

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/00725/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Determination Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2015                           | On 20 July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                STEVEN KADIMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the respondent:        Mr G. Denholm, Counsel, instructed by Luqmani
Thompson &        Partners Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and the decision in the First-tier Tribunal

    1. For the reasons upon which I intend to  expand  later,  this  is  an
       entirely unnecessary appeal and is a waste  of  legal  and  judicial
       resources in a jurisdiction which has  sufficient  workload  without
       being required to conduct hypothetical appeals which serve no useful
       purpose. Nevertheless, for the  reasons  that  I  will  subsequently
       provide, I  am  required  to  make  a  decision  in  relation  to  a
       deportation decision where  there  is  no  foreseeable  prospect  of
       deportation being effected given the fact that Mr  Kadima  has  been
       sentenced to a period of 17 years imprisonment and that it  will  be
       many years before he is eligible for release at which point anything
       I may say in 2016 as to the risk on return will only be of  historic
       interest. As a serving prisoner the  benefits  that  would  normally
       arise as a result of a finding that an individual  is  a  Convention
       refugee have no impact on this appellant. Similarly,  the  dismissal
       of his appeal will have no tangible consequences. The sequelae of my
       decision, if I commit a legal error in its preparation,  may  result
       in an appeal which is likely to be conducted at further  significant
       cost to the public purse for no obvious advantage to anyone.


    2. Both sides, however, insist I am bound to make a decision; Mr Kadima
       blames the Secretary of  State  for  her  failure  to  withdraw  the
       deportation decision and order, the Secretary of  State  blames  the
       appellant for pursuing his appeal to the Tribunal.

    3. The Secretary of State appealed against the determination of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Paul promulgated on 31  December  2014  allowing
       the appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds.  For  the  sake  of
       continuity, I shall refer to Mr Kadima as 'the appellant' as he  was
       before the First-tier Tribunal.

    4. On 9  July  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  revoke  a
       deportation order made on 9 March  2009  following  the  appellant's
       conviction on 10 August 2006 for offences of robbery and handling an
       offensive weapon. In my decision of 4 December 2015,  I  found  that
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul's determination contained an error on
       a point of law.


    5. Although the determination in BM and others  (returnees  -  criminal
       and non-criminal) DRC CG  [2015]  UKUT  00293  (IAC)  (McCloskey  J,
       President and Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan)  post-dated  the  Judge's
       determination, the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider  the
       additional material referred to by the Secretary  of  State  in  the
       decision letter and on which the Upper Tribunal  based  its  reasons
       for departing from Phillips J's decision in R (P and R - DRC) - v  -
       Secretary of State for the Home Department.  The background material
       considered by the Upper Tribunal in March 2015  was,  for  the  most
       part, the same material in December when the  determination  in  the
       instant appeal was promulgated.  The Judge's approach was flawed and
       amounted to an error on a point of law.


    6. In the course of the hearing on 4 December 2015, Mr Denholm informed
       me that, on 27 November 2015, the appellant had been convicted of an
       offence of attempted murder. Sentencing was deferred  until  a  date
       not before 18 December  2015.  In  the  error  on  a  point  of  law
       decision, I suggested that this would impact upon the  re-making  of
       the decision. Indeed,  depending  upon  the  final  outcome  of  the
       criminal  proceedings,  I  suggested  it  might  well  be  that  the
       Secretary of State would withdraw  the  deportation  decision  until
       such time as the appellant has served any further custodial sentence
       (or period of confinement). For this reason,  I  directed  that  the
       appeal be adjourned  until  18  February  2016  by  which  time  the
       respondent was to have decided whether to withdraw  the  deportation
       decision that is the subject of this appeal.

    7. On 18 December 2015 the appellant was sentenced  to  a  term  of  17
       years imprisonment.

    8. At the For Mention Only hearing on 18 February 2016, I was  informed
       the Secretary of State had decided to make a  fresh  decision  which
       covered the latest  conviction.  I  was  disinclined  to  conduct  a
       hearing at considerable public expense which  was  confined  to  the
       issue of whether the Secretary of State's refusal on 9 July 2013  to
       revoke a deportation order made  on  9  March  2009  (following  the
       appellant's conviction on 10 August 2006 for offences of robbery and
       handling an offensive weapon) violated the appellant's human rights.
        Given the latest conviction, the result of the appeal would  be  of
       academic interest only.   I also stated  that  the  respondent  must
       consider the utility  of  such  a  decision,  even  if  the  hearing
       encompassed the 18 December 2015 conviction, if it was the intention
       of the Secretary of State to require  the  appellant  to  serve  his
       sentence in the United Kingdom thereby rendering it likely that  the
       appellant would not be eligible for release for many years.

    9. The Secretary of State made a fresh decision on 18 March 2016.   (It
       was agreed at the hearing  that  this  was  the  relevant  decision,
       although I was shown other decisions made at around  the  same  date
       but only in draft form.)

The certification of the asylum claim under s. 72

   10.  The  asylum  appeal  was  certified  pursuant  to  s.  72  of   the
       Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act,  2002   excluding   the
       applicant refugee protection.  Mr Denholm did not seek to  challenge
       the certification or to introduce evidence to rebut the presumption.
        Hence there is no asylum appeal before me.  However, there  remains
       an in-country appeal on the basis of a human rights claim  which  is
       co-extensive with the asylum  claim.   The  human  rights  claim  is
       directed towards whether the hypothetical removal of  the  appellant
       would violate the appellant's Article  2  and  3  rights,  that  is,
       whether the appellant is at  real  risk  of  serious  harm,  a  risk
       equivalent to persecution in the asylum claim.

The remaining claim under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR

   11. For the sake of completeness,  a  human  rights  claim  is  normally
       assessed by reference to  whether  there  is  an  imminent  risk  of
       removal.  If no imminent removal then there is no risk.  Were  I  to
       be required to assess the risk to the appellant on the basis that he
       will be removed in 8 or 9 years time, his human rights  claim  would
       (it is accepted) fail because it is inevitably far  too  speculative
       to decide what might happen in so distant a  future.   We  therefore
       come back to making a decision on a deportation  decision  that  the
       Secretary of State has decided not to withdraw but in  circumstances
       where there is no foreseeable prospect of its being effected for the
       present.  This is the reason for my opening remarks that this appeal
       is entirely unnecessary and a waste of legal and judicial resources.



   12. The focus moves to the decision of 18 March 2016.

The Immigration History

   13. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 12 June 2000,  aged  13,
       accompanying his father,  Hoy  Kadima.  On  14  November  2001,  the
       appellant's father was granted asylum along with the appellant as  a
       dependent. Somewhat less than six years later, on  10  August  2006,
       when the appellant was aged 19, he was convicted at St Albans  Crown
       Court of robbery and sentenced to  33  months  imprisonment  and  of
       handling an offensive weapon for which he was sentenced to 6  months
       imprisonment concurrent. In  due  course,  on  3  August  2007,  the
       appellant was served with the  notification  of  his  liability  for
       deportation which resulted, on 4 November 2007, with the  revocation
       of his asylum status as a result of his  criminal  conviction.  That
       revocation is not now challenged. On 4 February 2008, the  Secretary
       of State decided to make a deportation order which resulted  in  the
       appellant's appeal being heard in the Tribunal. By  a  determination
       promulgated on 16 May 2008, the appellant's appeal was dismissed and
       a deportation order made by the Secretary of State on 9  March  2009
       was served on the appellant on 26 March 2009.


   14. After several more efforts to  prevent  removal,  the  Secretary  of
       State treated the various submissions as an  application  to  revoke
       the deportation order , which had not by then been put into  effect.
       The applicant sought judicial review of  the  Secretary  of  State's
       refusal.  This then led to the appeal being allowed on human  rights
       grounds which, as I have said above, was legally flawed and which  I
       have since set aside.  In the meantime, the appellant has, of course
       been convicted of the offence of attempted murder.


   15. The basis of the appellant's present claim  is  that  the  appellant
       will suffer serious  harm  or  death  on  account  of  his  father's
       connections with Rwandans.  In this context, it is  noted  that  the
       appellant's family comes from the Kasai Oriental Province, a  region
       associated with opposition to Kabila but not  close  to  the  border
       with Rwanda.  This claim was raised by Mr Denholm before the  First-
       tier Tribunal (see,  for  example,  paragraph  39  of  Judge  Paul's
       determination) but left unresolved by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.



The case law

   16. In AB and DM (Risk categories reviewed - Tutsis added) DRC CG [2005]
       UKIAT 00118, the Tribunal considered  the  appeal  of  AB  whom  the
       Adjudicator had found was a credible witness.   One key  element  of
       his claim was  his  part-Rwandan  ethnicity.   The  Adjudicator  was
       satisfied that those of Rwandan descent had in  the  past  been  the
       subject of adverse attention by the DRC authorities.  It was  argued
       that AB would fall into a risk category as  someone  having  Rwandan
       connections or being of Rwandan origin.

   17. Mr Kennes had given his expert opinion that if AB were suspected  of
       being Rwandan by association, he would fall into  a  risk  category.
       If there was no evidence of this, he would not  be  at  risk.    The
       transfer of information between  authorities  in  the  DRC  was  not
       systematic.   It might happen in some cases but not in others.   The
       immigration services had instructions to arrest all those thought to
       be Rwandan or Tutsi.  If he was considered to be of Rwandan  origin,
       he would be at risk from the authorities.  The assessment had to  be
       viewed in the context of the complexity of  the  previous  conflict,
       involving (amongst others) the government army and the  rebel  group
       controlled by Rwanda.  The position was  exacerbated  by  continuing
       concerns that the Rwandan government was  interfering  in  the  Kivu
       region resulting in mass demonstrations across the DRC in June  2004
       protesting  against  the  activities   of   the   Rwandans   and   a
       reinforcement of the  anti-Rwandan  and  anti-Tutsi  sentiment:  the
       Rwandans were seen as the cause of the evil that had come  over  the
       country. Mr Kennes thought that resentment against anything  Rwandan
       was very high.  This led to the Tribunal  summarising  the  risk  in
       paragraph 51 (i) of its determination in these terms:


         We confirm as continuing to  be  a  risk  category  those  with  a
         nationality or perceived nationality of a state regarded as hostile
         to the DRC and in particular those who have  or  presumed  to  have
         Rwandan connections or are of Rwandan origins.

   18. MK (DRC) CG [2006] UKIAT 00001 confirmed AB and DM (Risk  categories
       reviewed - Tutsis added).  More recently, BM and Others (returnees -
       criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293  (IAC)  referred
       to AB and DM without attempting to alter its conclusions  and  spoke
       of the events  that  have  transpired  since.   Hostilities  between
       government sources and the FDLR (Forces d�mocratiques de  liberation
       du Rwanda) continued.  This escalated in 2009 during a joint  DRC/UN
       military operation.  The UN peace keeping force ultimately  withdrew
       from the DRC in 2011. The  country  continued  to  suffer  from  the
       activities of militias, bandits and its official  army.   Widespread
       violence continued.  By 2011, the UN General Assembly reported  that
       the "overall human rights situation" in the DRC continued to be  "of
       serious concern".  There were grave human rights violations by armed
       groups and members of the national security forces.  These  included
       acts of arbitrary execution, rape, arbitrary arrest  and  detention,
       torture, looting and cruel, inhuman and degrading  treatment.   This
       was especially prevalent in the eastern provinces  of  the  country.
       State security forces were acting with impunity.


   19. The  Tribunal  suggested,  taking  into  account  both  history  and
       context, it might not be inaccurate to describe the present  overall
       situation in the DRC as one of relative peace  and  stability.   Yet
       there  remain  the  undisputed  factors  of  enduring  human  rights
       violations, which include in particular the repression of  political
       opposition, deplorable prison conditions, the lack of accountability
       of state agents and a weak judiciary:

     In short, the DRC is a state in which the rule of law is  both  fragile
         and fickle.

The appellant's claim

   20. It is at this stage that I turn to look at  the  father's  claim  to
       have been at risk in 2000, some 16  years  ago.   In  his  SEF,  the
       appellant's father, Mr Kadima claimed political asylum. The claim is
       set out at pages 75 and 76 of the appellant's bundle filed with  the
       Upper Tribunal following the directions of 14 March 2016. The father
       claimed that he was a risk from Kabila soldiers and  the  government
       as he was a businessman who had a farm and abattoir in the  area  of
       [Mbuji-Mayi] and was also selling and  negotiating  in  the  diamond
       business. He had business partners who were from Rwanda. He said  in
       a style which I have not attempted to amend because of the immediacy
       that the original version carries:

         Th will ey used to come and  do  business  with  me,  selling  cows
         since 1995. All Rwandese businessmen coming with  their  cows  were
         accommodated in my apartment. When the war broke out in August 1998
         between Rwanda and Congo I had three Rwandans in  my  flat.  [Three
         names provided.] On 12 November 1998 I was surprised to see a dozen
         of the  military  at  my  home.  They  came  and  arrest  everybody
         including  my  three  Rwandese  partners.  The  same  night  I  was
         arrested, they killed the three Rwandese. I was tortured and showed
         Rwandese clothes cover in blood. I was beaten with a long stick and
         asked several questions about Rwandese rebels who were  approaching
         the town...around 280 km near Kabinda. My first son  who  was  also
         arrested with me  was  found  three  days  later  dead,  killed  by
         military with a bullet on his back. My brother  was  also  arrested
         and never been seen up to now. I  was  in...prison  for  over  nine
         months, beaten and tortured by military who wanted  information  on
         Rwandese rebels. As my family were putting pressure on them, I  was
         transferred...

         The fact that I have accommodated Rwandese businessmen in my  flats
         and living with them, I was considered  as  someone  who  supported
         rebels. The fact that I am from Luba tribe...I was a victim of what
         I consider as a conspiracy against me just  because  I  have  given
         shelter to people I do business with and I know from long time.

         My family receive the same treatment. My  wife  and  children  were
         also arrested. My son was killed...

         I was arrested without apparent reasons. I  was  put  in  jail  for
         more than nine months. I was abused and tortured. My son was killed
         by military as a result of me accommodating business partners  from
         Rwanda. I...suffered a lot in both prisons.  I  was  considered  by
         military  as  an  informer,  a  traitor  and  someone  who  provide
         information to rebels. I was also ill treated because I  was  Luba.
         Following all the events I was threatened to be killed if I  failed
         to provide names of other rebels. I decided  to  leave  my  country
         because I risked my life since I was a victim of  something  I  did
         not know.


   21. The appellant provided a long statement at pages  4  to  18  of  the
       bundle which, inevitably, only touches in  part  upon  his  father's
       claim. However, the appellant's father  also  provided  a  statement
       found at pages 19 to 31 of the bundle in which he repeated his claim
       but in greater detail. He described how he had  a  long  history  of
       trading with Rwandans. The family farm was  located  at  Mbuji-Mayi,
       the capital of Kasai Oriental, a long way to the east  of  Kinshasa.
       The area was  associated  with  opposition  to  the  Kabila  regime.
       Farmers from Rwanda to the east brought cattle to the  farm  because
       of its abattoir. The area was also  a  diamond  producing  area  and
       provided a good market in which to sell  meat.  They  obtained  much
       better prices than in Rwanda. The appellant's father also said  that
       he travelled a lot to Rwanda to do business there. Because on  these
       business  connections,  Rwandans  often  stayed  at  the  farm.  The
       Congolese soldiers knew that Rwandans often visited. Commenting upon
       the contents of his SEF the appellant's father repeated his claim to
       have been detained but thought his detention was  much  longer  than
       the nine months or  so  that  he  had  described  earlier.  However,
       members of his family managed to bribe guards and  he  was  able  to
       leave the prison and finally reach the Zambian border where  he  was
       reunited with members of his family.


   22. The appellant's father also spoke of the disappearance of one of the
       appellant's brothers (page 24). He was sent back to the DRC in  2009
       (page 118 refers to the appellant's brother having  been  previously
       removed from the UK) and his whereabouts are not known.


   23. The account provided by the appellant in answer to  questions  asked
       in his interview which took place at HMP Dartmoor  (see  pages  111-
       113) is largely consistent. Mr Duffy, accepted  that  the  appellant
       was granted refugee status as a result of the claim brought  by  his
       father. He did not require the appellant's father, who  was  present
       at the hearing, to give evidence.

 The analysis


   24. What strikes me so forcibly about the father's account  is  how  the
       soldiers acted in accordance with the sense of  prevailing  violence
       associated with this period: the  summary  execution  of  the  three
       Rwandans (in contrast with his father's treatment); the  absence  of
       any legal process or trial, no charges, no sentencing;  the  release
       on payment of a bribe.  This has all the  hall-marks  of  the  rough
       justice that was meted out at a time when the raw  violence  was  at
       its height.


   25. In AB, which either  coined  or  repeated  the  expression  'Rwandan
       connection', the Tribunal was considering a person who was  of  part
       Rwandan  ethnicity.   The  classification  of  the  risk  was   also
       expressed as being of Rwandan descent or Rwandan origin.  In was  in
       this context that the risk category was said to include  those  with
       Rwandan connections.  Mr Kennes' evidence expanded the  category  by
       suggesting  persons  suspected  of  being  Rwandan  by  association.
       Whilst that categorisation is not altogether clear (and this  is  no
       criticism), it seems to cover the case of a person who is  perceived
       to be Rwandan.  This  is  consistent  with  his  evidence  that  the
       Rwandan immigration services had instructions to  arrest  all  those
       thought to be Rwandan.  Hence, whilst the Tribunal in AB did not set
       out to define precisely what is mean  by  Rwandan  connections,  the
       Tribunal was principally concerned with ethnicity or those perceived
       to have Rwandan ethnicity, perhaps by being  related  (by  marriage,
       for example) to those who were Rwandan.

   26. One can readily understand that if the general  feeling  within  the
       DRC is a sense of hatred for Rwandans, this may spill over to  those
       who are not Rwandan but, perhaps, look Rwandan (if such a thing were
       possible) or speak with an identifiable accent or are known to  have
       fraternised with Rwandans or have a name  that  appears  to  have  a
       Rwandan.  It is not so far removed from  anti-German  feelings  that
       were unleashed in the two World Wars of the last century.  Prejudice
       against Rwandans, so it appears, is not limited  to  action  against
       ethnic Rwandans but those perceived to have Rwandan connections.

   27. As this appellant is not Rwandan, or  part  Rwandan  or  of  Rwandan
       descent or Rwandan ethnicity or connected by marriage to those  that
       are, his case is not of direct links with Rwanda or  Rwandans.   Nor
       is his case based on a mistaken perception that he has  such  direct
       links.   Instead,  his  case  is  firmly  based  upon   that   wider
       categorisation of a person with Rwandan connections.

   28. Applying this test to the facts of a given case than in the is bound
       to be an inexact science.  Not all persons with some  form  of  link
       with Rwanda or Rwandans are  likely  to  be  at  risk.   Hence,  for
       example, whilst those from a border region are more likely to be  at
       risk that others who are located  in  more  distant  parts  off  the
       country, there is no evidence of widespread harm being  suffered  by
       all those from areas which border the DRC or  all  those  who  trade
       with Rwandans or offer  services,  including  accommodation  to  the
       general public including Rwandans.  Hence, there  is  a  qualitative
       element  that  must  be  introduced  when  examining  the   relevant
       connections.  Some connections will place an individual at risk  and
       some will not.  The decision  maker  is  required  to  differentiate
       between the two and decide in a scale  of  events  which  goes  from
       'definitely at  risk'  to  'definitely  not  at  risk'  whether  the
       particular claimant before him falls in that part of the scale  that
       represents a real risk of harm.

   29. Furthermore, the appellant himself entered the United  Kingdom  with
       his father on 12 June 2000, aged 13.  Hence, he makes  no  claim  to
       have generated by his own actions or associations  the  animus  that
       underlies the antipathy felt  in  the  DRC  to  those  with  Rwandan
       connections.  His claim is a generation removed from that and  based
       on a vicarious antipathy  directed  as  a  result  of  his  father's
       activities.

   30.  The 'connections' relied upon by the appellant was that of a son of
       a trader and provider of accommodation.  It is a connection that  is
       generated in a particular area, a farm located somewhere near Mbuji-
       Mayi, the capital of Kasai Oriental, 280 km to the east of Kinshasa.
        It is a connection generated by events that  took  place  in  1998,
       nearly two decades ago in a climate of violence that is removed from
       the present, notwithstanding the poor human  rights  record  of  the
       existing  government  and  the  long  memory  of  antipathy  towards
       Rwandans.  Hence, the links that exist between these events in  time
       and space is a tenuous one.

   31. The strength of the connections will be immeasurably strengthened if
       there is evidence sufficient to create an inference that the  events
       in 1998 were recorded in such a way that an official at the  airport
       will have a record accessible to him which details or summarises the
       events.  (There is no direct evidence of such record-keeping  but  I
       would not necessarily expect there to be so.  It is for this  reason
       the  Tribunal  must  look,  where  possible,  to  draw  inferences.)
       Inevitably, this assessment will require an examination of the  past
       events, including the history of the father's detention in order  to
       assess the likelihood of an accessible record being available.

   32. There was consistent evidence before  us  in  the  Country  Guidance
       appeal of BM and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) that
       returning nationals are interviewed by the DRC migration agency, the
       DGM, at Kinshasa airport.  It described how nationals being returned
       who  are  in  possession  of  an  emergency  travel   document   are
       interviewed at the airport by the DGM  and  how  the  ANR  (the  DRC
       national intelligence agency) may then  become  involved.   Not  all
       involvement results in persecution or Article 3  ill-treatment  such
       that all those interviewed by the DGM or the ANR are at  real  risk.



   33. The events described by the father as to his arrest  and  detention,
       which I accept, were the actions of soldiers who summarily  executed
       Rwandans for no other reason than that they were Rwandans.  It is to
       be noted that the appellant's father  was  not  summarily  executed,
       suggesting  the  obvious  distinction  made  between  him  and   the
       Rwandans.  Nor can we assume  that  the  appellant's  brothers  were
       summarily executed.  No-one is able to say.  Although in the  course
       of his detention the appellant's father was held in regular prisons,
       he was released on payment of a bribe or by  local  influence  which
       operated outside the legal system.  There is no evidence of a formal
       process of prosecution or trial.  Nor would I expect one in a period
       of  significant  turmoil.   A  bribe,  inferentially,  suggests  the
       detention is not  recorded  in  such  a  way  as  to  result  in  an
       investigation when the prisoner's absence is noted on  a  roll-call.
       The soldiers who executed the three Rwandans are  unlikely  to  have
       compiled a notebook of what took place.

   34. It seems to me almost inconceivable that what took place is recorded
       anywhere.  Nor can we infer that the arrival of  this  appellant  in
       Mbuji-Mayi, his home area, in  2016  will  recall  memories  of  the
       Rwandan connections that his  father  had  as  a  trader  when  this
       appellant was a 13-year-old boy such that the level  of  ill-feeling
       will place him at risk.

   35. That, however, is largely academic because the appellant may be very
       unlikely to return to Mbuji-Mayi if his family is  no  longer  there
       and the farm and abattoir has, presumably, long since gone.  He will
       certainly not return there if, notwithstanding my objective view  of
       the risk there, he has a subjective fear of returning.  If  in  this
       hypothetical exercise he is to return anywhere, it is  to  Kinshasa,
       some 280 km from Mbuji-Mayi.  Absent a record of events in 1998,  he
       will return as a convicted criminal and, as identified,  in  BM  and
       Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) will not be  at  risk
       for that reason alone.  Even if I am wrong on the existence of local
       records kept from 1998 in Mbuji-Mayi,  we  cannot  reasonably  infer
       that those records will be copied and filed in Kinshasa or  that  an
       extract is  made  accessible  to  the  officials  who  question  the
       appellant at the airport  on  return.   The  appellant  may  not  be
       expected to lie but he is unlikely  to  volunteer  information  that
       will put him at risk.

   36. It was not argued that it was unreasonable  for  this  33  year-old-
       male, to settle in Kinshasa or some other urban conurbation  of  his
       choosing.

   37. Stepping back a pace, I am quite satisfied that the appellant is not
       at risk.  At the commencement of my analysis I spoke of  the  events
       in 1998 in historical terms as at a  time  of  prevailing  violence,
       summary executions, the absence of the rule of  law,  rough  justice
       and  raw  violence.   Whilst  the  claims  of  those  with   Rwandan
       connections must be critically examined, the  connections  that  the
       appellant is  now  able  to  establish  are  so  tenuous  as  to  be
       insignificant as a source of risk.

   38. I dismiss his appeal under Articles  2  and  3  of  the  Convention.
       Inevitably, there is no claim advanced under Article 8.

    DECISION


    I have allowed the appeal of the Secretary of State.
    I re-make the decision and dismiss the appeal of Mr  Kadima  under  all
    the grounds advanced.









                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                14 July 2016




