
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA002932016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 22 May 2017                      |On 2 June 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr Nevel Aydan Yusuf
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen  promulgated  on  23  December  2016,
    allowing Mr Yusuf's appeal against the decision made by  the  Secretary
    of State on 8 June 2016 to remove him from the United  Kingdom  and  to
    make a deportation order against him.  Those decisions were made  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations").

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Bulgaria who came to the United  Kingdom
    with his wife in 2011.  They lived initially in London before moving to
    North Wales where both of them worked in a local factory.

 3. On 18 August 2015 the respondent caused a serious road traffic accident
    and on 25 November 2015 in the Crown Court at Mold he  was  convicted,
    having pleaded guilty, causing serious injury by dangerous driving  and
    driving  with  excess  alcohol.   He  was  sentenced  to   28   months'
    imprisonment as well to other orders made in  respect  of  his  driving
    licence.  The Secretary of State wrote to the respondent on 16 December
    2016 notifying  him  that  because  of  his  criminal  convictions  she
    intended to make a deportation order against  him  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy/public security pursuant to Regulations 19(3)(b)  and  21
    of the EEA Regulations.  The  applicant  also  certified  the  decision
    pursuant to Regulation 24.A of the 2006 Regulations and  the  applicant
    was later removed.  The decision letter of 8 June 2016 was supplemented
    by a further decision dated 12 July 2016.

 4. It is not suggested that the respondent had acquired permanent right of
    residence.

 5. In her refusal letters  the  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  the
    respondent had a propensity to  reoffend  and  that  he  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to
    justify his deportation on public policy grounds.  She considered  that
    his removal would be proportionate  and,  having  had  regard  to  Essa
    [2012] EWCA Civil 1718, there was no indication that he had  undertaken
    rehabilitative work and there is no reason why he  could  not  continue
    towards rehabilitation in Bulgaria with the support of family  members.
    A  decision  was  also  taken  pursuant  to  Article  8,  Human  Rights
    Convention and the Secretary of State  went  on  to  certify  the  case
    pursuant to Section 94B of the 2002 Act.

 6. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the respondent  was
    unrepresented.

 7. In his decision the judge concluded that:-

      i)  it  was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  establish  that   the
         respondent's removal was justified;

     ii) having asked  the  Secretary  of  State's  representative  to  make
         submissions as to the respondent's propensity to  reoffend  and  to
         his  representing  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat, the representative found it difficult to find  any  support
         for the Secretary of State's case and the available evidence;

    iii) the Secretary of State had not established any other  justification
         for the decision other  than  the  respondent's  previous  criminal
         convictions, contrary to Regulation 21(5)(e);

     iv) the evidence only shows that on one occasion the  respondent  drank
         to excess and caused a serious  accident  from  which  it  was  not
         possible  to  extrapolate  a  propensity  to  reoffend  [25],   the
         sentencing  judge  having  accepted  that  the  respondent  was   a
         hardworking man who had committed  the  offence  "in  a  moment  of
         madness";

      v) the Secretary of State had failed to establish on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that the removal of the respondent complied with  the
         requirements of Regulation 21(5)(c) or (e) [27] and  therefore  did
         not comply with 21(5)(a) either.

 8. The judge therefore allowed the appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State has sought permission to appeal on  the  grounds
    that the judge had made a material misdirection of law  in  failing  to
    correctly consider rehabilitation in conformity with  the  findings  of
    the Upper Tribunal in MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015]  UKUT
    00520 (IAC) when considering risk to the  public,  it  being  submitted
    that the judge had erred absent lack of independent evidence  that  the
    offending risk factors had been  removed  or  that  the  appellant  was
    rehabilitated; and, that it was for the appellant to prove that he  has
    sufficiently addressed his offending triggers.

10. On 21 March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted permission,
    stating:-

    The respondent says the judge failed to make a  proper  finding  as  to
    rehabilitation following MC [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC).  This is  arguable
    as the judge made no reference to rehabilitation in his decision.

11. The respondent was not represented at the hearing and,  when  inquiries
    were made of Pembridge Solicitors  who  still  are  on  the  record  as
    representing him, they explained that they were  without  instructions.
    I was given that this had  been  the  position  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, persuaded that there was no  basis  on  which  I should  not
    proceed to determine the appeal.

12. I heard brief submissions from Mr Bramble who  candidly  accepted  that
    the Secretary of State had not challenged the judge's finding that  the
    appellant did not show any propensity to reoffend and did not represent
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society.

The Law

13. Regulation 21(5), EEA Regulations provides as follows:-

    Where a relevant decision is taken  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public security it shall, in addition to complying with  the  preceding
    paragraphs  of  this  regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
    following principles-

    (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

    (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct  of
         the person concerned;

    (c)  the personal conduct of the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;

    (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which  relate
         to  considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not  justify   the
         decision;

    (e)  a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.

14. It is important to note in this case that, as was held by the Court  of
    Appeal in Dumliauskas [2015] EWCA Civ 145 at [40]

    I have to say that I have considerable difficulty with what was said by
    the Advocate General in relation to rehabilitation. In the first place,
    it had no, or very little, relevance to the questions referred  to  the
    Court, which concerned the meaning of  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security". Secondly, it is only if there is a risk of reoffending  that
    the power to expel arises [emphasis added] It is illogical,  therefore,
    to require the competent authority "to take account of factors  showing
    that the decision adopted (i.e., to expel) is such as  to  prevent  the
    risk of re-offending", when it is that very risk that gives rise to the
    power to make that decision. Secondly, in general "the conditions of [a
    criminal's] release" will be applicable and  enforceable  only  in  the
    Member State in which he has been convicted and  doubtless  imprisoned.
    ...

15. The sentence highlighted is confirmed at paragraph [55].

16. In MC the Upper Tribunal held as follows:-

    1.   Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to decisions taken  on
         public policy, public security  and  public  health  grounds  under
         regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

    2.   It is only if the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned  is
         found to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society
         (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider  whether
         the  decision  is  proportionate  taking  into  account   all   the
         considerations identified in regulation 21(5)-(6).

    3.   There is no specific reference  in  the  expulsion  provisions  of
         either  Directive  2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA  Regulations   to
         rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the Court of Justice as  an
         aspect of integration, which is one of the factors referred  to  in
         Article 28(1) and regulation 21(6) ( Essa (2013) at [23]).

    4.   Rehabilitation is not an  issue  to  be  addressed  in  every  EEA
         deportation or removal decision taken under regulation 21; it  will
         not be relevant, for example, if rehabilitation  has  already  been
         completed ( Essa (2013) at [32]-[33]).

    5.   ...

17. The issue and extent to which rehabilitation can be taken into  account
    logically only arises if there is a propensity  to  reoffend.  That  is
    because it is considered in assessing proportionality, and issue  which
    arises only if a propensity to offend is found. The judge in this  case
    found to the contrary, concluding that the respondent did not present a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat. If there is  no  such
    propensity, then future rehabilitation is not an issue.

18. As Mr Bramble accepted there is no challenge to the  finding  that  the
    respondent did not represented  a  genuine,  serious  and  sufficiently
    serious threat.  I consider that conclusion was one open to  the  judge
    given the very clear observation  by  the  sentencing  judge  that  the
    respondent had only one conviction albeit for a very  serious  offence,
    and that it was a moment of madness.  It is difficult to  see  how  one
    could extrapolate from that a propensity to reoffend in the future, nor
    was the Secretary of State able to make effective submissions  on  that
    point, nor is there other evidence of propensity to offend.

19. In these circumstances the issue of the prospects of rehabilitation did
    not need to be considered, and therefore I consider that the  Secretary
    of State has not made out her ground of appeal and I therefore  dismiss
    it.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date  1 June 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



