
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00665/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th December 2016                 |On 9th January 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    o n m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J M Wilson (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Jamaica, who  was  born  on  18th
    January 1973.  The appeal has a long  and  tortuous  history  beset  by
    procedural difficulties.  By a decision dated  17th  August  2015,  the
    Upper Tribunal remitted this appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Upper Tribunal's decision is reported as ONM (Remitted  to  UKFTT  with
    directions) [2015] UKUT  517  (IAC).   The  determination  is  publicly
    available.  There is no need to repeat its contents here.  It was heard
    at Birmingham Sheldon Court by  a  panel  comprising  Designated  Judge
    McCarthy and Judge Parkes on 8th  June  2016,  with  the  determination
    promulgated on 18th August 2016, whereupon the Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed on the basis  of  Article  3  ECHR.   The  Respondent  appealed
    whereupon on 14th September 2016, Designated  Judge  Woodcraft  granted
    permission to appeal.

 2. Judge Woodcraft observed how the panel had  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 because they found  that  the  Appellant's  activities  as  a
    police informer would put him at risk from non-state actors upon return
    to Jamaica.  They had found  that  the  reach  of  the  "Shower  Posse"
    extended throughout Jamaica (paragraph 28 of the determination).  Judge
    Woodcraft also observed how it was that this appeal  had  been  in  the
    Tribunal for almost five years and that the Tribunal had now sought  to
    narrow down the issues quite  understandably  and  to  give  a  concise
    determination.  However, it was arguable that they  do  not  adequately
    explain the evidential basis for their findings.  For example,  it  was
    not clear whether the shower posse really did have  the  reach  alleged
    when the Respondent claims that her evidence shows the gang had  broken
    up, such that the shower posse would be able to seek out the  Appellant
    in Jamaica and subject him  to  ill-treatment.   This,  observed  Judge
    Woodcraft, was arguably unfortunate given  that  the  previous  panel's
    decision (to dismiss the appeal) was remitted because they had erred in
    the  opposite  direction  by  wrongly  concluding  that   the   witness
    protection plan would be available to the Appellant upon return.  There
    was an additional issue, namely  whether  the  Appellant  was  given  a
    reduced sentence in this country because of his  informant  activities.
    The Respondent previously accepted that he was an informant.  The issue
    therefore goes to whether anyone in Jamaica would know that they  would
    be in a position to act on it to the Appellant's detriment.  Permission
    to appeal was granted.

 3. At the hearing before me on 9th  December  2016,  both  representatives
    referred to the procedural irregularities.  The list of  appeals  dated
    6th December 2016 did include the Appellant's appeal as being one  that
    was to be heard on 9th December by this Tribunal.  However,  there  was
    then subsequently an application by Appellant's Counsel to adjourn this
    matter which was refused by the Tribunal.  Notwithstanding that, in the
    morning list of 9th December 2016, it transpired that  the  matter  had
    been taken out of the list and was no longer effective.   Nevertheless,
    all these relevant parties were present at the hearing.  Mr J M Wilson,
    the Appellant's solicitor, who has had conduct of this  case  for  very
    many years  had  diligently  attended  court.   The  Appellant  was  in
    attendance also with his partner.  So, also,  was  Mr  Norton  who  had
    travelled up from London to represent the Respondent Home Office.   He,
    as the documentation shows, had been involved in this case for a number
    of years, having seen it through  its  various  stages  before  various
    Tribunals.

 4. Both representatives indicated that given that  all  the  parties  were
    here, and given that this matter had been ongoing for such a long time,
    it would be altogether wise and prudent to reinstate the matter in  the
    list and to have it heard today.  I undertook to personally inform  the
    listings section at Field House in London (and did so after this appeal
    hearing in the presence of the court clerk and  both  of  us  spoke  to
    listings to explain the position and have  this  matter  reinstated  to
    this court's list), the effect of  which  was  that  we  were  able  to
    proceed and dispose of this matter.

 5. Mr Norton, handed up a detailed bundle of documents which included  the
    "Respondent's consolidated bundle" dated  23rd  March  2016,  with  the
    Respondent's skeleton argument, the original appeal  file  bundle,  the
    first determination of IJ Colyer on 15th February 2012, and  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision of UTJ Hanson of 27th February  2012,  together  with
    much case law, that was relevant to this appeal.  He submitted that the
    Tribunal of Designated Judge McCarthy was wrong to  allow  this  appeal
    under Article 3 because there is a wealth of  case  law  that  confirms
    that the Appellant could not succeed on this basis, and the reasons for
    this were set out in the very well combined skeleton  argument  of  the
    Respondent.  On the other hand, it remained the case that the Appellant
    had his partner in this country and two children,  who  had  long  been
    settled here, with the eldest child now being 18  years  of  age,  such
    that it was arguable that there would be very significant obstacles  to
    these children relocating to Jamaica.  The Appellant  still  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules, but the  position  could  well  be
    properly considered outside the Immigration Rules.  In short, Mr Norton
    submitted that provided that the Article 3 aspect of the appeal was not
    pursued, and was conceded by Mr  Wilson  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant,  as  being  a  non-starter,  this  Tribunal  could  properly
    consider whether the Appellant could now succeed under Article  8  ECHR
    outside the Rules.

 6. For his part, Mr Wilson submitted that he was prepared to concede  that
    Article 3 could not succeed for the reasons set out  in  the  case  law
    referred to in the Respondent's skeleton argument.  On the other  hand,
    as far as Article 8 was  concerned  there  were  two  children  of  the
    Appellant and of  Miss  Richards  and  DUTJ  Hanson  had  granted  Miss
    Richards' appeal precisely on the basis that the  "best  interests"  of
    the eldest child (now aged 18) require that he remain in  the  UK  (the
    younger child of the two not at the time having  been  here  for  seven
    years, but now having been here for ten years).  The youngest child was
    himself now in a position to apply for British citizenship on the basis
    of the ten year Rule.  The eldest child, who was 18, had  always  lived
    with Miss Richards, and the family live together.   There  is  also  an
    independent social worker's report which had originally been  submitted
    and this had also stated that it was in the best interests of the child
    to be here.  On this basis, there was no  need  for  this  Tribunal  to
    consider the application of Article 3.

Error of Law

 7. I am satisfied that the making of the decision  by  the  panel  in  the
    determination promulgated on 18th August 2016 amounted to an  error  of
    law (see Section 12(1) of  TCEA  2007).   The  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest and this has been long established:
    see SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  The Respondent in  her  decision
    of 2nd September 2011 certified  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  under
    Section 72 NIAA.  The original Tribunal determination of  Judge  Colyer
    of 15th February 2012 makes it clear (at paragraph 32(1)) that,  "There
    is no suggestion having examined Pagasus records that the source of the
    relationship was ever compromised".  It has only been  the  Appellant's
    word that the relationship has been compromised.

 8. The Appellant himself has been a convicted criminal who has  sought  to
    embellish and exaggerate his role in the role that he has  played  with
    the police authorities in this  country.   But  more  importantly,  the
    Appellant was registered CHIS in the UK between 2006 and  2007  and  he
    was never an informer in Jamaica.  He has never  given  evidence  in  a
    court of law regarding criminal activities in the UK or Jamaica.

 9. Therefore, his historical identity as CHIS in the  UK  has  never  been
    compromised.  He is not even suspected except on the basis of what  the
    Appellant himself states.  There is no evidence that the  Appellant  is
    at any perceivable risk in  Jamaica  and  this  was  confirmed  in  the
    original determination of IJ Colyer (at paragraphs 56 to 73).  For this
    reason, it is an error to allow this appeal under Article 3 ECHR.

10. I note that Mr Wilson does not seek to challenge this view  as  it  was
    explained to  all  parties  concerned  in  open  court.   The  Tribunal
    decision of 18th August 2016 cannot therefore stand.

Remaking the Decision

11. I remake the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before the judge, and the submissions that  I  have
    heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.  The
    previous determination recorded that the Appellant's  partner  and  her
    two minor children had no status in the UK and that they will return to
    Jamaica to live with the Appellant.  However, since  then  the  partner
    won her appeal for leave to remain on the basis of her son's length  of
    residence in the UK and his best interests.

12. The position now is that the Appellant's partner and her  two  children
    have been granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK.  The  eldest
    child is now over 18 and the youngest child has reached the age  of  10
    years such that he is entitled to apply for a British citizenship.  The
    children live with their mother and  the  independent  social  worker's
    report has made it clear that the best interests of the children are to
    remain in this country.  Both  parties  before  me  accepted  that  the
    appeal stood to be allowed under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.   It
    cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.  Even if one has regard  to
    the public interest considerations in Section 117, it is clear that the
    length of time that the children have been here is a  more  significant
    factor.

13. In MA  (Pakistan)  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  705,  the  court  considered  the
    application of the "reasonableness test", in  circumstances  where  the
    children were otherwise "qualifying" and  observed  (at  paragraph  46)
    that the Immigration Directorate Instructions themselves make it  clear
    that "once the seven years' residence requirement  is  satisfied  there
    need to be 'strong reasons' for  refusing  leave  (paragraph  11.2.4)".
    This is because after such a period of time the  child  will  have  put
    down roots and develop social, cultural and educational links in the UK
    such that "it is likely  to  be  highly  disruptive  if  the  child  is
    required to leave the UK".  The court went on to  say  that  "In  these
    cases there must be a very strong expectation  that  the  child's  best
    interests will be to remain in the UK with his parents as part  of  the
    family unit" (paragraph 46).

14. The Appellant is in a family relationship with  the  children  and  the
    impact of his removal on the family unit  is  something  that  must  be
    carefully assessed and evaluated.  It is significant that Miss Richards
    obtained her leave to remain expressly on the basis of the position  of
    the children.  In MA (Pakistan) the Court of Appeal gave  consideration
    to the "wider  approach"  and  drew  attention  to  whether  Parliament
    intended to  require  considerations  bearing  "upon  the  conduct  and
    immigration history of the applicant", and stated that the  assessment,
    as far as the children are concerned is what  is  "reasonable  for  the
    child" (see paragraph 40).  This was part of the "wider approach"  that
    Parliament had itself mandated in relation to such cases.

15. This is, of course, a case which involves  Article  8  in  relation  to
    foreign criminals and the express provision here is Section  117C,  but
    even here the public interest in favour of deportation can be  obviated
    where the Appellant, as here, has a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of the deportation
    on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.  I found this to be  the
    case here and I heard no representations to the contrary.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original Tribunal.  I remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th January 2017

