
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00024/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2014                   |On 23 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       The Honourable Mr Justice King
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE K CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AG
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Barnes, 9-12 Bell Yard


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an automatic deportation case  involving  a  foreign  criminal.
    It concerns a deportation order directed  to  the  respondent  AG,  the
    appellant in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.  The order
    dated 29 November 2013, served on 3rd December 2013, was  made  by  the
    Secretary of State under section 5 of the  Immigration  Act  1971  (the
    1971 Act) not as an act of discretion  but  because  of  the  mandatory
    provisions of section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 (the 2007  Act).
    For convenience we shall refer to AG either as AG or as the appellant.

2.   The Order was in these terms:

         'Whereas [AG] is a foreign criminal as defined by section 32(1)  of
         the Borders Act 2007:


         The removal of [AG] is, under section 32(4) of that Act,  conducive
         to the public good for the  purposes  of  section  3(5)(a)  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971:


         The Secretary of State must make an order in respect of  a  foreign
         criminal under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 (subject to
         section 33).


         Therefore in pursuance of section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971,
         once any Right of Appeal, that may be  exercised  from  within  the
         United Kingdom under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 is exhausted, and the said appeal is  dismissed
         ... the Secretary of State by this order requires the said [AG]  to
         leave and prohibits him from entering the United Kingdom so long as
         this order is in force.'


3.   There is no right of appeal against the making of  the  deportation  as
    such but there is a right of appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision that section 32(5) applies which  AG  duly  exercised  on  the
    grounds that his removal in pursuance of the deportation order would be
    a breach of his rights under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  and  hence  came
    within the exceptions to section 32(5) provided for in  section  33  of
    the 2007 Act.  The Secretary of  State's  written  decision  dated  3rd
    December 2013, that section 32(5) applied was served upon  AG  together
    with the deportation order.

4.   This appeal has come before us as an appeal by the Secretary  of  State
    from the determination of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  allowing  AG's
    appeal.  Such an appeal lies to us only on an error of law.  It raises,
    amongst other grounds, an important issue  as  to  the  application  of
    paragraph 398(a) of the Immigration Rules where  the  conviction  which
    rendered the proposed deportee a foreign criminal for the  purposes  of
    the 2007 Act, was for less than four years  but  where  the  individual
    concerned has in the past been convicted and received a sentence of  at
    least four years albeit, because of its antiquity, not a conviction and
    sentence which brought him within the Act.

Background Facts

5.   AG is a citizen of Jamaica born on the 30th July 1966.  He  is  now  48
    years of age.  He first entered the United Kingdom on  18th  June  1978
    when he was 11 to join his mother.  On 23rd April 2003 he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

Personal relationships

6.   On the 20th November 2004 AG married MG in the  United  Kingdom.   They
    remain married,

7.   During his time in the United Kingdom AG has, in addition  to  MG,  had
    relationships with two other women, namely  MC  and  SM.   He  has  had
    children by all three.  With MC he has had 3 children, namely two  sons
    and a daughter born between 1986 and 1996.  With his now  wife,  MG  he
    has had two children one born in 1996, the other in 2005, now  aged  8.
    With SM he has had one child, a son born  in  2004,  now  aged  9.   In
    addition he regards MC's older daughter born in 1983,  and  MG's  older
    daughter born in 1992 as stepdaughters.

Convictions

8.   Between July 1981 and March 2010 AG appeared before the courts  in  the
    United Kingdom on thirteen separate occasions for seventeen offences.

9.   In July 1981 he was made the subject of  a  supervision  order  by  the
    Juvenile Court for theft; in October 1982 before the same court he  was
    given a like order for indecent assault.  On 17th October 1985  he  was
    convicted in the Crown Court at Snaresbrook, of rape and  sentenced  to
    four  years  youth  custody.   In  April  1988  he  was  fined  in  the
    Magistrates Court for shoplifting.  In August 1989 he was convicted  at
    the Crown Court of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and  given  a
    six months suspended sentence order; in March 1991 he was bound over at
    the Crown Court for wounding.   In  May  19991  he  was  fined  by  the
    Magistrates Court for possession of a controlled drug  and  failing  to
    surrender to bail.  In January 1992 he was convicted in the Crown Court
    of criminal damage and ordered to pay compensation.  In August 1994  he
    received an eighteen month probation order from the  Magistrates  Court
    for an offence of common assault.

10.  In March 1997 AG was sentenced at the Crown Court to  a  total  of  two
    years imprisonment for two drug offences being one of  possession  with
    intent to supply and one of possession.  On his release he did not  re-
    appear before a court for several years.

11.  He next appeared in May 2009 before the magistrates who fined  him  for
    possession of a controlled drug, Class B.  In February 2010 he appeared
    again before the magistrates for motoring  offences  involving  driving
    uninsured and without a licence.  He was fined.

12.  Finally, on 4th March 2010, at  the  Crown  Court  at  Warwick  he  was
    sentenced to twenty one months imprisonment for one  offence  of  being
    knowingly concerned in the importation of a controlled drug of Class B,
    cannabis.  He had pleaded guilty to this offence.  In passing  sentence
    the Judge observed that for a payment of �1800, AG had agreed to  bring
    into the country a quantity of cannabis weighing 16.9 kg which he  said
    he believed to be half that amount.  The Judge took  into  account  the
    plea of guilty, the explanation that the offence had been committed  to
    raise money to pay off debts,  and  AG's  comparatively  better  recent
    record.  The Judge observed that AG had  been  working  quite  hard  of
    late, had recently passed a forklift driver test  and  there  was  work
    available.

13.  AG was released on licence  under  the  supervision  of  the  probation
    service in January 2011 which continued until his  sentence  expiry  on
    3rd December 2011.

The statutory scheme for the automatic deportation of foreign criminals

14.  A deportation order under section 5 of the 1971 Act can  be  made  only
    if the person is 'liable to deportation' under section 3(5) or  (6)  of
    the 1971 Act (see the opening words  of  section  5(1)).   For  present
    purposes the material 'liability provision' is that set out in  section
    3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act providing that a person who is  not  a  British
    citizen is liable to deportation from the United Kingdom  if  '(a)  the
    Secretary of State deems his deportation to be conducive to the  public
    good'.  It follows for present purposes that a determination that  'the
    deportation of the person  is  conducive  to  the  public  good'  is  a
    necessary prerequisite before a deportation order can be made.  The use
    of the word 'deems' in section 3(5)(a) indicates an assessment  by  the
    Secretary of State.  However section 32(4) of the 2007 Act removes  the
    need for such a considered assessment by the Secretary of State in  the
    case of a 'foreign criminal' as defined by the 2007 Act and  in  effect
    substitutes the determination of Parliament that the deportation  of  a
    foreign criminal  is  'public  good  conducive'.   Thus  section  32(4)
    provides that 'for the purposes of section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 ..., the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the
    public good'.

15.  The effect of section (1) and (2) of the 2007 Act is that  for  present
    purposes a 'foreign criminal' is a person who is not a British  citizen
    who is convicted of an offence and who is sentenced to a sentence of at
    least 12 months.

16.  In this case as has been set out above, AG  had  been  convicted  of  a
    number of offences in the United Kingdom but the  chronology  of  these
    offences is important since it was common ground  before  us  that  the
    2007 Act which was passed on the 30th August 2007 and came  into  force
    on the 1st August 2008, applies only to those who have  been  convicted
    after the passing of the Act or who were convicted before that date but
    at the time of commencement were  in  custody  awaiting  or  serving  a
    sentence or whose sentence was suspended.  See section 59  of  the  Act
    and the decision of the Court of Appeal in AT (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 567 at paragraphs 7-10.

17.  The chronology shows AG had been convicted of an  offence  of  rape  on
    17th October 1985 and sentenced to four years youth custody, but  given
    this was well before the passing of  the  2007  Act,  this  conviction,
    albeit involving a sentence of at  least  12  months,  could  not  have
    triggered the automatic deportation provisions of the 2007  Act.   More
    particularly and material to this appeal,  this  conviction  could  not
    have given rise to the automatic determination under section  32(4)  of
    the 2007 Act that the  claimant's  deportation  'is  conducive  to  the
    public good' for the purposes of section 3(5)(a) of the  1971  Act  and
    hence for the purposes of the  making  of  a  deportation  order  under
    section 5 of the 1971 Act.

18.  In fact of  AG's  series  of  convictions  in  this  country  the  only
    conviction which triggered the statutory  determination  under  section
    32(4) of the 2007 Act that his deportation was conducive to the  public
    good, was that of the 4th March 2010 when he was sentenced to 21 months
    imprisonment for drug importation.  See paragraph 12 above.

19.  That this was the conviction - and the only conviction -  to  which  in
    this case the Secretary of State had regard for the purposes of  making
    the deportation order signed on 29th November 2013 on the grounds  that
    AG's deportation was conducive to the public good, can be seen from the
    very terms of the Deportation Order itself.   See  paragraph  2  above.
    The Secretary of State  was  not  purporting  to  make  an  independent
    assessment of whether the claimant's deportation was conducive  to  the
    public good but was applying the automatic provisions of section  32(4)
    of the 2007 Act which could  have  been  triggered  by  only  the  2010
    conviction.  Put another way, these terms make clear that the Secretary
    of State was not purporting to make a discretionary  deportation  under
    section 5 of the 1971 Act by reference to her own assessment  that  the
    claimant's deportation was conducive to the public good, but was making
    an automatic order under section 5 pursuant to section 32(5).

The section 32(5)  obligation  to  make  a  deportation  order:  subject  to
    section 33 Exceptions

20.  Section 32(5) then provides that the Secretary of State 'must'  make  a
    deportation  order  in  respect  of  a  'foreign  criminal'  but   this
    obligation is subject to the Exceptions provided  for  in  section  33.
    This present case is concerned with Exception 1 by reference  to  which
    section 33 provides that 'section 32(5) does not apply'  where  removal
    of the foreign criminal in pursuance of  the  deportation  order  would
    breach 'a person's Convention rights' under the ECHR  (see  section  33
    (1) and (2)(a)).  It is, as already indicated,  specifically  concerned
    with the appellant's claim that his deportation would  be  contrary  to
    his convention rights under  Article  8  ('the  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life').

21.  It is to be noted that section 33(7) of the 2007 Act makes  clear  that
    the application of an Exception  does  not  prevent  the  making  of  a
    deportation order by the Secretary of State under section 5 of the 1971
    Act as an act of discretion although in the case of the application  of
    Exception 1,  section  32(4)  [the  automatic  determination  that  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal is  conducive  to  the  public  good]
    continues to apply.

The Article 8 exception: the applicable Immigration Rules

The position as at the date of the FtT decision

22.  Since 2012 the Immigration Rules ('The Rules') have established a  rule
    - based approach to the consideration by  the  Secretary  of  State  of
    Article 8 claims.  The balancing  exercise  to  be  carried  out  under
    Article 8(2) where Article 8 is engaged, in particular, in the  context
    of deportation, the consideration of whether  deportation  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights, is  now  reflected
    in the Rules.  Deportation is dealt with under Part 13  of  the  Rules.
    When first introduced, paragraph A362 read:

         'where article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under Part
         13 of these Rules, the claim under  Article  8  will  succeed  only
         where the requirements of these rules as at 9 July  2012  are  met,
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served'


23.  As at the date of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  in  this  case
    (November 2013) and as at the date of the determination of the FtT  (29
    May 2014) paragraphs 398 to 399A of the Rules set out  when  a  foreign
    criminal's private and/or family life will outweigh the public interest
    in deporting him in the terms  referred  to  below.   In  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 the Court of Appeal held that the 2012 Rules  were
    'a complete code' for dealing with  a  person  faced  with  deportation
    under the Immigration Acts and who claims this would be contrary to his
    Article 8 rights.  See MF at paragraph 44,  and  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 192 at paragraph 41.

24.  The starting point is paragraph 398 which read as follows:

    '398.    where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and


         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             at least 4 years;


         (b)  the  deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good because thy have been convicted of an offence  for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but al least 12 months; or


         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of  State,
             their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law,


         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if it does not,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors.'

25.  Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  Rules  then  provide,  respectively,  a
    family life and private life exception to automatic deportation but the
    important matter to note for present purposes is that these  paragraphs
    and hence  these  exceptions  apply  only  to  those  who  fall  within
    paragraph 398(b) and (c) of the Rules.  An individual who falls  within
    paragraph 398(a) cannot avail themselves of the benefit  of  paragraphs
    399-399A.  In such cases, as the Rules stood as at the date of the  FtT
    determination, the public interest will be outweighed by other  factors
    'only in exceptional circumstances'.

The position as of today

26.  Since the FtT determination, section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    has come into force on 28th July 2014 and introduced a new Part 5A into
    the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act)
    (sections 117A to  117D)  setting  out  a  number  of  public  interest
    considerations to which a court  or  tribunal  must  have  regard  when
    called upon to determine whether a decision under the Immigration  Acts
    breaches a person's Article 8 rights.  Section 117B  is  applicable  to
    all cases. Section 117C sets out  additional  considerations  in  cases
    concerning the deportation of foreign criminals.

27.  We set out first subsections (1) to (6) of section 117C:

    '117C Article 8: additional considerations involving foreign criminals


         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminal is in the public interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where:


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life;


             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.'


28.  The final subsection of section 117C is important  in  the  context  of
    the issues raised on this appeal.  It provides as follows:

         '(7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.'


29.  The emphasis is the emphasis of this court.

30.  'Foreign criminal' in Part 5A of the 2002 Act  is  defined  in  section
    117D(2) as meaning:

    'a person:


         (a)  who is not a British citizen,
         (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence and
         (c)  who -
                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12months


                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or


                  (iii)    is persistent offender'


Changes to the Rules

31.  Changes have been made to Part 13 of  the  Rules  to  ensure  alignment
    between the Rules and the new statutory framework.  These changes  came
    into force on the same day as Part 5A of the 2002 Act, the 28th July of
    this year.  A362 is like terms as before save for substitution of:

    '... the claim under article 8 will only succeed where the requirements
    of these rules as at 28 July 2014 are met ...'


32.  The basic scheme of the amended Rules 398 to 399A however  remains  the
    same.  They continue to set  out  when  a  foreign  criminal's  private
    and/or family life will outweigh the public interest in deporting  him.
    They continue to provide a family life exception to deportation (399(a)
    with reference to a parental relationship, and 399(b) with reference to
    a partner relationship) and a private life  exception  (339A)  although
    the wording of the  requirements  to  make  out  these  exceptions  has
    changed.  They continue to provide that these exceptions do  not  apply
    where  398(a)  applies  which  is  now  in  these  terms  (the  italics
    highlights the material amendment)

    '(a) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good and in  the  public  interest  because  thy  have  been
         convicted of an offence to which they  have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years.'


    Similar amendment to introduce the words 'and in the  public  interest'
    has been made to the provisions of 398(b) and (c), but  otherwise  they
    remain the same.



33,  Where the exceptions do not apply, the wording of 398 is now that  'the
    public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors
    where there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 339A'.

The history of the making of the deportation order in this case

34.  On the 26th April 2010 the Secretary  of  State  through  the  then  UK
    Border Agency wrote to the Governor of the prison where  the  appellant
    was held asking that the appellant be informed that in the light of his
    conviction and sentence  of  the  4th  March  2010  he  was  liable  to
    deportation under  the  1971  Act,  and  to  automatic  deportation  in
    accordance with section 32(5) of the 2007 Act, unless  he  fell  within
    one of the exceptions set out in section 33 and requesting him to  give
    reasons why he might qualify for an exception.  The appellant  returned
    a questionnaire setting out his  family  background.   He  subsequently
    instructed solicitors who submitted documentary evidence in support  of
    the claim that the appellant fell within the Article 8 exception.

35.  By a notice of decision dated the 9th November 2012, the  Secretary  of
    State considered the appellant's Article 8 claim under the  Immigration
    Rules as they then stood.  By this notice her decision was that section
    32(5) did apply but she reached this by a different route from that  in
    the decision under this appeal.  On this occasion she did not  consider
    that paragraph 398(a) applied.  She proceeded on the basis  because  of
    the conviction and 21 month sentence of  the  4th  March  2010  it  was
    paragraph 398(b) which applied.  She accordingly went  on  to  consider
    whether the appellant could bring himself  into  one  or  more  of  the
    family life or private life exceptions under 399 and 399A but found  he
    could not.  She found  that  the  appellant  could  not  qualify  under
    paragraph 399(a) (family life with a  child)  because  the  requirement
    under (a)(ii)(b) as it then stood, could not be met ('there is no other
    family member who is able to care for the child in the UK'), nor  under
    399(b) (family life with a partner) because there was  no  satisfactory
    evidence that he currently had a 'genuine and subsisting  relationship'
    with any person settled in the UK (and that included his wife MG),  nor
    under 399A (private life) because  he  could  not  satisfy  requirement
    339A(b) as it then stood ('he has no ties (including  social,  cultural
    or family) with the country to which he would have to go if required to
    leave the UK').  She then went on to explain why she did  not  consider
    there were any exceptional factors which would cause deportation to  be
    in breach of Article 8.

36.  By a subsequent notice of appeal the appellant challenged this
    decision of November 2012.

37.  What then happened was that at the substantive hearing  of  the  appeal
    on the 18th June 2013 in the  light  of  recent  information  that  the
    appellant's immigration bail had been varied and he was now back living
    and cohabiting with his wife MG in Romford, the Secretary of  State  by
    her Presenting Officer withdrew the decisions  of  9th  November  2012,
    namely both the decision that section 32(5) applied and the decision to
    make a deportation order, and undertook to reconsider  the  appellant's
    case given his current circumstances.

38.  It  might  have  been  thought  that  upon  that  re-consideration  the
    question for the Secretary  of  State  was  going  to  be  whether  the
    appellant could now bring himself within the requirements of the family
    life exceptions not whether the  exceptions  applied  to  him  at  all.
    Indeed on 21st June 2013 the Secretary of  State  through  one  of  her
    caseworkers wrote to the appellant's solicitors in these terms:

    '... I have been allocated a case on behalf of your client in order  to
    consider his automatic deportation from the United Kingdom in light  of
    his criminal conviction.


    On 18 June 2012(sic) the decision to deport dated 9 November  2012  was
    withdrawn in order that your client's case could be reconsidered  given
    his current circumstances ...


    ... please provide details of his current family and private life in
    order that a new decision can be made ...'


39.  The appellant's solicitors duly made submissions that on  the  evidence
    there was a genuine and subsisting relationship  between  him  and  his
    wife MG and there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  living  in
    Jamaica and hence the requirements of 399(b)(i) and (ii) as  they  then
    stood, were met.

The Decision of the 3rd December 2013

40.  The Secretary of State's decision  made  on  that  reconsideration  and
    which is in issue in this appeal was still that section  32(5)  applied
    but the reasoning was now very different.  The Secretary of  State  now
    stated that the exceptions allowed for in paragraphs 399(a) and (b) and
    399A did not  apply  to  the  appellant  at  all  because  it  was  now
    considered that he fell within paragraph 398(a)  which,  it  is  to  be
    recalled, read at the time:

    '(a) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
         which they were sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
         years;'


    and that there were no exceptional  circumstances  raised  which  would
    outweigh the public interest in seeing him deported  given  his  record
    ('the serious nature of your offences and  your  sustained  criminality
    ... the sustained nature of your criminality is clear evidence of  your
    failure to rehabilitate and your ongoing contempt for UK's laws').

41.  The reasoning of the Secretary of State as to why  she  considered  the
    appellant fell within paragraph 398(a) is not wholly  clear  from  this
    decision letter which appears to vacillate between identifying the Rape
    conviction of 1985 as being the sole reason why the appellant  met  the
    criteria in that paragraph (see paragraphs 14 to 19 of  the  decision),
    and considering for this purpose that it was legitimate to look at  the
    totality of the appellant's offences (see paragraphs 11 to 13).

42.  Thus paragraphs 14 to 19 are in these terms:

    'Family Life


    Family life with children
    Consideration under paragraph 399(a)


    14.  Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration  Rules  specify  the  criteria
         which must be satisfied in order for a parental relationship with a
         child to outweigh the public interest in deportation in  line  with
         Article 8 of the ECHR ...


    15.  You have a previous conviction which resulted in a sentence  of  4
         year imprisonment and this conviction is  not  spent,  consequently
         you meet the criteria as outlined in Paragraph 398(a) and therefore
         your circumstances under Paragraph 399(a) will not be considered.


    Family life with a spouse/partner
    Consideration under paragraph 399(b)


    16.  Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules specify the criteria
         which must be satisfied before a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a spouse or partner outweighs the public interest
         in deportation in line with Article 8 of the ECHR.


    17.  You have a previous conviction which resulted in a sentence  of  4
         year imprisonment and this conviction is  not  spent,  consequently
         you meet the criteria as outlined in Paragraph 398(a) and therefore
         your circumstances under Paragraph 399(b) will not be considered.


    Private Life
    Consideration under Paragraph 399A


    18.  Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules specify the criteria which
         must be satisfied before an individual's private life outweighs the
         public interest in deportation in line with Article 8 of the ECHR.


    19.  You have a previous conviction which resulted in a sentence  of  4
         year imprisonment and this conviction is  not  spent,  consequently
         you meet the criteria as outlined in Paragraph 398A  and  therefore
         your circumstances under Paragraph 399A will not be considered.'


43.  In contrast paragraphs 11 to 13 read as follows:

    'Sentence of at least 4 years imprisonment


    11.  You were convicted on 04 March 2010  of  Being  Concerned  in  ...
         Import ... which is prohibited (drugs class B) and sentenced  to  a
         period  of  21  months  imprisonment.   This  conviction  will   be
         considered in conjunction  with  your  previous  conviction  on  17
         October 19985 of Rape for which  you  were  sentenced  to  4  years
         imprisonment and your conviction on 21 March 1997 of  Possessing  a
         Controlled drug with Intent to Supply and Possessing  a  Controlled
         drug for which you were sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.


    12.  As your previous convictions are not spent, their totallity  (sic)
         must be taken into  account  when  considering  the  criteria  with
         regard to the Immigration Rules.


    13.  The Immigration Rules state that it will only  be  in  exceptional
         circumstances that a person's right to a family life and/or private
         life would the public interest in seeing a  person  deported  where
         they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  4
         years'


The determination of the First-tier Tribunal

44.  On AG's successful appeal  against  this  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it was found (at paragraph 21) that the appellant  could  not
    and did not fall within paragraph 398(a) as 'the conviction which  gave
    rise to his liability to deportation' was not that of the 1985 Rape but
    his conviction of March 2010 for which he was sentenced  to  21  months
    imprisonment, that paragraphs 398(a) and (b) refer to a conviction  for
    an offence and the respondent had been wrong in  paragraph  12  of  her
    decision to take the totality of the sentences of imprisonment  imposed
    on the appellant between 1985 and 2010 into  account  in  finding  that
    paragraph 398(a) applied.

45.  The Tribunal then went on to find that  although  the  appellant  could
    not bring himself within either the family life with children exception
    under paragraph 399(a) [it being conceded by  the  appellant  that  his
    wife was able to care for their children and hence (a)(ii)(b)  was  not
    met], or the private life exception under 399A, the requirements of the
    private life with a partner exception under paragraph 399(b)  had  been
    made out.  On the evidence before them they  found  that  on  the  sole
    issue under this paragraph disputed by the Secretary  of  State,  there
    was a genuine and subsisting relationship between the appellant and his
    wife, and hence 'the appellant has established his article 8  claim  on
    the ground of family life with his wife within the  Immigration  Rules'
    (paragraph 22).  It appears that the Secretary of State  conceded  that
    there would be insurmountable obstacles to the wife going to live  with
    the appellant in Jamaica as she had to remain in the UK to  look  after
    their  young  son  and  hence  the  requirements  of  399(b)(ii)   were
    satisfied.

46.  The Tribunal did go on however to consider whether, if they were  wrong
    in finding that paragraph 398(a) did not apply, 'having regard  to  the
    decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF(Nigeria)  ...  there   are
    exceptional circumstances which outweigh the great weight to  be  given
    to the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals'.   They
    found such circumstances had been made out.  Their reasoning is set out
    in paragraph 24:

         '24. If we were wrong in  our  finding  at  paragraph  21  of  this
         determination that paragraph 398(a) of the Immigration  Rules  does
         not apply, we have considered, having regarding to the decision  of
         the Court of Appeal MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  (2013)  EWCA  Civ  1192
         whether there are  exceptional  circumstances  which  outweigh  the
         great weight to be given to the public interest in the  deportation
         of foreign criminals.  At the hearing Ms. Masood relied on a number
         of factors which she set out in the penultimate  paragraph  of  her
         skeleton argument.  We have conducted a balancing exercise.  On the
         one hand, the  appellant's  criminal  record  is  poor.   In  1985,
         shortly after reaching the age of eighteen,  he  was  convicted  of
         Rape and sentenced to four years  imprisonment.   Subsequently,  he
         was given a two year prison  sentence  in  1997  for  Possessing  a
         Controlled Drug with Intent to Supply and in 2010 he was  sentenced
         to twenty one months imprisonment for Importing a Controlled  Drug.
         Further, in the probation  report,  prepared  for  his  2010  court
         appearance, the likelihood of re-conviction was assessed as  medium
         though the OASys report concluded  that  the  likelihood  was  low.
         With regard to the prison sentences and to all  the  non  custodial
         sentences appearing on his record, great weight has to be given  to
         the public interest in his deportation as a foreign  criminal.   On
         the other hand, the appellant  has  lived  legally  in  the  United
         Kingdom since first arriving here in 1978 aged eleven.  Further, he
         has, on our finding, a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
         wife and their two children S G and A G.  There  is  also  evidence
         that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his son A  T
         who currently resides with him at the appellant's mother's house in
         Leyton and there is also evidence that he has a  relationship  with
         his son R G.  In considering the appellant's relationship with  his
         children  we  have  had  regard  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  to  the  decision  in  ZH
         Tanzania (2011) UKSC 4 and we find, having particular regard to the
         close relationship which exists between the appellant and A G, that
         it would be in the child's best interests for him to be brought  up
         by both parents in the United Kingdom.  Further, at the hearing, it
         was accepted on behalf of the respondent that it was not reasonable
         to expect the appellant's wife or A G to live with him in  Jamaica.
         There is  also  credible  evidence  that  the  appellant  maintains
         contact with other family members in the United Kingdom.   Overall,
         after conducting a balancing exercise,  we  find,  having  attached
         considerable importance to the  interests  of  A  G,  that  in  the
         particular circumstances of  this  case  exceptional  circumstances
         outweighing the great public interest in deportation have been made
         out.'


47.  We accept the submissions of the Secretary of State that these  reasons
    can be summarised as (a) the appellant has lived in the UK since age 11
    years, (b) genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and  their
    two children (c) evidence of a like relationship with two of his  other
    children AT and RG, (d) the best interests of his children should be to
    be brought up by both parents it having been accepted by the respondent
    that it would be unreasonable for  the  wife  and  AG  to  relocate  to
    Jamaica.

The grounds of appeal

48. Before us Mr Melvin on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  although
    originally minded to seek to permission to amend the grounds of  appeal
    to challenge the finding that the appellant met  the  requirements  of,
    and hence succeeded under, paragraph  399(b),  assuming  the  paragraph
    could be applied to him, did not ultimately pursue such a course.

49. The grounds of appeal before us were accordingly limited to two:

    (1)  that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in finding that the
         appellant did not come within paragraph 398(a);


    (2)  that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in finding that  on  the
         assumption that the appellant did come within paragraph 398(a)  and
         to whom therefore paragraphs 399a and 399A  did  not  apply,  there
         were nonetheless 'exceptional circumstances' rendering  deportation
         a disproportionate interference  with  the  appellant's  Article  8
         rights.


50. Given the lack of challenge to the finding that the appellant  met  the
    requirements of the family life with partner exception under  paragraph
    399(b), it must follow that ground two can come into play only  if  the
    first ground succeeds.  If the first ground fails, the  appeal  against
    the First-tier Tribunal determination allowing AG's  Article  8  appeal
    within the Immigration Rules, must fail.

Ground One: the applicability of paragraph 398(a)

51.  Mr Melvin did not seek to argue that the  1985  conviction  could  have
    brought the appellant within the automatic  deportation  provisions  of
    the 2007 Act.  He accepted that it was the 21 month  sentence  for  the
    March 2010 drug offence which had had this effect.   His  argument  was
    (to quote his written  submission)  that  'once  within  the  automatic
    deportation provisions the Secretary of State is entitled  to  consider
    that a conviction of four years, albeit from 1985 for rape, can be used
    to show that an appellant comes within paragraph 398(a) of the  Rules',
    and that once paragraph 398(a) applied,  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to look at the totality  of  the  appellant's  offending  when
    considering,  applying  the  'exceptional  circumstances'  criteria  in
    paragraph 398, whether any Article 8 rights of the claimant  outweighed
    the public interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal.  This was
    all that the Secretary of State was purporting to do when  saying  that
    the 2010 conviction would be considered with the other convictions  and
    that their totality had to be taken into account.  Mr Melvin  disavowed
    any attempt on the part of the Secretary of State to combine  a  number
    of sentences for a number of different offences in order to  bring  the
    appellant within  398(a).   He  submitted  this  was  a  misreading  of
    paragraphs 11 to 13 of the decision letter.

52.  When granting permission to appeal on this ground, UT Judge  Gill  said
    this:

    'The first issue that arises ... is whether it  is  only  the  sentence
    imposed for the conviction which precipitates deportation  action  that
    is to be taken into account in deciding  whether  a  case  falls  under
    paragraph 398(a),(b) or (c) or whether the totality  of  the  sentences
    imposed on an individual must be taken into account.  The FTT took  the
    former approach finding that the  Respondent  was  wrong  to  take  the
    latter approach.  On that basis, the FTT decided that  the  appellant's
    case fell within the para 398(b).  In support of the  panel's  view  is
    the fact that the word 'because' in:


         'the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
         which they have been  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
         least 4 years'


    in paragraph 398(a) suggests  there must be a link between  the  reason
    for considering that a person's deportation is conducive to the  public
    good (thus leading to their deportation) and the sentence.  As far as I
    am aware there is no authority on the point.  It is an  issue  of  some
    significance because it is evident from the concluding  words  of  para
    398 that Parliament has decided that an  individual  who  falls  within
    398(a) is not to have the benefit of paras 399 and 399A from  which  it
    arguably follows that exceptional circumstances in such  a  case  would
    have to be something more than the scenarios provided for in paras  399
    and 399A.


    The panel's view may be supported by  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    history ... shows that he was granted ILR on 23  April  2003  after  he
    committed some of the most serious offences,  a  fact  which  does  not
    arguably support the contrary view that the totality  of  the  offences
    should be taken into account ...'


53.  Ms Barnes on behalf of AG, in  the  course  of  her  able  and  concise
    submissions, submitted that the approach of the FtT was  correct.   The
    historic 4 year sentence on conviction for rape could not be relied  on
    to  find  that  the  paragraph  398(a)  applied  since  the   automatic
    deportation order issued was not predicated on this conviction.  In any
    event AG had only been 18 when  convicted  of  the  offence,  was  most
    likely a child when the offence was committed,  and  the  Secretary  of
    State had granted him leave to remain in April 2003 some 7 years  after
    he had committed the offence.

Our conclusion on Ground One

54.  We are conscious that we are being invited to determine  first  whether
    the FtT determination was wrong in law  having  regard  to  the  proper
    construction of the material Rules as they stood at  the  time  of  the
    decision, although if we were to conclude that an error of law is  made
    out and decided both to set aside the decision and to proceed to remake
    the decision ourselves, we are satisfied that we would be  governed  by
    section 117C of the 2002 Act (see section 117A) and would be  bound  to
    apply the Immigration Rules as they now stand having  regard  to  their
    proper construction in light of section 117C.   See  Aikens  LJ  in  YM
    (Uganda) at paragraphs 36-39.

55. In broad terms the thrust of the Rules both as they were at the time of
    the FtT determination and as they are today, is that in the case  of  a
    foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    at least four years and whose deportation is conducive  to  the  public
    good as result (see section 32(4) of the  2007  Act),  his  deportation
    will only be a disproportionate interference with his Article 8  rights
    'in exceptional circumstances' (as per the 2012 Rules pre 28 July 2014)
    or if 'there are very compelling circumstance' 'over and  above'  those
    described in the  private  life/family  life  exceptions  (as  per  the
    current Rules).  Whereas, in the case of one who has been sentenced  to
    less than four years but to at least 12 months (and hence  is  still  a
    foreign criminal whose deportation is  conducive  to  the  public  good
    pursuant to section 32 (4)), those Article 8 private  life/family  life
    exceptions set out in paragraphs 399 and  399A  will  apply,  if  their
    requirements are met, so as not to require deportation  in  the  public
    interest.

Paragraph 398(a): single offence not totality of offending

56. It was common ground before us that  paragraph  398(a)  on  its  proper
    construction in either  version  of  the  Rules  does  not  permit  the
    totality of a criminal's offending to be  taken  into  account  to  see
    whether he falls within its terms.  It is not permissible to add  up  a
    number of sentences for a number of offences to  see  whether  a  total
    sentence of 4 years has been passed.  Aggregation of multiple sentences
    for multiple convictions in order to bring a  person  within  paragraph
    398(a) is not permissible.  See again Aikens LJ in YM at paragraphs 43-
    44.  Paragraph 398(a) refers  to  'an  offence'  not  'offences'.   The
    relevant sentence must be a sentence for a single conviction.  Only one
    offence at a time can  be  taken  into  account  to  determine  whether
    paragraph 398a applies.

57. On this aspect the First-tier Tribunal made no error  of  law  when  it
    ruled that it was wrong for the  respondent  in  paragraph  12  of  her
    decision to take the totality of the sentences of imprisonment  imposed
    on the appellant in account in finding that  paragraph  398(a)  of  the
    Rules applied - although as already indicated Mr Melvin  disavows  that
    this is what the Secretary of State was purporting to do.

The proper construction of paragraph 398(a) in the current rules

58. The current Rules have obviously been drafted to take  account  of  the
    provisions of section 117C.  A new A398 has been introduced  providing,
    amongst other things, that:

         'These rules apply where
             (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.'


    Paragraph 398(a) and the concluding words  of  paragraph  398  must  be
    taken as being intended to reflect subsections  (1),  (2)  and  (6)  of
    section  117C.   However  critically  for   present   purposes,   those
    subsections are subject to subsection (7)  which  as  we  have  already
    indicated, provides:


         '(7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted'


59. In the light of subsection (7), we have no doubt in the context of  the
    current Rules, that for a foreign criminal  to  fall  within  paragraph
    398(a), the conviction and sentence relied on must be  the  reason  for
    the decision to deport.  In other words there must  be  a  causal  link
    between the conviction and sentence relied on and the determination  of
    public good conduciveness (under section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act) which
    has led to the making of the decision to deport.   The  conviction  and
    sentence relied on must be the conviction and sentence upon  which  the
    foreign criminal's liability to deportation is predicated.

60. Had the First-tier Tribunal been applying the current Rules  then  this
    first ground of appeal would have been bound to fail.   This  appellant
    was liable to deportation in this case and the decision to  deport  him
    was made by the Secretary of State not  because  of  the  1985  4  year
    sentence on conviction for Rape but because (and only because)  of  his
    2010 conviction and 21  month  sentence  (see  our  analysis  above  at
    paragraph 14 to 19), which did not bring him  within  paragraph  398(a)
    but rather paragraph 398(b).

The proper construction of the 2012 Rules as at the date of the FtT
    determination

61. We accept that we cannot use the provisions of the 2014 Act introducing
    the new part 5A into the 2002 Act or our consideration  of  the  proper
    construction of the current Rules in the light of those provisions,  in
    any consideration of the proper construction of the 2012 rules as  they
    stood in May of this year at the date of the FTT decision.  See  Aikens
    LJ in YM (Uganda) at paragraph 36.

62.  Nonetheless  our  considered  conclusion  is  that  the  only   proper
    construction of paragraph 398(a) in its then form from its very wording
    and the context of its application to a person to  whom  a  deportation
    notice has been issued on the express grounds that his  deportation  is
    conducive to the public good,  is  that  the  conviction  and  sentence
    relied  upon  to  bring  him  within  paragraph  398(a),  must  be  the
    conviction and sentence relied on by the Secretary of State  (expressly
    or by implication)  in  that  notice  for  considering  (under  section
    3(5)(a) of the1971 Act) that his deportation is conducive to the public
    good for the purpose of giving rise to the liability to deportation and
    the making of the deportation order under section 5 of  the  1971  Act.
    Indeed it is difficult to see to what other  finding  of  'public  good
    conduciveness' paragraph 398(a) can refer other  than  that  which  has
    given rise to the liability to deportation in the particular case.  The
    reference in  paragraph  398(a)  to  the  'person's  deportation  being
    conducive to the public good' must be a  reference  to  that  essential
    stepping stone in the particular case  which  has  given  rise  to  the
    liability to deportation which is under challenge as being in breach of
    the appellant's human rights.

63. In other words even under the then 2012 Rules we consider there has  to
    be a causal link between the  conviction  and  sentence  relied  on  as
    bringing a  person  within  paragraph  398(a),  and  the  liability  to
    deportation which is under  challenge.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    correct in law so to find.  Only a conviction and sentence  upon  which
    the liability to deportation and the consequential decision  to  deport
    is predicated  in  the  particular  case  can  bring  a  person  within
    paragraph 398(a).

64. In this case the liability to deportation arose solely by reason of the
    operation of the 2007 Act.  The only material conviction  and  sentence
    for this purpose was the 2010 conviction and the 21 month sentence  for
    the reasons we have already explained.  The 1985  rape  conviction  was
    not the reason for the liability to deportation in this case.   It  was
    not the reason for any stated 'deeming' by the Secretary of State  that
    the appellants deportation was conducive to the  public  good.   As  we
    have  already  demonstrated  the  only  basis   for   the   appellant's
    deportation being conducive to  the  public  good,  relied  on  by  the
    Secretary of State in making her deportation order,  was  that  brought
    about by the operation of section 32(4) of the 2007Act  which  everyone
    accepts was triggered solely by the 2010 conviction and sentence.   The
    Secretary of State has never purported to make a deportation  order  in
    this case on a discretionary  basis  by  reference  to  an  independent
    considered assessment of her own by which she  deemed  the  appellant's
    deportation to be conducive to the public good.

65. Indeed it would be difficult to see any justification for an assessment
    of the Secretary of State in 2013 that the  1985  rape  conviction  and
    sentence viewed in isolation made the appellant's deportation from  the
    UK conducive to the public good and made  him  liable  to  deportation,
    when  the  Secretary  of  State  had  in  2003  granted  the  appellant
    indefinite leave to remain, notwithstanding the existence of that  rape
    conviction of many years before.

66. Nor is this a case in which the Secretary of State  has  purported,  in
    exercise of an independent view, to 'deem' the appellant's  deportation
    conducive to the public good because of his being a persistent offender
    with several convictions over several years demonstrating a  particular
    disregard for the law.  But even  if  she  had,  this  would  not  have
    brought the appellant within paragraph 398(a) but rather paragraph  398
    (c) to which the exceptions under 399 and 399A do apply.

67. For all these reasons we consider no error of law has been demonstrated
    under ground one.

The Immigration directorate instruction

68. We were referred to the 'Chapter 13: criminality guidance in Article  8
    ECHR cases' issued by the Secretary of State on 28 July 2014 as part of
    Immigration Directorate instructions  to  immigration  officers.   This
    guidance is given pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of schedule 2 to the  1971
    Act.  Its purpose is stated as being  to  explain  how  decision-makers
    consider claims that the deportation of a foreign criminal would breach
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

69. We were referred in particular to the terms of  paragraph  2.2.2  which
    reads:

    '2.2.2.  Once a foreign criminal has been sentenced to a period  of  at
             least four years' imprisonment, he will never be  eligible  to
             be considered under the  exceptions.   This  applies  even  if
             deportation is not pursued  at  the  time  of  the  four  year
             sentence because there are very compelling circumstances  such
             that deportation would have  been  disproportionate,  and  the
             foreign criminal goes on to re-offend and is  sentenced  to  a
             period  of  less  than  four  years.   This  is  because   his
             deportation will continue to be conducive to the  public  good
             and in the public interest for the four year sentence as  well
             as any subsequent sentences'.


70. On any view this guidance must be treated with caution in so far as  it
    is being relied upon to aid the proper construction of the  Rules  (see
    Lord Brown in Ahmad Mahad v Entry Clearance Officer  2009  UKSC  16  at
    paragraphs 10 and 11) but in any event we did not find  any  assistance
    in determining the issues in this appeal in the paragraph to which  our
    attention was drawn.

71. This paragraph is referring to a situation where a foreign criminal has
    become liable to deportation by reason of a conviction  and  associated
    four year sentence which has triggered (by reason of section  32(4)  of
    the 2007 Act) a finding that his deportation is conducive to the public
    good for the purposes of section 3(5) of the  1971  Act,  but  who,  up
    until he re-offends, has been able to avoid deportation because of  the
    existence of very compelling circumstances provided for in the  current
    version of the 2012 Rules.  The guidance in this paragraph makes clear,
    as must be correct in law, that even though the foreign criminal has to
    date avoided deportation on Article 8 grounds, his deportation  remains
    conducive to the public good  by  reason  of  the  original  four  year
    sentence (see again section 32(7) of the  2007  Act).   Hence  he  will
    always be within paragraph 398(a) and will never be able to rely on the
    exceptions in paragraph 399 or 399A in the event, for example,  of  the
    Secretary of State considering that in view of  the re-offending  there
    are no longer very compelling circumstances, and his deportation is now
    in the public interest.  If the foreign criminal were then to challenge
    his removal as being in breach of his Article 8 rights he could not lay
    claim to being outside paragraph 398(a) on the  grounds  that  his  re-
    offending had attracted a sentence of less than 4 years.

72. The situation covered by  this  paragraph  of  the  guidance  bears  no
    resemblance to the one prevailing in this case.  The  appellant's  1985
    rape conviction and four year sentence  did  not  have  the  effect  of
    making him a 'foreign criminal' within the meaning of the 2007  Act  or
    the 2002 Act as amended, as neither were in force at the time.  It  did
    not have the effect of  rendering  his  deportation  conducive  to  the
    public good so that it could be said that this was a state  of  affairs
    which was still continuing when he re-offended in 2010.  The  appellant
    never became liable to deportation as a result of that 1985  conviction
    and sentence.  There is no suggestion that this  appellant  would  have
    been deported following that 1985 conviction and sentence but for  some
    exceptional or compelling circumstances.

73. For all these reasons the Secretary of State's  appeal  on  ground  one
    must fail.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in finding  that
    the 1985 conviction and sentence albeit one of four years did not bring
    the appellant within paragraph 398(a) of the Rules, and did not err  in
    law in finding that he came within paragraph 398(b) because of  his  21
    month sentence following his 2010 conviction and  that  accordingly  he
    was eligible to be considered under the exceptions provided  for  under
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.  As already explained, as there is  no  appeal
    challenging  the  finding  that  the  appellant  met  the  family  life
    requirements of 398(b),  it  must  follow  that  this  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.

Ground two

74. It follows it is strictly unnecessary for this  tribunal  to  determine
    ground two of this appeal, namely that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    law in finding that if the appellant did come within  paragraph  398(a)
    of the Rules, there were nonetheless exceptional  circumstances  making
    deportation disproportionate on article 8 grounds.

75. We consider it appropriate however to indicate what our considered view
    is on this issue.

76. The 2012 Rules as at the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    clearly contemplated that anyone who fell into paragraph 398(a)  should
    not have the benefit of the family  life  exceptions  provided  for  in
    paragraphs 399(a) or (b), or the private life exceptions  provided  for
    in paragraph  399A,  and  that  there  would  have  to  be  exceptional
    circumstances in such a case if the public interest in deportation  was
    to  be  outweighed   by   other   article   8   factors   relevant   to
    proportionality.  In MF (Nigeria) at paragraphs 40 and 41 the Court  of
    Appeal accepted the submission in the context of this  version  of  the
    Rules 'that the  reference  to  exceptional  circumstances  serves  the
    purposes of emphasising that in the  balancing  exercise  great  weight
    should be given to the public interest in deporting  foreign  criminals
    who do not satisfy  paragraphs  398  and  399  or  399A.   It  is  only
    exceptionally that such foreign criminals will succeed in showing  that
    their rights under Article 8(1)  will  trump  the  public  interest  in
    deportation'.  At paragraph 42, the court said that 'in approaching the
    question whether  removal  is  a  proportionate  interference  with  an
    individual's article 8 rights  the  scales  were  heavily  weighted  in
    favour of deportation and something very  compelling,  (which  will  be
    'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest in removal'.
     At paragraph 46 the Court referred to the exercise contemplated by the
    new rules under paragraph 398 as regards consideration of  'exceptional
    circumstances',  as  being  separate  from  consideration  of   whether
    paragraph 399 or 398 applies:

         '46. ... if he (the claimant) does not (show that para 399 or  399A
         applies),  it  is  necessary  to   consider   whether   there   are
         circumstances which  are  sufficiently  compelling  (and  therefore
         exceptional) to outweigh the public interest in deportation.   That
         is an exercise which is separate from a  consideration  of  whether
         para 399 or 399A applies.  It is the second part  of  a  two  stage
         approach which ... is required by the new rules'


77. We accept that the court in MF did not go on expressly to say  that  on
    such a consideration, the  exceptional  circumstances  had  to  embrace
    matters which are over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
    399A and which are exceptional, but we have no doubt that this  is  the
    logical consequence of the structure of the Rules under which a foreign
    criminal caught by 398(a), is not to have the benefit of the exceptions
    provided for in those succeeding paragraphs.

78. Support for this construction can be found in the approach of the Court
    of Appeal in LC (China) v SSHD [2014 ] EWCA Civ 319 in the judgment  of
    Lord Justice Moore-Bick  at paragraph 24:

         '... in case where the person to be deported has been sentenced  to
         a term of imprisonment of less than four years and  has  a  genuine
         and subsisting relationship  with  a  child  under  18  who  enjoys
         British nationality and is in the UK, less weight is to be attached
         to the public interest in deportation if it would not be reasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK and there is  no  one  else  to
         look after him.   By  contrast  however  where  the  person  to  be
         deported has been sentenced to a term of 4  years  imprisonment  or
         more, the provisions of paragraph 399 do not apply and  accordingly
         the weight to be attached to the public interest remains very great
         despite the factors to which that  paragraph  refers.   It  follows
         that neither  the  fact  the  appellant's  children  enjoy  British
         nationality nor the fact that they  may  be  separated  from  their
         father for a long time will be sufficient to constitute exceptional
         circumstances of the kind which outweigh the public interest in his
         deportation'.


79. We accordingly are of the view that had it been necessary to decide the
    issue, we would have been minded to find the that  the  tribunal  below
    did  err  in  law  in  its  approach  to  the  finding  of  exceptional
    circumstances since none of the matters relied on for this purpose were
    over and above, or went beyond, the family life or private life factors
    making up the exceptions in  paragraphs  399  and  399A  to  which  the
    appellant on this hypothesis could not lay claim.  This in our judgment
    is self evident from the analysis of those factors identified above  in
    paragraph 47.

'Very compelling circumstances' under the current Rules

80. Were the current rules applicable, then from their very terms there  is
    a requirement that in the case of a  foreign  criminal  falling  within
    paragraph 398(a)  and  who  therefore  cannot  take  advantage  of  the
    exceptions under paragraphs 399 and 399A there has to  be  demonstrated
    factors which are both  'over  and  above'  those  described  in  those
    paragraphs and are 'very compelling', if the deportation is to be found
    disproportionate.  Hence under the current  Rules  we  would  not  have
    considered that the factors relied on by the First-tier Tribunal  would
    have been sufficient in law  to  support  a  finding  that  the  public
    interest in deportation of the appellant as a foreign criminal  falling
    within 398(a), was nonetheless outweighed.

Final conclusion

81. For the reasons we have given, this appeal by the Secretary of State is
    dismissed, and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  allowing  AG's
    appeal, is affirmed.



Signed        Date 19th December 2014

Mr Justice King

