


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00251/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 10 February 2014                         |On : 19 February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                sofian majera
                            (NO aNONYMITY oRDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reynolds, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before us following a grant of permission to appeal  on  4
September 2013.

The appellant is a citizen of Rwanda, born on 10 January  1982.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 14 April 1997, aged 15  years,  together  with  his
mother and siblings. His mother claimed asylum but her claim was refused  on
25 April 2001. She was nevertheless granted four years of exceptional  leave
to remain and on 9 November 2005 was given indefinite leave to remain,  with
the appellant granted leave in line as her dependant.

On 16 May 2001 the appellant received his first convictions and went  on  to
commit a further 18 offences, including mainly  driving  offences  but  also
handling stolen goods and taking vehicles  without  consent,  up  until  the
index offences. On 16 December 2005 he was remanded in  custody  on  charges
of robbery and on 12 September 2006 he was convicted  at  Wood  Green  Crown
Court on ten counts of robbery. On 13 November 2006 he was sentenced to  ten
terms of life imprisonment (concurrent) with a minimum of seven years to  be
served and was recommended for deportation. The life sentences were  quashed
on appeal on 1 April 2007 and were  varied  to  that  of  'imprisonment  for
public protection' with the seven year imprisonment and  the  recommendation
for deportation being upheld.

On 22 March 2007 the appellant was served with  a  notice  of  liability  to
deportation to which he  responded.  A  further  liability  for  deportation
letter and questionnaire was served on 19 November 2011 to  which  he  again
responded, raising Article 8 grounds. A decision  was  made  on  1  November
2012  that  section  32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  applied  and  a
deportation order was signed against the appellant on 13 November  2012.  He
appealed against the decision of 1 November 2012.

Deportation Proceedings

The  respondent,  in  making  the  deportation  decision,  considered   that
paragraphs 399 and 399A of the immigration rules  could  not  apply  to  the
appellant due to the length of sentence handed  down  but  observed  in  any
event that he did not have children or a partner and that,  with  regard  to
private life, he had not lived in the United Kingdom with  valid  leave  for
20 years continuously. The respondent considered, with regard  to  paragraph
398 of the rules, that there were no exceptional  circumstances  that  would
outweigh the public interest in  his  deportation,  taking  account  of  his
claim to have no ties to Rwanda and to have  mental  health  problems.  With
regard to the latter, the respondent noted the lack of evidence  to  confirm
such a claim and considered in any event that  the  appellant  could  access
treatment in Rwanda. The respondent did  not  accept  that  his  deportation
would breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant's appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal, by a  panel
consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish  and  Mr  B  D  Yates.  The
panel heard oral evidence from Joanne  Lackenby,  a  chartered  psychologist
and  senior  lecturer  at  Coventry  University  who  had  represented   the
appellant before the Parole Board at the prison. The panel was  referred  to
a grant of indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  made  to  the
appellant's mother and to  the  appellant  himself  on  9  April  2009,  but
rejected the submission made that that in effect cancelled  out  the  effect
of the  convictions  arising  before  that  grant  in  accordance  with  the
principles in Omojudi v. The United Kingdom  - 1820/08 [2009] ECHR 1942.  It
also rejected Ms Lackenby's assessment of the  appellant  as  posing  a  low
risk of re-offending. The panel concluded that the  appellant's  deportation
would not breach Article 8 and it accordingly dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  on  the  following
grounds: that the First-tier Tribunal ("the Tribunal") had erred by  failing
to attach considerable weight to the grant of  indefinite  leave  to  remain
made in full awareness of the appellant's offending  history  including  the
index offences, in line with the principles in Omojudi; that  it  had  erred
in its approach to  the  appellant's  behaviour  whilst  in  prison  and  in
particular in its misunderstanding of the nature of  the  32  negative  VDTs
(voluntary drug tests) that he had  received;  that  it  had  erred  in  its
understanding of the Secretary of State's  discretionary  powers  to  recall
the appellant to prison; that it had failed to  take  account  of  the  risk
assessments made by the relevant professional experts; that  it  had  failed
to consider and apply the principles in Maslov v Austria  -  1638/03  [2008]
ECHR 546; and that it  had erred in its approach to the  appellant's  mental
health when assessing Article 8.

Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently granted  on
a renewed application on 4 September 2013.

Appeal hearing

 The appeal came before us on  10  February  2014.  The  appellant  was  not
present and Mr Reynolds informed us that that was  because  he  had  advised
the escort services that his presence was not  required  since  the  hearing
only concerned the matter of error of law.

We heard submissions from  both  parties.  Mr  Reynolds  expanded  upon  the
grounds of appeal and Ms Martin responded accordingly. We  have  dealt  with
their submissions in more detail in our considerations below.

Consideration and findings.

In our view the Tribunal did not make  any  errors  of  law  such  that  its
decision needs to be set aside.   Our  reasons  for  so  concluding  are  as
follows.

The first and second  grounds  challenge  the  Tribunal's  findings  on  the
effect of the grant of indefinite leave to remain  to  the  appellant.  They
rely on the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in  the  case  of
Omojudi as establishing a principle following which considerable weight  was
to be given to a grant of indefinite  leave  to  remain  subsequent  to  the
index offences. Mr  Reynolds  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  by
seeking to distinguish the appellant's case from  that  of  Omojudi  on  the
basis that in the latter case there was  a  long  period  of  no  offending.
However it is plain that that was not the principle  basis  upon  which  the
Tribunal had distinguished the  appellant's  case.  Although  that  was  one
reason given, at paragraph 27, for so doing, the  more  significant  reasons
were given by the Tribunal in the subsequent paragraphs, from  paragraph  28
to 32. Those reasons were that in the appellant's case the actual  grant  of
indefinite leave to remain had been made on 9 November 2005  at  which  time
the respondent would not have known about the index offences and  that  what
had occurred on 9 April 2009 was a replacement of the  appellant's  mother's
immigration status documentation and, in error, that  of  the  appellant  as
her dependant, after she had lost the original papers.

As recorded from the summary of the pre-sentence report of 7 November  2006,
at paragraph 6 of the Tribunal's  determination,  the  index  offences  took
place between 24 October and 15 November 2005. It was not until 16  December
2005 that the appellant was  remanded  in  custody  as  a  result  of  those
offences and it was not until 12  September  2006  that  he  was  convicted.
Thus, at the time he was granted indefinite leave to  remain  in  line  with
the grant made to his mother, on 9 November 2005, the respondent  could  not
have been aware of that offending history and indeed it continued past  that
date. Although the appellant's history of offending  extended  back  to  May
2001, it appears that the respondent did not consider the  relatively  minor
offending during that earlier period to be  a  reason  to  refuse  to  grant
indefinite leave to  remain.  Clearly  the  appellant's  offending  from  24
October 2005 was in a significantly more serious category and it was on  the
basis of that period of offending  that  the  deportation  proceedings  were
initiated.

The Tribunal went on, at paragraphs 29 to 32, to  consider  the  "grant"  of
indefinite leave to remain on 9 April 2009, at a time  when  the  respondent
had already initiated deportation proceedings. It was  on  that  basis  that
the grounds particularly relied  upon  the  observations  made  in  Omojudi.
However the Tribunal properly concluded that  that  was  not  a  "grant"  of
leave so much as a duplication of an earlier grant and that the  papers  had
been issued to the appellant, as the dependant of his mother,  in  ignorance
of the deportation proceedings. It was simply an  administrative  error.  It
was Mr Reynolds' submission that it was not open to the  Tribunal  to  reach
such a conclusion, given the inadequate evidential basis for such  a  claim.
However, it is clear from the Tribunal's findings  at  paragraph  30  to  32
that it reached its conclusion not only on the basis  of  instructions  from
the relevant senior caseworker to the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  but
also upon a  careful  consideration  of  the  further  documentary  evidence
relating to the appellant's mother's lost immigration status  documentation.
We find no reason why the Tribunal was not entitled to rely  upon  the  oral
instructions of the senior caseworker, but in any  event  consider  that  it
was entirely open  to  the  Tribunal  to  conclude,  on  the  basis  of  the
documentary evidence before it, that the  "grant"  of  indefinite  leave  to
remain on 9 April 2009 was simply a duplication of  status  papers  previous
issued and was no more than an  administrative  error.  Indeed  Mr  Reynolds
agreed before us that the issue of the status papers in April 2009  was  not
an actual "grant" of leave, but a  confirmation  of  the  earlier  grant  of
leave. He nevertheless submitted that the point was  the  same.  We  do  not
agree and we find, as the Tribunal did, that there is no proper  basis  upon
which to conclude that  the  observations  made  in  Omojudi  apply  in  the
appellant's case and that the Tribunal was accordingly  entitled  to  attach
the limited weight that it did to the grant of indefinite leave to remain.

 The grounds go on to challenge the Tribunal's findings at paragraph  37  in
regard to the appellant's conduct during his imprisonment,  as  relevant  to
the question of rehabilitation and, in turn, future risk. We agree  that  it
appears  the  Tribunal  misunderstood  the  effect  of  negative  VDTs  when
concluding that the appellant's period of imprisonment  was  not  devoid  of
incident. However, contrary to the assertion made in the grounds, we do  not
consider that to be material to the assessment of risk. We find merit in  Ms
Martin's submission that the outcome of the drugs test was a neutral  factor
and did not materially assist the appellant,  given  that  there  had  never
been a question of him having ever taken drugs and that was not relevant  to
his criminal offending.  There is no  doubt  that  the  Tribunal  was  fully
aware of the positive comments made by the Parole Board with respect to  the
appellant's conduct in prison and the absence of any adjudications and  that
that was a matter which it took into account - that  is  apparent  from  the
references to their report at paragraph 9 and to the evidence  at  paragraph
37. However the  Tribunal  was  nevertheless  entitled  also  to  take  into
account other matters such as the incidents  arising  from  his  employment,
indicating  a  lack  of  motivation  and  engagement,  and   an   unresolved
adjudication  on  transfer  to  a  different  prison,  as  referred  to   at
paragraphs 13 and 14.

It is not in dispute that the assessments made with respect to the  risk  of
re-offending and harm to the public identified as the  relevant  factor  the
appellant's re-association with his criminal friends. It  was  the  view  of
the chartered forensic psychologist, Ms Lackenby, that that  risk  could  be
managed by the conditions of his licence, given that warning  signs  of  re-
association with criminal peers would be picked up by his  offender  manager
leading to him being recalled into prison. The Tribunal,  at  paragraph  38,
did not accept that that was realistic and  considered  that  the  appellant
would have to commit a  further  crime  in  order  to  be  recalled.  It  is
asserted in the grounds that that was an error of fact,  made  in  ignorance
of the Secretary of State's broad discretionary powers to revoke  a  licence
or recall to prison, and that the Tribunal thereby made a material error  of
law. However the Tribunal was, in  our  view,  entitled  to  be  circumspect
about the management of that risk factor, but in  any  event  took  a  wider
view of the relevant factors impacting on the question of risk at  paragraph
38 and gave full and proper reasons for  reaching  the  conclusion  that  it
did.

Contrary  to  the  assertion  made  in  the  grounds  and  to  Mr  Reynolds'
submissions, it seems to us that the Tribunal gave a  detailed  and  careful
consideration to the reports from all  relevant  professionals  involved  in
the appellant's risk assessment, from the pre-sentence report  in  2006,  to
the OASys report in September 2009 and up  until  the  most  recent  reports
from the Parole Board and the forensic psychologist Ms Lackenby.  There  was
plainly no failure to  consider  the  views  of  the  offender  manager  and
offender supervisor. Indeed, paragraph 17 specifically refers to the  report
from the offender supervisor (albeit mistakenly referred to as the  offender
manager), as found at page 59 of Tab B of the appellant's appeal bundle  and
the views of the offender manager and the offender supervisor  are  referred
to within the consideration of the Parole Board's  report  at  paragraphs  8
and 9 of the determination.  It  is  of  some  relevance  to  note,  as  the
Tribunal did at paragraph 17, that  Ms  Wallace,  the  offender  supervisor,
had, at the time of her report in December 2012 only spent an hour with  the
appellant and that the offender manager had not even met  him.  It  is  also
relevant to note  that  Ms  Lackenby,  at  paragraph  13.4  of  her  report,
referred to the appellant having had very little contact with  his  offender
manager at the time of her report. Furthermore, the parole  panel  mentioned
at paragraph 7 of their assessment the fact that the  offender  manager  had
not prepared a full and detailed risk management plan. The updated  offender
manager report referred to at paragraph 2 of the Parole  Board  report  does
not appear to have been included in the appeal bundle before  the  Tribunal.
Mr Reynolds made much of  the  Tribunal's  confusion  between  the  offender
manager and the offender supervisor but we do not consider anything to  turn
on that and what is relevant is that  consideration  was  clearly  given  to
their views.

In  the  circumstances  we  consider  that  the   Tribunal   gave   detailed
consideration to the evidence before it in assessing  risk,  taking  account
of the views of the various professionals and professional  bodies  involved
and taking into account the appellant's conduct in prison and  (contrary  to
the assertion made in the  grounds)  including  the  completion  of  various
courses. Having considered all that evidence, the Tribunal was  entitled  to
form the view that it did as to the risk posed  by  the  appellant  and  was
entitled to accord the limited weight that it did to the more generous  risk
assessment made  by  Ms  Lackenby.  In  any  event,  the  Tribunal  properly
recognised the weight to be attached to the seriousness of  the  appellant's
crimes as a significant factor in the overall proportionality assessment.

We find no merit in the assertion in the grounds that  the  Tribunal  failed
to apply the principles in Maslov, when it is clear  from  its  findings  at
paragraph 41 that full and proper reasons were given for distinguishing  the
appellant's circumstances from those in that case and  in  the  case  of  MJ
(Angola) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 557. In any event we do  not  consider  that
the  principles  in  those  cases  assist  the  appellant,   in   particular
considering that his offending  can  plainly  not  be  explained  simply  as
juvenile delinquency, given that the index offences were committed  when  he
was an adult of 23 years of age. The  Tribunal,  furthermore,  gave  careful
consideration to the appellant's ties to the United  Kingdom,  finding  that
his family  and  other  ties  were  limited  and  considering,  for  reasons
cogently given at paragraph 46,  that  he  would  be  able  to  re-establish
himself in his home country.

Contrary to the  assertion  made  in  the  grounds,  we  consider  that  the
Tribunal adequately addressed the issue of the  appellant's  mental  health.
It was Mr Reynolds' submission that the appellant's condition was not  given
separate consideration under  Article  8  as  part  of  the  proportionality
assessment.  Whilst  the  Tribunal  could  perhaps  have  made   a   clearer
distinction  between  its  findings  under  Article  3  and  Article  8,  it
nevertheless took account of all relevant issues  including  the  assessment
made by Ms Lackenby, noting in particular her conclusions  at  section  16.5
of her report as to relevant  treatment  and  support,  the  effect  on  the
appellant of his mental condition and  the  impact  of  deportation  on  the
appellant's mental  health.  As  Ms  Martin  submitted,  the  conclusion  at
paragraph 16.5iv in regard to the latter was speculative and it was open  to
the Tribunal to attach to it the weight that it did.

The Tribunal properly found, at paragraph 42, that  the  appellant  was  not
able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  relating  to
deportation, given the length of his sentence and of his  residence  in  the
United Kingdom. Although not expressly stated by the Tribunal,  it  was  for
the appellant to show, pursuant to paragraph 398 of the  immigration  rules,
that there were exceptional circumstances such that the public  interest  in
deportation was outweighed by other  factors.  The  Tribunal  plainly  found
that such circumstances did not  exist  in  the  appellant's  case  and  its
findings are summed up in the conclusions at paragraph 45  and  46.  In  our
view, the Tribunal took account of all relevant factors and  gave  full  and
detailed consideration to the evidence in reaching the conclusions  that  it
did. Those conclusions were entirely open to the Tribunal on  the  basis  of
the evidence before it. We find nothing in the  grounds  of  appeal  or  the
submissions most ably made by Mr Reynolds which would lead  us  to  conclude
that the Tribunal erred in law.


DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law, such that the decision has to be set aside.  We  do
not set  aside  the  decision.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
deportation appeal therefore stands.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    We find no reason to continue that order and accordingly lift the order
    (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008).
























                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
