
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00689/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 HUSSEIN [U]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, instructed by Citywide, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By decision promulgated on 24 July 2018, I found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.
    My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, Hussein [U], was born on 10 February  1992  and
         is a citizen of the Netherlands.  He claims to have arrived in  the
         United Kingdom aged 12 in April  2004.   On  30  October  2015,  at
         Sheffield Crown Court the appellant was convicted on two counts  of
         possession with intent to supply of a controlled drug (class A) and
         was sentenced to a total of four years  six  months'  imprisonment.
         The Secretary of State decided to make a deportation  order  on  18
         June 2016 but,  owing  to  an  error  in  the  decision,  this  was
         withdrawn and a further decision was made dated  23  January  2017.
         The appellant appealed against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  26
         February 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,
         with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   There are two grounds of appeal.  I shall deal first with  the
         second ground  for  reasons  which  will  become  apparent.   I  am
         grateful to Mr Karnik, who appeared before both Tribunals on behalf
         of the appellant, for his helpful submissions.  He has referred  me
         to several cases which stress the importance of assessing the level
         of protection available to an individual under EU law by  reference
         to whether or not he  or  she  has  acquired  rights  of  permanent
         residence.  I was referred to the case of  LG  and  CC  (EEA  Regs:
         residence; imprisonment; removal) Italy  [2009]  UKAIT  0024.   The
         Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (AIT) held at [82]:

             "Thus,  even  if  the  highest  level  of  protection  is  not
             available as a matter of right, a person's period of residence
             is still relevant in deciding whether his expulsion  would  be
             disproportionate on the facts of his case. Where a person  has
             become fully integrated into this country  by  more  than  ten
             years residence, particularly if he has severed any links with
             his country of origin, it would be consistent with the purpose
             of the Directive (as  stated  in  the  Preamble)  to  apply  a
             stringent test, which may be equivalent  in  practice  to  the
             "imperative grounds" test."

         3.   I was also provided with a  copy  of  the  preliminary  ruling
         under Article 267 TFEU in respect of B (Citizenship of the European
         Union - right to remove and reside  freely  -  enhanced  protection
         against expulsion - judgment) [2018]  EUECJ  C-316/16.   Where  the
         European Court at [61] held that:

             "In the light of all the foregoing the  answer  to  the  first
             question in Case C-424/16 is  that  Article  28(3)(a)  of  the
             Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted as meaning that it is  a
             prerequisite  of  eligibility  for  the   protection   against
             expulsion provided for  in  that  provision  that  the  person
             concerned must have a right of permanent residence within  the
             meaning of Article 16 and Article 28(2) of that directive."

         4.   Accurate calculation  of  the  length  of  residence  and,  in
         particular, the acquisition of permanent residence within the  host
         country is, therefore, vital as a prerequisite for any analysis  of
         the protection available from deportation for any  individual.   At
         [47-49] Judge Shimmin wrote:

             "47. The appellant  argues  that  he  gained  residence  as  a
             dependant of his mother.

             48.  The appellant's mother came to  the  UK  in  2004  and  I
             accept, on the documentary evidence before me, that she worked
             2005  to  April  2007.   However  after  that  there   is   no
             documentary evidence that she is a worker.  She told  me  that
             she was without work for six months but went back to work  for
             two and a half years.  Her oral evidence  was  very  uncertain
             and unclear and there was  no  evidence  of  the  job  in  the
             documents.  In fact the appellant's documents  contradict  her
             later claimed employment.  They show  that  she  received  tax
             credits to April 2009.   In  addition  an  HMRC  questionnaire
             states that her 'employment started 8 March 2005 and  ended  5
             April 2007'.  I found her oral evidence is  inconsistent  with
             the documentary evidence so I  reject  her  claim  around  her
             second employment.  There  is  no  evidence  that  during  the
             second period that  she  was  a  jobseeker  and  there  is  no
             evidence of temporary incapacity to work as  submitted  by  Mr
             Karnik.  I find that Regulation 6(2) is not applicable.

             49.  For the above reasons I  conclude  the  appellant  cannot
             claim five years' permanent residence as his  mother's  family
             member."

         5.   At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for
         the Secretary of State, accepted that the judge was wrong  to  have
         said that  there  was  "no  evidence"  of  the  mother's  temporary
         incapacity to work.  It  appears  that  Mrs  [M[  (the  appellant's
         mother) had been asked in cross-examination  why  she  had  stopped
         working in 2007 and she had given an explanation;  she  had  fallen
         down and injured herself.  There was medical evidence showing  that
         Mrs [M[ had been confined to bed as a result of  longstanding  back
         pain  and  mobility  issues.   There  was  also  evidence  in   the
         appellant's bundle that Mrs [M[ had received Personal  Independence
         Payment (PIP).  There was evidence also the appellant had  received
         Disability Living Allowance (DLA).  I  accept  that  this  evidence
         appears to have been overlooked by Judge Shimmin.   I  accept  also
         that it  may  be  relevant  to  the  question  of  determining  the
         acquisition by the appellant of permanent residence.

         6.   I find that, in relation to ground 2, the judge has  erred  in
         law and that his decision should be set aside.  I  make  no  formal
         finding in respect of ground 1.  However, should it become relevant
         at the resumed hearing, I wish to hear further argument in  respect
         of the appellant's contention  that  the  nature  of  his  criminal
         offending does not engage "imperative" grounds of protection.

         Notice of Decision and Directions

         7.   I make the following directions:

             (A)  There will be a resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal
             (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) at Bradford on a date to be fixed.
              Two hours are allowed.  If an interpreter  is  required,  the
             appellant's  solicitors  must  notify   the   Upper   Tribunal
             immediately.

             (B)  None of the findings of fact of the  First-tier  Tribunal
             shall stand.  The parties may  adduce  new  evidence  provided
             copies of any documentary evidence are sent  to  the  Tribunal
             and to the other party  no  later  than  10  days  before  the
             resumed hearing.

             (C)  Both parties are directed to file at the  Upper  Tribunal
             and serve upon each other skeleton arguments dealing with  all
             issues which may arise in the remaking of the decision by  the
             Upper Tribunal.  The skeleton arguments should  be  filed  and
             served no later than 5 days prior to the resumed hearing.

         8.   No anonymity direction is made."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 13 June 2019, both the  appellant
    and his mother, [SM], gave evidence.




    The Law

 3. Regulations 27 and 28  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 provide as follows:

         'Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security  and
         public health

         27.- (1) In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has a right of permanent residence  under  regulation
                  15 and who  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                  continuous period of at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the
                  relevant decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                  is in the best  interests  of  the  person  concerned,  as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United  Nations  on
                  20th November 1989(1).

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                  even in the absence of  a  previous  criminal  conviction,
                  provided the grounds are specific to the person.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
             public policy and public security  in  relation  to  a  person
             ("P") who is resident in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision
             maker must take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,
             state of health, family  and  economic  situation  of  P,  P's
             length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and
             cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of
             P's links with P's country of origin.

             (7)  In the case of a relevant decision taken  on  grounds  of
             public health-

                  (a)  a disease that does not have  epidemic  potential  as
                  defined by the relevant instruments of  the  World  Health
                  Organisation or is not a disease listed in Schedule  1  to
                  the Health Protection (Notification) Regulations  2010(2);
                  or

                  (b)  if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, any
                  disease occurring after the three month  period  beginning
                  on the date on which the  person  arrived  in  the  United
                  Kingdom,

             does not constitute grounds for the decision.

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

         Application of Part 4 to a person with a derivative right to reside

         28.- (1) This regulation applies where a person-

                  (a)  would, but for this Part  of  these  Regulations,  be
                  entitled to a derivative right to  reside  (other  than  a
                  derivative right to reside conferred by regulation 16(3));

                  (b)  holds a derivative residence card; or

                  (c)  has applied for a derivative residence card.

             (2)   Where  this  regulation  applies,  this  Part  of  these
             Regulations applies as though-

                  (a)  references to "the family member of an EEA  national"
                  referred instead to "a person with a derivative  right  to
                  reside";

                  (b)  references to a registration certificate, a residence
                  card, a  document  certifying  permanent  residence  or  a
                  permanent residence card referred instead to a "derivative
                  residence card";

                  (c)  regulation 24(5) instead conferred on an  immigration
                  officer the power to revoke a  derivative  residence  card
                  where the holder is not at  that  time  a  person  with  a
                  derivative right to reside; and

                  (d)  regulations 24(4) and 27(3) and (4) were omitted.'

 4. As I understand the submissions made by Mr Diwnycz,  who  appeared  for
    the Secretary of State at the resumed hearing, the  respondent  accepts
    that Ms [M] and the  appellant  himself  have  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence. Issues which concerned  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    such as the mother's exercise of Treaty Rights and the  nature  of  her
    immigration status, therefore, are no longer of relevance. It is agreed
    also that the appellant himself has resided in the United Kingdom  more
    than 10 years before the date of commencement of his  imprisonment.  It
    remains at issue whether the appellant has, as  a  consequence  of  his
    imprisonment and criminal offending, severed the integrated links which
    he had forged in the United Kingdom from his childhood (he entered  the
    United Kingdom when he was 12 years old).

 5. The evidence given by the appellant and his mother was not contentious.
    I accept that, save when in  prison,  the  appellant  has  resided  and
    continues to reside in the same household as his mother. I accept  also
    that the appellant suffers from epilepsy. I accept his evidence that he
    last suffered a reasonably serious seizure only 3 to 5  days  prior  to
    the resumed hearing. There was a  discrepancy  in  the  evidence  given
    about this seizure by the appellant and Ms [M] but Mr Diwnycz  did  not
    submit that anything turned upon it.

 6. It is submitted by the appellant that he had his  mother  are  mutually
    dependent; she no longer works but has both physical and mental  health
    problems and provides care and assistance  to  the  appellant  when  he
    suffers epileptic seizures. I am prepared to accept  that  there  is  a
    degree of inter-dependence between these  individuals,  notwithstanding
    the fact that the appellant himself is an  adult.  I  accept  that  the
    appellant's mother suffers mental health  issues  as  detailed  in  the
    evidence.

 7. At the resumed hearing, Mr Diwnycz produced  copy  of  the  appellant's
    criminal record which showed that, on 13 June 2019, the  appellant  had
    been given a conditional discharge having obstructed a police officer.

 8. Mr Karnik, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that  'imperative'
    grounds for removing the  appellant  had  not  been  established.  Both
    parties accept that the burden of proving that such grounds exist rests
    on the Secretary of State.

 9. I am in no doubt that the public interest concerned with the removal of
    this appellant is considerable. He has  committed  a  criminal  offence
    involving Class A drugs which has attracted a prison sentence in excess
    of  four  years.  However,  I  accept  also  that  the  threshold   for
    establishing 'imperative' grounds for the removal of an EU national  is
    a high one. I find that the appellant's recent offending involving  the
    obstruction of a police officer  does  not  establish  that  he  has  a
    present propensity to  repeat  the  conduct  which  might  represent  a
    genuine  present  sufficiently  serious   threat   affecting   one   of
    fundamental interests of society. Indeed, I find it would be  an  error
    to take that offending into account in assessing the present nature  of
    any threat. Further, I find that the appellant, as he  claims,  has  no
    links with the Netherlands and  also  that  he  remains  integrated  in
    society  of  the  United  Kingdom  notwithstanding  his  offending.  In
    reaching that finding, I have had regard to the fact that the burden of
    proving the nature of any threat posed by the appellant  rests  on  the
    respondent and that no issue was taken regarding the written  and  oral
    evidence of the appellant and his mother. Although I am aware that  the
    claimed inter-dependency between the appellant and his  mother  appears
    to have done little to discourage him from his serious past offending I
    am, having heard both witnesses give evidence, prepared to accept  that
    they do now rely upon each other as they claim and that both  witnesses
    suffer from medical conditions which, certainly  in  the  case  of  the
    appellant, constitute a relevant factor in determining proportionality.
    Having regard all the evidence, I  find  that  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to  deport  him  to  the
    Netherlands should be allowed.



Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 23 January 2017 is allowed.


Signed                              Date 1 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
















