
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00331/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2019                           |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE WAKSMAN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Marcio Correia Pestana
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M C Pestana in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS



This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a decision of
the First-tier Tribunal which allowed the appeal of Mr Pestana, a
Portuguese national, against a decision to deport him following his
conviction in 2017 of an assault which took place in 2014. It is subject to
the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

Although the class of offence was at the lower end of the spectrum, being
an offence of assaulting occasioning actual bodily harm, it is clear from
the sentencing judge that he regarded this, as he described it, as a
"horrible offence" and one of the victims was left with eye problems for
some time.  Mr Pestana was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment and he
served six months of that, after which he went into immigration detention.
There were some other matters which were of different character back in
2000.

It is clear that the relevant test so far as the putative deportation of Mr
Pestana is concerned, as it is in almost all cases under the EEA
Regulations, includes finding "that the personal conduct of the person
concerned must represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".  The judge noted,
as is still the case, that Mr Pestana denies having committed this offence.
 Mr Pestana tells us that it is not likely that he will be able to prove
his innocence easily, simply because of his financial position.

The judge, having noted that, and having set out the test that I have
referred to, then said in paragraph 9 that: "Recent cases have shown the
threshold to be relatively high and reserved for offences involving
terrorism."  We agree with the submissions of the Secretary of State that
that is imposing far too high a test and is not equivalent wording to that
which is set out in Regulation 21(5)(c), which I have recited.  On that
basis alone, it seems to us that the First-tier Judge has proceeded on the
wrong basis. It is, at best, a misdescription of the "imperative grounds"
test that applies to people who have resided in the United Kingdom for a
continuous period of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision.

There is a second problem with the Decisions and Reasons as well, which is
that the judge in paragraph 12 said that the incident involved him being a
willing tool of another but was not a random attack but rather an incident
involving someone they both knew.  We see the force of the Secretary of
State's submission that it is difficult to see how here, the fact that such
an assault on someone they knew, rather than someone they did not, in any
way lessens the seriousness of the matter.

For those reasons we consider that the grounds of appeal are made out and
we allow the appeal.

The question is then what should be done next.  The Secretary of State says
that on the basis of the more modest test applicable, it is plain that it
is made out.  They rely upon the fact that Mr Pestana has got himself into
trouble when drunk.  It appears even that he was drunk and was unable to
attend his own hearing before the First-tier Tribunal a few months ago he
has tried to make somewhat light of that today.  The core submission
therefore is that if he finds himself drunk and in particular circumstances
he may well be disposed to commit the same kind of act that he did in 2014.

While we can understand why the Secretary of State says that, having heard
Mr Pestana today, taking account of the fact that there appears to have
been no further problems, and taking account of the fact that he might in
fact be able to show sufficient evidence to establish 5 year's lawful
residence here, although the judge ultimately took the view that this was
not established before him, we are of the clear view that what must happen
here is that Mr Pestana's appeal must go back to the First-tier Tribunal
for a rehearing. This will allow the evidence to be viewed within the prism
of the correct test which we have identified.

UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

I agree.

Notice of Decision

The appeal from the First-tier Tribunal is  allowed.  Its  decision  is  set
aside and the matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  tribunal  for  fresh
consideration.


Signed        [pic]                     Date 15 February 2019


Mr Justice Waksman


