
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00343/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |    Decision & Reasons        |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 30th November 2015                         |    On 11th December 2015     |
|Given extempore                               |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              TOMASZ BRZEZINSKI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tom Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Hooper, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State is the  appellant  and  to  avoid
    confusion I  am  going  to  refer  to  her  throughout  as  being  "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Poland who  was  born  on  3rd  October,
    1988, and, I believe it is not in contention that he entered the United
    Kingdom in 1994, aged 5 to join his mother.  He was granted  indefinite
    leave to remain as the dependant of his mother on 21st June, 2001.  His
    mother had married a gentleman who was settled in the United Kingdom.

3.   Between 2006 and 2014, the respondent has  acquired  nineteen  criminal
    convictions for a total of 34 offences.  On  31st  January,  2012,  the
    respondent was convicted of an offence whilst a community order was  in
    force and on 16th March, 2012 was served with a notice of liability  to
    deportation.  He responded by questionnaire on 22nd March, 2012, and on
    further consideration by  the  claimant  it  was  considered  that  the
    respondent did not meet the criteria for deportation at that  time  and
    so, on 9th May, 2012, he was issued with a warning letter.

4.   Unfortunately, on 18th September, 2014, the  respondent  was  convicted
    at Blackfriars Crown Court of conspiracy to steal and sentenced  to  21
    months' imprisonment.  A new notice of  liability  to  deportation  was
    served on him on 8th June, 2015, and on 24th June, 2015, the respondent
    was served with a signed deportation order dated 22nd June, 2015, which
    was made for reasons set out in a letter dated 4th June and served with
    a notice of immigration decision under the 2006 Regulations dated  22nd
    June, 2015.

5.   The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Jane  Plumptre,  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 23rd September, 2015.  She allowed  the  respondent's  appeal,
    but in doing so erred by incorrectly applying  the  imperative  grounds
    test.

6.   Addressing me on behalf of the  claimant,  Mr  Wilding  suggested  that
    this  may  be  an  imperative  grounds  case,  under  Regulation  21(4)
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006,  but  before  deciding,  it   is
    necessary to look back to see if  someone  has  ten  years'  continuous
    period  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  a  break  for
    imprisonment, so that one looks  for  a  period  of  ten  years  before
    imprisonment and then periods following imprisonment and those  periods
    may be taken with relevant consideration into account by  the  national
    authorities responsible for applying  Regulation  28,  as  part  of  an
    overall assessment required for  determining  whether  the  intervening
    link previously forged by the individual with the  host  member  state,
    has been broken and thus deciding whether enhanced protection  will  be
    granted.  Unfortunately, in this determination, nowhere  is  there  any
    engagement with the exercise of assessing whether  the  appellant  lost
    any integrating links.  The judge has simply concluded that because the
    respondent has been in the United Kingdom since 1994, the respondent is
    entitled to the high level  of  protection  of  imperative  grounds  of
    public policy.

7.   Mr Wilding confirmed  that  although  Poland  did  not  accede  to  the
    European Economic Union until May  2004,  this  does  not  prevent  the
    respondent being able to rely on his earlier residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom from 1999, given the provisions of paragraph 6 and  Schedule  4
    of the Regulations; as a dependant of his mother the respondent was  in
    a category which would have fallen within the scope of Article 7 of the
    Free Movement Directive, had it applied at the time.

8.   He submitted that there needed for a full assessment as to  whether  or
    not the respondent lost the intervening links during the periods of his
    employment.  This judge failed to engage with that at all.

9.   Ms Hooper submitted that the judge did not quote but did follow the  MG
    (Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  MG  (Judgment  of  the
    court) [2014] EUECJ C-400/12) test.  It is  agreed  that  the  relevant
    initial period is that since 1994,  when  the  respondent  entered  the
    United Kingdom aged 5.   Periods  of  imprisonment  can  of  course  in
    principle break continuity of residence.  Taken as a  whole,  when  one
    reads paragraph 48 of the determination onwards it is  clear  that  the
    judge applied the correct principles.  She lists the  relevant  factors
    at paragraph 48 and having been  alert  to  and  applied  the  relevant
    principles, has not erred.  The claimant's own  policy  refers  to  the
    same factors as those to which the judge made  reference  in  paragraph
    48.  She urged me to find that there was no error of law on the part of
    the judge and to uphold the determination.

10.  Responding on behalf of the claimant,  Mr  Wilding  suggested  that  at
    paragraph 48 the judge has  simply  recited  the  factors  relevant  in
    Regulation 8 cases, but has not reached a  reasoned  conclusion  as  to
    whether or not the appellant was integrated given the series of periods
    during which he has been in prison which had the potential to interrupt
    integrating links he may previously have forged.  He has  been  in  and
    out of prison since 2011 and an assessment as to his integration  still
    needs to be made.  There has been a complete failure.  He invited me to
    remit the appeal for hearing afresh  and  suggested  that  no  findings
    could be preserved.

11.  Helpfully, Ms Hooper agreed that in the event I found an error of  law,
    the appeal should be remitted for hearing afresh by a judge other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Jane Plumptre.

12.  Having carefully listened  to  the  helpful  submissions  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer and Counsel I have concluded that the  determination
    cannot stand.  There has not been an assessment undertaken  of  whether
    the periods of imprisonment imposed on the respondent  had  interrupted
    the integrating links previously  forged  by  him  since  he  initially
    entered the United Kingdom at the age of 5.  I  remit  the  matter  for
    hearing  afresh  by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre.

13.  Mr Wilding  suggested  that  it  was  certainly  possible  that  having
    undertaken the assessment properly a different judge may reach the same
    conclusion.  However, this judge simply failed to  correctly  undertake
    that assessment.



Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

