

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00233/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision and Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 29th January 2016                   |                 On 4th February 2016   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                              OLUMARLON JACKSON

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr J. Plowright of counsel, of Karis Law,
solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The  appellant,  who  is  a  citizen  of  Jamaica,  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Freestone who, by a decision promulgated on 17 March  2015,  dismissed
      his appeal against a decision that he be deported as a consequence  of
      his conviction before the Leicester Crown Court on 17 July 2013  of  7
      counts of possession and/or use of false documents. As we  shall  see,
      that was not his only  conviction  but  it  followed  from  his  being
      sentenced to 12 month imprisonment, concurrently, for  each  of  those
      seven counts that he became a foreign criminal for the purposes of s32
      of the UK Borders Act 2007 so that the decision to make a  deportation
      order was mandatory, subject to the exceptions provided by s33 of  the
      2007 Act, which was the focus of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge.

   2. In granting permission to appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  said
      this:


           "It is arguable that in reaching its conclusions  at  paragraphs
           40 and 41, the First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed  to  take  into
           account  the  apparently  unchallenged  evidence   recorded   at
           paragraph  23.  It  is  arguable  that  had  it  done  so,   its
           conclusions as to whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
           Appellant's British child to live without him  would  have  been
           different."


   3. Judge Bruce did not specifically limit the grant of permission to  the
      ground upon which she was persuaded to grant permission, and  in  fact
      the  grounds  went  a  little  further  than  that.  In  opening   his
      submissions on behalf of the appellant, Mr Plowright made  clear  that
      the appeal was argued on the basis also identified in paragraph  3  of
      the summary of his grounds:


           "The learned IJ draws  an  inference  from  the  fact  that  the
           appellant's  bail  address  was  initially  in  Leicester,   and
           therefore he enjoyed only a remote relationship  with  his  son.
           This was not put to the appellant or  his  partner  but  had  it
           been, the evidence could have addressed the nature,  extent  and
           quality of the relationship the appellant enjoys with his on."

   4. The  decision  of  the  judge  begins  by  examining  the  appellant's
      immigration history, which she described when setting out her findings
      as an appalling one. There can be no quarrel with that  conclusion  as
      the following summary makes clear.


   5. According to the sentencing remarks of the judge who passed  upon  the
      appellant  the  sentence  of  imprisonment  that  gave  rise  to   the
      deportation decision, the appellant moved  to  the  United  States  of
      America in March 1989. Thereafter:


        "He was arrested  three  times  for  firearms  and  class  A  drugs
        offences and used two false names and in 1991 in the USA,  for  the
        possession of cocaine and handling stolen property,  got  11  years
        and was deported from the USA on 28 December 2000."

   6. Nine months later, on 15 September 2001, the appellant arrived in  the
      United Kingdom and secured entry as a visitor by  presenting  a  false
      passport in the name of Errol Anthony Walcott. Using  the  same  false
      identity, he successfully  applied  for  further  leave  in  the  same
      capacity and then applied for that to be varied so that he be  granted
      leave to remain as a student. However, having come to the attention of
      police  following  allegations  from  his  then  partner  of  domestic
      violence, his true identity was discovered and he was removed from the
      United Kingdom on 7 July 2002 as an illegal entrant.


   7. The appellant soon made an  application  to  the  High  Commission  in
      Kingston for a visa to facilitate his return. This  was  refused  but,
      undeterred by that, he travelled to the United Kingdom on  13  October
      2002 using another false passport, this time in  the  name  of  Trevor
      Alvin Burke, and again was  admitted  with  leave  as  a  visitor.  He
      overstayed that leave and in May 2003 applied for leave to  remain  on
      the basis of a marriage entered into on 3 February 2003 with a  person
      present and settled here. He was granted first a period  of  leave  in
      that capacity and, following  a  further  application  in  June  2005,
      indefinite leave to remain.


   8. Each of those applications was made dishonestly, not just because they
      were made in a false identity and in reliance of false  documents  but
      because the appellant answered "No" to the question on the application
      forms the question asking whether he had "received a  prison  sentence
      in the UK or elsewhere".


   9. The appellant's antecedents, also record that on 27 November  2007  he
      was convicted before the Birmingham  Magistrates  Court  of  making  a
      false representation to obtain benefits,  although  he  disputes  that
      conviction, as he did when appearing before the Leicester Crown  Court
      in July 2013. Despite that, the conviction  remains  recorded  against
      him. However, in view of his protestation that this does not relate to
      him, I leave this out of account, as is apparent  did  the  judge  who
      dismissed his appeal.


  10. It appears  that  although  the  appellant  had  secured  a  grant  of
      indefinite leave under the false name of  Burke,  he  wished  also  to
      acquire that status in his real name of Marlon Jackson. On 16  October
      2008  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  founded  on   rights
      protected by article 8 of the ECHR. This was refused on  21  September
      2009 with no right of appeal.   He  was  served  with  notice  of  his
      liability to be removed.


  11. Despite this, the appellant remained.  He  retained,  of  course,  the
      grant of indefinite leave to remain in the name of  Trevor  Burke.  In
      March 2003 he made an application for indefinite leave, again  in  his
      real name of Jackson. That was refused but, because his former partner
      and their two children had been granted discretionary leave to remain,
      he also was granted a period of  discretionary  leave,  until  6  July
      2014. Two observations might be made about that. This was the  partner
      whose complaints to the police that the  appellant  had  been  violent
      towards her led to his removal from the United Kingdom in  July  2002.
      Secondly, this application, although made in his own name, was also  a
      dishonest one because he failed  to  disclose  that  he  had  made  an
      earlier application, successfully, in a false identity and that he had
      served a lengthy prison sentence in the USA for  involving  dishonesty
      and Class A drugs.


  12. Before this period of leave expired, as I  have  observed  above,  the
      appellant was convicted of seven counts  of  possessing  and/or  using
      false  documents  and  was  sentenced  to  a  total   of   12   months
      imprisonment.


  13. In setting out her reasons for rejecting the  appellant's  claim  that
      there would be an impermissible infringement of  rights  protected  by
      article 8 of the ECHR, so that the appellant could not  bring  himself
      within one of the exceptions to automatic deportation provided by  s33
      of the UK Borders Act 2007, the respondent conducted a careful  review
      of all that was known  about  the  appellant's  asserted  private  and
      family life. She examined separately the appellant's relationship with
      his former partner and their two children and with his current partner
      and their two year old son. She considered also the private  life  the
      appellant had built while living  in  the  United  Kingdom.  She  then
      concluded that:


           "The nature of your offence weighs  heavily  in  favour  of  the
           public interest in securing your deportation. It is  clear  that
           your offences are representative of your willingness  to  ignore
           the criminal and immigration laws of this country and to exploit
           a source of negative impact  on  the  community  of  the  United
           Kingdom. In the light of the above it is  concluded  that  there
           are no  exceptional  circumstances  in  your  case  which  would
           outweigh the public interest in your  deportation.  It  is  also
           noted that you was convicted for drugs offences in the  name  of
           Peter O'Neal Brown and sentenced to 10 years and  deported  from
           the United States of America to Jamaica in 2000. You also failed
           to note this conviction on any  of  the  application  forms  you
           completed to regularise your stay in  the  United  Kingdom.  You
           have also admitted to using a number of other alias names in the
           past  and  your  long   criminal   history   demonstrates   your
           willingness  to  reoffend.  It  is  therefore  considered   that
           deportation would be proportionate response to your offending."


  14. It should be noted that the conclusion  that  the  appellant  did  not
      stand to benefit  from  exceptions  to  deportation  set  out  in  the
      immigration rules concerning his parental  relationships  was  reached
      with reference to the earlier version of para 399(a) then in force. As
      each of the three children lived, and would  continue  to  live,  with
      their respective mothers, it could not be said that there was no other
      family member able to care for the child in the United Kingdom. As  we
      shall see, and as was recognised by all concerned,  before  the  judge
      the relevant rules were those in force at the date of the hearing: see
      YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.


  15. That, then, was the position at the commencement of the hearing before
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge. She directed herself correctly in terms
      of the deportation provisions of s32 of the UK Borders Act 2007,  s117
      of the Nationality Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 as amended  by  the
      Immigration Act  2014,  and  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  in
      determining a claim under article  8  of  the  ECHR.  She  heard  oral
      evidence from the appellant and from his current partner, Ms W, who is
      the mother of his 3 year old son.


  16. At paragraph 23 of the decision the judge said this:


           "In his oral evidence the Appellant said he has been with  Ms  W
           for six years. The Appellant takes his youngest son  to  nursery
           three days a week. Ms W works part time  as  a  care  assistant.
           When she is working the Appellant looks after (their  son)  full
           time. The Appellant provided a birth certificate for  (his  son)
           which appears to indicate that he  and  Ms  W  were  not  living
           together at the time he was  born.  In  his  oral  evidence  the
           Appellant said that his  youngest  son  is  hyperactive.  He  is
           currently being assessed although the GP said  he  is  so  young
           they may have to "wait and watch him"  The  couple  have  to  be
           careful who they leave him with. He wants to be a good father to
           him"


  17.  The  judge's  summary  of  the  evidence  continued.  She  noted  the
      appellant's evidence that it would be very hard  for  him  to  support
      himself in Jamaica so he would be unable to send financial support for
      his three children here. The judge noted also that the mother  of  the
      appellant's youngest child had said in her written evidence that their
      son's behaviour had improved since the appellant had returned to  live
      with them and it would be hard for her to care for her son alone.  She
      confirmed that she herself had come to the United Kingdom from Jamaica
      ten years ago and, although she had taken her son there last Christmas
      for a two month long visit, she would not  want  to  move  back  there
      because she did not want her son to grow  up  "with  the  violence  in
      Jamaica".


  18. There was no real evidence at all from the appellant's former  partner
      who is the mother of his two elder children. A document  was  produced
      that was said to be "an unsigned statement" of this lady  saying  that
      the appellant had been "a wonderful father to his children"  and  that
      there was no possibility of them visiting the appellant in Jamaica.


  19. Finally, the judge noted that the evidence from the Probation  Service
      produced in October 2013 was that the appellant had been  assessed  as
      posing a low risk of serious harm based on his lack of convictions for
      violent offences or domestically abusive behaviour.  It  appears  that
      the author of that report was unaware of the accusations  of  domestic
      violence against the  former  partner  that  led  to  the  appellant's
      removal from the United Kingdom in 2002.


  20. As Mr Plowright quite properly conceded, there can be no challenge  to
      the findings of the judge concerning the appellant's two children from
      his earlier relationship, that being that his relationship  with  them
      and their mother was not such as  to  bring  about  any  impermissible
      infringement of rights protected by article 8 of the ECHR  should  the
      appellant be deported. The judge  observed  at  paragraph  42  of  her
      decision:


           "... On the Appellant's own evidence he is  now  conducting  the
           relationship with his two eldest children from afar..."


  21. The reasoning and findings of the judge are distilled into  paragraphs
      39-41 of her decision:


           "39. In her refusal letter the Respondent accepts it is  in  the
           best interests of the Appellant's children to remain in the  UK.
           Whilst  I  accept  the  Immigration  Rules  have  changed  I  am
           satisfied  that  this  is   still   the   position.   In   those
           circumstances the question is whether it  is  unduly  harsh  for
           them to remain in the UK with their mothers after the  Appellant
           has been deported (paragraphs 398 and  399  of  the  Immigration
           Rules and section 117C of the 2002 Act."


      Mr Plowright accepts,  realistically,  that  neither  the  appellant's
      relationship with his elder two children who continue to live with his
      former partner nor that with his current  partner  is  sufficient,  in
      itself, to bring about any breach of rights protected  by  article  8.
      Therefore, the focus of the appeal is upon the genuine and  subsisting
      parental relationship presently enjoyed  by  the  appellant  with  his
      three year old son. The judge continued:


           "40. The Appellant's youngest child is aged 3 years. He was born
           on the 21st October 2011. The Appellant was not living with Ms W
           (his mother) at the time. The Appellant  was  convicted  on  the
           17th July 2013 and was sentenced to a term of  imprisonment.  He
           was eventually released on bail in May 2014 (oral  evidence).  I
           note that the address he provided for his Home Detention  curfew
           was his mother's address in Leicester and not Ms Ws' address  in
           Oxford (J3 of the Respondent's bundle). The address in Leicester
           is the same address that is given for the Appellant on the birth
           certificate of (his youngest son).

           41. It seems to me that whilst it is conceded by the  Respondent
           that the Appellant has a genuine relationship with  his  son  he
           was conducting it from afar when (his youngest son) was born and
           whilst he was in prison. By intending to live  in  Leicester  on
           his release it would  appear  that  he  was  still  prepared  to
           conduct that relationship whilst  living  apart  from  his  son.
           Accordingly, whilst I accept that the Appellant's deportation to
           Jamaica would be harsh on his youngest son, I do not find it  to
           be unduly harsh being in mind his age  and  the  fact  that  for
           nearly a significant part of his son's life  the  Appellant  has
           not been living with him.  I  also  note  that  the  Appellant's
           partner returned to Jamaica recently with their son and remained
           there for two months. In those circumstances it seems to me that
           their  relationship   can   continue   after   the   Appellant's
           deportation to Jamaica."


  22. In my judgement it  plainly  cannot  be  said  that  in  reaching  her
      conclusions concerning the appellant's youngest  son,  the  judge  had
      simply left out of account what she had recorded at  paragraph  23  of
      her decision.  First, there is no reason at all to  suppose  that  she
      had forgotten what she had just  written  in  the  earlier  paragraph.
      Secondly, it is clear from paragraph 39 of the decision that here  the
      judge is addressing specifically the issue of whether  the  separation
      caused by deportation would be unduly harsh  upon  the  child  and  at
      paragraphs 40 and 41 the judge is explaining why, despite  that  which
      she had recorded at paragraph 23, it would not be. The fact  that  the
      judge concluded that the effect upon the child would be harsh but  not
      unduly harsh is plainly illustrative of the fact that the  judge  was,
      specifically, drawing together all of  the  evidence,  including  that
      which she had recorded as speaking in favour of the need  to  avoid  a
      separation, and reaching a judgement upon the issue that  she  had  to
      resolve. Clearly, it could not be accepted to be "harsh" for  a  child
      to be separated from a father whose  relationship  was  in  any  event
      presently "being conducted from afar".


  23. That analysis is reinforced  by  examining  precisely  how  the  judge
      expressed herself. She said that in "intending" to live  in  Leicester
      rather than Oxford:


           "... it would appear that he was still prepared to conduct  that
           relationship whilst living apart from his son..."


      From which it can be seen that the judge is expressing herself in  the
      past tense, speaking here not about the current  circumstances,  which
      she had described earlier at paragraph 23, but about the  position  as
      it was when the appellant was contemplating his release from prison.


  24. The second challenge being pursued is that if the judge  was  to  draw
      the inferences  she  did  about  the  significance  of  the  appellant
      providing an address in Leicester, his mothers, address,  rather  than
      the address in Oxford where his son lived with  his  partner  for  his
      bail/curfew address on release from prison, then she should  have  put
      that to the appellant so that he had an opportunity to deal  with  it.
      Mr Plowright pointed out that, in any event, the document to which the
      judge referred appears to be a request for  post  release  bail/curfew
      rather than a certificate of what happened as the date  upon  it  does
      not chime with the known date of release.


  25. I am entirely satisfied that the judge made no error of  law  in  this
      regard for two reasons. First, the judge spoke of  this  in  terms  of
      what the appellant was intending on release rather than whether or not
      that intention was given effect. In any event, there  was  nothing  at
      all offered to suggest that this is not what did in fact occur.


  26. The issue of where the appellant chose to live or  did  in  fact  live
      during the life of his three year old son was plainly at the heart  of
      this appeal and as both  the  appellant  and  his  partner  gave  oral
      evidence before the judge they had every opportunity to deal with  it.
      he  appellant  was  fully  aware  that  there  was  before  the  judge
      documentary evidence from several  sources  that  indicated  that  the
      appellant had not consistently lived in the same house hold  with  his
      son:


        a. The child's birth certificate discloses that the  appellant  was
           living at a different address than the mother of the  child  and
           so, plainly, he was not cohabiting with the child and his mother
           when the birth was registered;


        b. It can be seen from the sentencing remarks of HHJ Head that  the
           appellant was not living in Oxford  with  his  partner  and  son
           immediately before he was sentenced to 12  months  imprisonment.
           The judge said:


                 "... he returned to  Leicester  to  care  for  his  elderly
                 mother who is 78 and I'm told his case has  been  adjourned
                 for him to make arrangements for care for his mother."


        c.  The  evidence  indicates  that  the  appellant,  before   being
           sentenced to imprisonment, had been running a barbers shop  and,
           as was confirmed at the hearing by the appellant,  that  barbers
           shop was in Leicester and not Oxford. In his sentencing remarks,
           HHJ Head observed that  the  appellant  had  been  running  that
           barbers shop   "until  shortly  before  his  arrest"  which  was
           October 2012;


        d. Then, of course, the appellant was unable to live with his child
           and his partner while imprisoned between July 2013 and May 2014;


        e. The evidence indicates that on release from prison the appellant
           lived, at least initially, at his mother's address in Leicester.


  27. Even now it is unclear when the appellant returned to live  in  Oxford
      with his son and partner.


  28. On the basis of the written and oral evidence the appellant  chose  to
      put before the judge, she was plainly entitled to reach the conclusion
      that, although by the date of the hearing  the  appellant  was  living
      with his partner and son, performing a significant role in  his  daily
      routine, including taking him to nursery school three days a week  and
      looking after him while his partner  was  engaging  in  her  part-time
      employment, the appellant had chosen to organise his  life  in  a  way
      that meant that the role he had played in his son's life, and the role
      he was performing by the date of the hearing, was not such as to  mean
      that the effect of his deportation would be unduly harsh upon his son.


  29. This was, ultimately, a fact based assessment for the  judge  to  make
      and, having heard oral evidence, she was best placed to do so. As  was
      observed by Carnwath LJ (as he then was) in  Mukarkar  v  SSHD  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 1045 about the assessment of article 8 claims generally:

           "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy, but they are
           not made easier or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
           analysis. It is of the nature of such judgments  that  different
           tribunals,  without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may   reach
           different conclusions on the same case (as is indeed illustrated
           by Mr Fountain's decision after the second  hearing).  The  mere
           fact that one tribunal has reached what may  seem  an  unusually
           generous view of the facts of a particular case  does  not  mean
           that it has made an error of law, so as  to  justify  an  appeal
           under the old system, or an order for reconsideration under  the
           new. Nor does it create  any  precedent,  so  as  to  limit  the
           Secretary of State's right  to  argue  for  a  more  restrictive
           approach on a similar case in the future. However, on the  facts
           of the particular case, the decision of the specialist  tribunal
           should be respected."


      In this case the judge did not reach "an unusually  generous  view  of
      the facts" but the principle is the same one.  It was for the judge to
      assess the evidence and to make of it what she could as she  struck  a
      balance between the competing interests in play. In so doing  she  had
      regard to all, that spoke in the appellant's favour  as  well  as  all
      that added weight to the public interest in the deportation of foreign
      criminals. She left nothing material out  of  account  and  reached  a
      conclusion that was unquestionably open to her for the reasons she has
      given.


  30. For all of these reasons, I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge made no error  of  law.  Therefore,  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal is dismissed.

   Summary of decision:


  31. First-tier Tribunal Judge Freestone made no error of law.


  32. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    1 February 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
