
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
DA/00421/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2018                           |On 15 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                           mr Tomasz Mateusz SKIT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the respondent made on 14
    July 2017 to make a deportation order signed against him on that  date.
    That  decision  was  made  pursuant  to  Regulation  23(6)(b)  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016.   His  appeal
    against that decision was allowed by the First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    reasons given a decision of 22 June 2018.

 2. For the reasons given in my decision of 15 November 2018 that  decision
    was set aside on the basis it involved the making of an  error  of  law
    and directions were given for the appeal to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  A copy of my decision  is  set  out  in  the  annex  to  the
    decision.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Poland who entered the United Kingdom  in
    2004 and was employed after that date for a number of years ceasing  to
    work in 2016 as a result of a workplace accident.  The appellant has  a
    child from a previous relationship, that  child  now  being  a  British
    citizen.  The appellant  is  in  a  relationship  with  another  Polish
    national and who has a daughter from a previous relationship.

 4. In 2004 the appellant was cautioned for  shoplifting  and  since  then,
    between 3 February  2009 and 22 May  2017  he  has  been  convicted  on
    twelve occasions of 22 offences  including,  assault,  battery,  theft,
    being drunk and disorderly, driving otherwise in  accordance  with  the
    licence, three counts of using a vehicle while uninsured, resisting  or
    obstructing a constable, two counts of driving  a  motor  vehicle  with
    excess alcohol, driving whilst disqualified and failing to surrender to
    custody at appropriate time.  He  was  also  convicted  of  failing  to
    comply with the requirements of community orders.

 5. The most recent conviction, on  22  May  2017,  was  a  conviction  for
    driving whilst disqualified, using a vehicle while insured and  driving
    with excess  of  alcohol,  of  which  he  was  sentenced  to  28  days'
    imprisonment and disqualified from driving for three  years.   This  is
    the only offence of  which  the  appellant  has  been  convicted  which
    resulted in an immediate custodial sentence, previous convictions being
    dealt with by fines and community orders; a sentence to sixteen  weeks'
    imprisonment imposed on 27 September  2011  was  wholly  suspended  for
    eighteen months.

 6. For the reasons set out in the letter of 14 July  2017  the  respondent
    concluded that Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations 2016 paragraphs  F,  H
    and J were engaged such that the appellant's behaviour was a threat  to
    the fundamental interests of society.  It was  concluded  also  that  a
    history of failure to comply with court orders indicated an  antisocial
    or an attitude towards the public and community, but the appellant  has
    shown no remorse in his behaviour or any recognition of the  impact  it
    may have on others.  This concluded also that his convictions indicated
    an established pattern of repeat offending with an  escalation  in  the
    seriousness of offences as indicated by the sentences imposed  and,  in
    the absence of any evidence of improvement  in  personal  circumstances
    since the conviction there  remains  a  risk  of  reoffending  and  him
    continuing to impose a risk on to  the  public.   The  respondent  also
    concluded that even if the appellant had had permanent residence  or  a
    continuous period of ten years' residence the requirement  for  serious
    grounds of public policy  or  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
    respectively would be satisfied.

 7. The respondent considered that deportation was proportionate submitting
    the appellant could go back to live in Poland, that he had provided  no
    evidence of his relationship  with  his  son  or  of  his  partner  and
    stepdaughter.  It was concluded that he had not integrated into  United
    Kingdom society and his persistent offending was evidence that  he  had
    not integrated socially and culturally into life in the United Kingdom.
     He had provided little evidence  to  show  he  had  contributed  in  a
    positive way  to  United  Kingdom  society  or  the  economy  and  thus
    deportation would be proportionate.  The respondent concluded also that
    his removal would be a proportionate interference  with  his  right  to
    respect for family and private life pursuant to Article 8 of the  Human
    Rights Convention.

 8. I heard oral evidence from the  appellant  who  was  supported  by  his
    current partner.  He provided a letter from HM Revenue & Customs  dated
    14 September 2017 which sets out his history of employment for the  tax
    years 2004/5 to 2016/17.

 9. I heard evidence from the appellant who confirmed that  he  still  sees
    his son on a regular basis and that he stays with him at weekends.   He
    said that three years earlier he had had a bad accident at  work  which
    had meant he was no longer  able  to  work  and  that  despite  several
    operations to his arm it was still not functioning properly.  He has an
    ongoing court case about this.

10. I asked why the appellant's offending appeared to have a peak in  2011.
    He said that it was due to the people he had been socialising  with  at
    the time but he had stopped seeing  them.   He  said  that  the  second
    period of offending around 2013 was  when  he  became  depressed  as  a
    result of his accident which he accepted was not a good excuse and that
    he had also been drinking heavily, as much as seven to  eight  beers  a
    day.  He said he had stopped drinking as his current partner  had  made
    it clear that if he did not do so and did not sort himself out  it  was
    over between them.  He said that now he had realised that  he  had  too
    much to lose and he did not want his family to suffer as a result.

11. In  cross-examination  the  appellant  said  that  if  his  appeal  was
    successful he would, he hoped, get compensation for his injury, that he
    and his partner would find a home  and  he  hoped  to  find  employment
    again.  He said that  he  helped  by  translating  between  Polish  and
    English for the local council and helping local people in that way.  He
    said that despite the three operations it was  still  not  possible  to
    move the wrist properly.  It was put to him that some of the  offending
    indicated that he simply did not care.  He said  at  the  time  he  was
    depressed and really had not been thinking about what he was doing.  He
    said that he realised now that he had too much to lose and would not go
    back to the previous forms of behaviour.

12. In submissions, Ms Holmes submitted that  there  were  few  integrating
    links in this case.  Whether they  existed  depended  entirely  on  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence.  It was accepted that the  key
    issue here was integration but that ultimately this was  a  matter  for
    me.  She accepted that she may be  in  difficulty  in  suggesting  that
    fourteen days in prison was capable of interrupting integrative  links.





The Law

13. Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public security and public
    health

    27.  (1) In  this  regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy and public security

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
                  in the best interests of the person concerned, as provided
                  for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child  adopted
                  by the General Assembly of  the  United  Nations  on  20th
                  November 1989(17).

         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
                  in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                  the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  ("P")  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must
             take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
             health, family and economic situation  of  P,  P's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  of  P's
             links with P's country of origin.

         (7)  In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of  public
             health-

             (a)  a disease  that  does  not  have  epidemic  potential  as
                  defined by the relevant instruments of  the  World  Health
                  Organisation or is not a disease listed in Schedule  1  to
                  the Health Protection (Notification) Regulations 2010(18);
                  or

             (b)  if the person concerned is in  the  United  Kingdom,  any
                  disease occurring after the three month  period  beginning
                  on the date on which the  person  arrived  in  the  United
                  Kingdom,

             does not constitute grounds for the decision.

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
             this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

14. It is clear from B [2018] EUECJ C-316/16 that in order  to  obtain  the
    highest level of protection the person concerned must have acquired the
    right of permanent residence within the meaning of  Article  8  in  the
    Regulations.

15. It is also clear that the requirement to have  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for the previous ten years may  be  satisfied  for  an  overall
    assessment of the person's  situation,  taking  into  account  all  the
    relevant  aspects,  leaves  the  conclusion  that  notwithstanding  the
    contention the integrative links between the person concerned  and  the
    host member may not have been  broken.   These  aspects  include  inter
    alia, the strength of the integrative links forged with the host Member
    State before the detention of the person concerned, the nature  of  the
    offence  that  resulted  in  the  period  of  detention  imposed,   the
    circumstances in which the offence was committed and the conduct of the
    person concerned throughout the period of detention.

16. In reaching my conclusions, I have  applied  Schedule  1  of  the  2016
    Regulations which provides as follows, so far as is relevant:

    2.  An EEA national or the family member  of  an  EEA  national  having
    extensive  familial  and  societal  links  with  persons  of  the  same
    nationality or language does not amount to integration  in  the  United
    Kingdom;  a  significant  degree  of  wider   cultural   and   societal
    integration must  be  present  before  a  person  may  be  regarded  as
    integrated in the United Kingdom.

    3.  Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national  has
    received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the  longer
    the sentence, or the more numerous the  convictions,  the  greater  the
    likelihood that the  individual's  continued  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom represents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

    4.  Little weight is to be  attached  to  the  integration  of  an  EEA
    national or the family member of an  EEA  national  within  the  United
    Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at or  around  the
    same time as-




         (a) the commission of a criminal offence;

         (b)  an  act  otherwise  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society;

         (c) the EEA national or family member of an  EEA  national  was  in
    custody.

    5.  The removal from the United Kingdom  of  an  EEA  national  or  the
    family member of an EEA national who is  able  to  provide  substantive
    evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat   (for   example,   through
    demonstrating that the EEA national or the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely  to
    be proportionate.

    ...

    7.  For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests of
    society in the United Kingdom include-

    (a)preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the  immigration  laws,
    and maintaining the integrity  and  effectiveness  of  the  immigration
    control system (including under these Regulations) and  of  the  Common
    Travel Area;

    (b)maintaining public order;

    (c)preventing social harm;

    (d)preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

    (e)protecting public services;

    (f)excluding or removing an EEA national or family  member  of  an  EEA
    national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that  person
    is likely to  cause,  or  has  in  fact  caused,  public  offence)  and
    maintaining  public  confidence  in  the  ability   of   the   relevant
    authorities to take such action;

    (g)tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an immediate
    or direct victim may be difficult to identify but where there is  wider
    societal harm (such as offences related to the misuse of drugs or crime
    with a cross-border dimension as mentioned  in  Article  83(1)  of  the
    Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

    (h)combating the  effects  of  persistent  offending  (particularly  in
    relation to offences, which if taken in  isolation,  may  otherwise  be
    unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);

    ...

    (j)protecting the public;

17. I was not addressed on any of these factors specifically.

18. I found the  appellant  to  be  a  candid  witness.   Although  he  did
    initially give evidence in Polish, it rapidly became clear that he  was
    in fact perfectly comfortable to speak in English which he was able  to
    do without  any  real  difficulty.   The  appellant's  account  of  his
    employment history is  supported  by  the  letter  from  HM  Revenue  &
    Customs.  This indicates, and it was not  suggested  to  the  contrary,
    that he was in full-time employment from 2004 until  2016  when,  as  a
    result of  an  industrial  injury,  he  had  to  cease  work.   I  have
    considered carefully the appellant's evidence including that set out in
    his statements provided previously.  There is a consistent threat  that
    the appellant spontaneously accepted that his previous misbehaviour was
    not acceptable  and  that  he  has  now  realised  what  he  can  lose,
    particularly the relationship with his partner and children and that he
    has put at risk the relationship he has with his son.  It  does  appear
    also that the service on him of the deportation order came as  somewhat
    of a shock.

19. I have no reason to doubt the  appellant's  account  of  having  played
    football for a work's related team, whilst he was working for the  Ford
    Motor Company but beyond this and assisting fellow Polish speakers as a
    translator for the local council,  there  is  little  evidence  of  his
    integration into the United Kingdom beyond  the  fact  that  he  has  a
    family here and a relationship with a  son  born  here  who  is  now  a
    British citizen.  He also has, until the injury  caused  him  to  cease
    work, a good work  history.   It  appears  that  he  was  in  full-time
    employment for a period of thirteen years.  I am satisfied that he  has
    in reality moved the centre of his life to the United Kingdom and  that
    objectively at least he has integrated into the United Kingdom.

20. As against that, there is a long history of offending.  Aside from  the
    isolated caution for shoplifting, the offending appears to fall into  a
    pattern related to drink both in terms  of  being  convicted  of  being
    drunk and disorderly and also drink driving with excess alcohol in 2009
    and then a period of newer offences in 2011.   Much  of  the  offending
    involves the failure to comply with  community  orders  which  extended
    into 2012.  There is then an offence committed in 2013,  again  driving
    without a licence, but then no offending again until 2017.

21. Three aspects of this offending  behaviour  cause  me  concern:  first,
    there is the involvement of alcohol, second there is the disregard  for
    community punishments imposed on him and third there is the driving  of
    a vehicle when uninsured and disqualified from driving.  All  of  these
    demonstrate antisocial attitudes which he sought to  explain  as  being
    within the wrong crowd.  Both that and to an extent  what  must  be  an
    undiagnosed  depression  after  the  accident,  may  go  some  way   to
    explaining behaviour but equally although the appellant  was  aware  of
    what he did and it is clear that he acted consciously, he  did  nothing
    about it.

22. The appellant did, however, spontaneously accept  that  a  lot  of  his
    problems had been due to alcohol and that he had given up drinking.  He
    candidly admitted having drunk seven to eight beers a day and that  his
    partner had made it clear that if he did not cease then she  was  going
    to ask him to leave.

23. By nature of the appellant's offending and  the  very  short  sentences
    such that he would not have been offered any enhanced thinking  courses
    nor would any presentencing report have been prepared.  In addition, as
    all his sentences were in the Magistrates' Court, there will have  been
    no sentencing remarks available.

24. Returning then to what was said in B there is nothing to  suggest  that
    the appellant's conduct, whilst in detention, albeit of  a  very  short
    period, indicated a lack of integration.  Further,  the  offence  which
    resulted in detention is at the lower end of seriousness.  The offences
    are summary only and the sentence imposed of  28  days  indicates  also
    that it is at the lower end of the scale.  That said,  it  is  probably
    only because of good luck and good fortune than anything else that  the
    appellant did not cause serious injury or damage through driving whilst
    under the influence of alcohol.  I view this offending  as  serious  in
    the light of the previous offending.

25. Taking all of these factors into  account  I  am  persuaded  that,  the
    offending notwithstanding, the appellant  has  established  integrative
    links  here  in  the  form  of  connections  through  work  and  social
    connections  outwith  the  family.  I  do  not  consider  that  in  the
    circumstances of this case imprisonment for 14 days (the appellant  was
    released mid-way through his sentence) or even 28 days is  such  as  to
    break those links, given the short duration. On that basis  I  conclude
    that the appellant is entitled to benefit from  the  highest  level  of
    protection, that is that the Secretary of State would need to show that
    the imperative meets public security. The appellant does not,  for  the
    reasons set out below present a threat reaching even  the  next  lowest
    level.

26. If, however, I am wrong to conclude that the  appellant  has  developed
    integrative links such that he is  entitled  to  the  higher  level  of
    protection, I am nonetheless satisfied that the appellant  is  entitled
    to the middle level of protection, that is that the Secretary of  State
    has to show that there are serious reasons of public policy or security
    such that he should be deported.

27. Having heard and observed the appellant give evidence, and having  read
    the submissions he made in July 2017, I conclude that in this case  the
    shock of a relatively short period of imprisonment has had the  desired
    effect.  It has, I consider brought the appellant to his senses and  he
    has, in his own words, realised how much he has to lose  which  is  his
    relationship with his partner, son and his  stepdaughter.   Ordinarily,
    given the history of offending in this case, even though it is  related
    on the appellant's evidence to firstly becoming involved with the wrong
    people and again following depression in 2017, it  would  be  difficult
    not to accept that there was a propensity  to  reoffend.   Viewing  the
    evidence as a whole, in this case, I am satisfied that there is  little
    risk now that this appellant will, as a result of the effectiveness  of
    the imprisonment and separation from his family reach the position that
    he has given up drinking and has decided that  he  will  not  reoffend.
    Accordingly, I am not satisfied that he  does  present  a  sufficiently
    serious threat such that Regulation 27 is engaged.

28. In reaching my conclusion I have had full regard to Schedule 1  of  the
    2016 Regulations.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  introduced  any
    specific evidence to show  that  the  offences  committed  here  caused
    public offence nor did Ms Holmes submit that the public maintenance  of
    public confidence in taking action was undermined in this case.   Thus,
    I accept that there has been persistent offending in the past, for  the
    reasons set out above I consider that this is no longer likely to occur
    and that there is, given the findings  with  regard  to  propensity  to
    offend, that the public is adequately protected.

29. Further, I am satisfied that the appellant has a relationship with  his
    partner and her child.  I am also satisfied that he has a close genuine
    parental relationship with his son.  None of  this  was  challenged  in
    cross-examination and  I  conclude  that  there  would  be  significant
    interference with these rights were he to be deported to Poland.

30. I note that the appellant has not reoffended since  2017  a  period  of
    some eighteen months.  That, in the context of his previous history, is
    a significant period.

31. Taking all of these factors into account I am  satisfied  that  removal
    would be disproportionate.

32. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that the Secretary of  State
    has not shown the decision made to deport  in  this  case  was  not  in
    accordance with the United Kingdom's obligations  pursuant  to  the  EU
    Treaties and I allow the appeal on that basis.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.




 2. I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on EU grounds.


Signed                                  Date 22 January 2019.
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

Annex - Error of law decision
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00421/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |                              |
|Extempore                                     |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                             Tomasz Mateusz Skit
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    in person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

33. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan promulgated on 22 June 2018  in  which
    he allowed the appeal of Mr Skit (the respondent) against the  decision
    to deport him that decision being made on 14th July 2017.

34. Mr Skit arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004 and has been convicted in
    the period since then for a number of offences.  The  most  serious  of
    that were offences committed in 2017 for which  he  received  28  days'
    imprisonment those being offences of driving with  excess  alcohol  and
    associated offences.

35. In light of these offences, the Secretary of State considered  that  Mr
    Skit posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
    interests of public policy and public security if allowed to remain  in
    the United Kingdom and decided that his deportation was justified under
    the Regulations.

36. Neither the respondent nor  his  partner  attending  the  hearing;  the
    respondent had in fact returned to Poland.  The  judge  considered  the
    evidence on file, and concluded that the respondent  had resided in the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of at least ten years  prior  to
    the relevant decision, that is, the decision to expel him and  on  that
    basis it was necessary for the Secretary of State to establish that his
    deportation was warranted on imperative grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public security.

37. The judge then noted that the respondent had entered the United Kingdom
    in 2004 and had been in a long-term relationship of over six years with
    his partner who is a Polish  citizen  and  that  they  have  a  British
    citizen child.  He found that the respondent has been looking after his
    son and his  stepdaughter  from  the  partner's  previous  relationship
    whilst the partner is at work and that he had previously worked himself
    at some point in the past.

38. The judge found that the  respondent  was  a  persistent  offender  but
    concluded that the sentence of 28 days' imprisonment and the cumulative
    severity of his offences came  nowhere  near  reaching  the  imperative
    grounds threshold.  On that basis the  judge  found  that  it  was  not
    necessary to go on to make a proportionality  assessment  but  that  he
    would in any event have found that it was not proportionate  and  found
    at paragraph 15 that the appellant did not present a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat to the public to justify deportation.

39. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge erred:

        i) in his approach to assessing whether the respondent was entitled
           to the benefit of the protection of  the  respondent  having  to
           justify  deportation  on  the  imperative  grounds  of  national
           security;

       ii) in assuming that the respondent had shown that he  had  achieved
           permanent right of residence;

      iii) in failing to have regard to Schedule 1 of the 2016  Regulations
           and  the  factors  to  be  taken  into  account   in   assessing
           proportionality, the judge having directed himself to  the  2006
           Regulations; and,

       iv) in failing properly to explain  his  findings  of  fact  and  in
           accepting all the evidence to be credible despite the fact  that
           neither the respondent nor his partner had given evidence.

40. I deal with each of the grounds in turn.

41. In B [2018] EUECJ C-316/16, the Court of Justice of the European  Union
    ruled that the assessment of the ten year  period  must  be  calculated
    from the date on which the expulsion decision was made,  in  this  case
    May 2017.  It also ruled that it is necessary  to  assess  whether  the
    person in question had obtained permanent residence as a starting point
    before reaching the imperative grounds test; and, that having concluded
    that the ten year period is met, a  judge  must  consider  whether  the
    individual has established integrating lasts which may have been broken
    by the period of imprisonment.  It is clear from the decision that  the
    judge did not apply the correct test

42. First the judge did not identify the correct date.   Second  the  judge
    did not consider whether the appellant had achieved permanent right  of
    residence.  Third he failed to whether integrative links  had  in  fact
    been established; and finally, he did not consider whether the 28  days
    broke any integrative links.  It follows from that that the judge erred
    in concluding that the respondent was entitled to the highest level  of
    protection.

43. Dealing with the second ground it is unclear from  a  decision  whether
    the judge accepted that  the  respondent  had  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence.  It may well be he  had  done  so  but  there  are
    sustainable findings on this issue.  It is  implicit  in  the  decision
    that the judge concluded that the respondent was entitled to be treated
    as residing lawfully as his partner  with  whom  he  has  a  subsisting
    relationship, is a  Polish  citizen  exercising  Treaty  rights.   That
    however does not assist him.  That is  because  following  Macastena  v
    Secretary of State [2018] EWCA  Civ  1558  and  on  the  basis  of  the
    Regulations it is only after a successful application for  a  residence
    card as the extended family member of an EEA national (in this  case  a
    durable partner) that time spent in that  capacity  is  time  spent  in
    accordance with the Regulations. It is only time which is spent in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with  the  Regulations  or  the  Directive
    which counts towards the acquisition of permanent right  of  residence.
    For that reason I consider that the second ground  of  appeal  is  made
    out.

44. The judge  does  misdirect  himself  as  to  the  relevant  Regulations
    referring to the 2006 Regulations not the 2016 Regulation which require
    a judge to  consider  factors  set  out  in  Schedule  1  of  the  2016
    Regulations  when  assessing  the  proportionality  of  a   deportation
    decision. The judge did not do so and that taken with the  misdirection
    as to the Regulations demonstrates that the judge  did  not  take  into
    account the  Regulations  or  the  relevant.   That  error  is  perhaps
    explained because the judge had  already  wrongly  concluded  that  the
    appellant was entitled to the highest level of protection.

45. Finally, I consider that the Secretary of State is entitled  to  submit
    that the findings are not properly  reasoned  in  that  the  judge  has
    failed to explain why he believed everything that was said to him  when
    neither of the witnesses  attended  to  give  evidence.   That  is  the
    appellant or his partner and for these  reasons  I  consider  that  the
    decision of Judge Morgan did involve the making of an error of law  and
    I set it aside.

46. It will, in the circumstances be necessary to remake the  decision  and
    this will take place in the Upper Tribunal

47. As discussed at the hearing, it  will  be  necessary  for  Mr  Skit  to
    provide  evidence  of  all  of  his   work   and   National   Insurance
    Contributions history which he said had been obtained. It will also  be
    necessary to hear  evidence  from  him  and  his  partner.   The  Upper
    Tribunal will also need to see and hear evidence about the  links  that
    Mr Skit has developed with the community in general over  the  time  he
    has spent here. Any documents must be placed in a  numbered,  paginated
    bundle and sent to the Presenting  Officers'  Unit  and  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal at least 1 week before the next hearing.  The NI contributions
    records are very important.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and it is set aside.

 2. The decision will be remade at a hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  on  20
    December 2018



Signed                                  Date:  15 November 2018

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

