

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00755/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 February 2014                            |On 11 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP

                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
               AND THE REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. This is a notice consenting to the  withdrawal  by  the  Secretary  of
      State of her case (namely her appeal) to the Upper  Tribunal.  Because
      of the circumstances leading to  the  application  made  orally  at  a
      hearing, I set out the background and my reasons.  For convenience,  I
      will refer to the parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

   3. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC")
      who was born on 6 June 1993.  The appellant came to the United Kingdom
      in 1998 when he was five years  of  age.   In  2002,  the  appellant's
      father was granted refugee status and indefinite leave to  remain  and
      the appellant was granted the same leave as his dependent.

   4. On 16 May 2011, the appellant was convicted at the  Blackfriars  Crown
      Court of one count of  possession  of  a  firearm  when  committing  a
      Schedule 1 offence.  On 11 October  2012,  again  at  the  Blackfriars
      Crown Court, the appellant was convicted of  robbery.   On  6  January
      2012, the appellant was sentenced to five years and 6 months detention
      in a Youth Offenders Institution in respect of the  count  of  robbery
      and a period of two years detention to run concurrently in relation to
      the offence of possessing a firearm.

   5. On 9 April 2013, the Secretary of State made  a  decision  to  make  a
      deportation  order  against  the  appellant  under  s.3(5)(a)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that his deportation  was  conducive
      to the public good.

   6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 10 October 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Foulkes-
      Jones and Mr P Bompass) allowed the appellant's  appeal.   First,  the
      First-tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant's deportation to  the
      DRC would breach Article 3 of the ECHR.  Having reviewed the  evidence
      concerning the treatment of criminal deportees by the DRC  on  return,
      including a letter from the DRC Ambassador, the Tribunal concluded  at
      para 9.18 of its determination that:

           "9.18 Having regard to what  we  say  above  we  find  that  the
                 appellant's criminal history will be ascertained from  what
                 the DRC authorities already know about the  appellant  from
                 their meeting with him and from when he  is  questioned  on
                 his return to Kinshasa; he will then be detained and  as  a
                 result his Article  3 rights will be breached."

   7. Secondly, the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  appellant's
      deportation would be contrary to para 398 of the Immigration Rules (HC
      395  as  amended)  on  the  basis   that   there   were   "exceptional
      circumstances" which outweighed  the  public  interest.   Finally,  in
      respect of Art 8 of the ECHR the Tribunal concluded,  particularly  in
      the light of the Strasbourg  Court's  decision  in  Maslov  v  Austria
      [2009]  INLR  47,  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would   be   a
      disproportionate interference  with  the  right  to  respect  for  his
      private life.

   8. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision both in relation to  its  decision  to  allow  the
      appeal under  Article  3  and  also  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
      Permission was initially refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  28
      October 2013  but,  on  19  November  2013  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ
      McGeachy) granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal  on  the
      basis that the First-tier Tribunal had arguably erred in  law  in  its
      assessment of the public interest under Art 8 and also  in  concluding
      that as a  criminal  deportee  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
      treatment contrary of Article 3 of the ECHR on return to the DRC.

   9. The appeal came before me  on4  February  2014.   At  the  outset,  Mr
      Richards who represented the Secretary of State made an application to
      adjourn the hearing in order to await a country guidance case  by  the
      Upper Tribunal in respect of the risk to criminal deportees on  return
      to the DRC.  Mr Richards  drew  my  attention  to  the  Administrative
      Court's decision in R (on the application of P)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC
      3879 (Admin).  At [54] Phillips J stated that:

           "54.  In my judgement there is a real and substantial risk  that
                 P, in common with other criminal deportees (who have served
                 the sentence imposed on  them  for  their  crimes  in  this
                 country), would be subjected to  further  imprisonment  and
                 ill-treatment if returned to the DRC."

  10. At [55] Phillips J concluded as follows:

           "55.  I cannot bind the defendant in  relation  to  other  cases
                 involving the deportation of  convicted  criminals  to  the
                 DRC, but I should indicate my view,  again  expressed  with
                 regret, that, on the basis of the  evidence  I  have  seen,
                 such persons have a strong claim for asylum and should  not
                 be deported to the DRC unless and until there  is  a  clear
                 basis for believing that the risk indicated above no longer
                 arises generally or does not arise in a particular case."

  11. Mr Richards indicated that his instructions were that the Secretary of
      State was seeking to appeal that decision and  it  was  hoped  that  a
      country guidance case might result if  the  appeal  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal was compromised and the appellant then appealed to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal.  On that basis, Mr Richards submitted that it would  be
      appropriate to adjourn this appeal which raised  precisely  the  point
      dealt with in P and to await the outcome of any country guidance case.



  12.  Mr  Hodgetts  opposed  the  Secretary  of  State's  application.   He
      submitted that it was inappropriate to adjourn this  appeal  to  await
      any further country guidance, at least at  the  stage  of  determining
      whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.  He  submitted  that
      the decision in P fully supported the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion
      that this appellant's deportation would breach Article 3 of the  ECHR.



  13. At the conclusion of these submissions, I  refused  the  Secretary  of
      State's application for an adjournment.   Although  the  Secretary  of
      State is seeking to appeal the Administrative Court's  decision  in  P
      and, as I understand it, has been granted permission to appeal,  there
      does not appear to be any immediate prospect of any  country  guidance
      decision by the Upper Tribunal.  Even if, as  Mr  Richards  indicated,
      the Secretary of State accepts the quashing of the certification  that
      the claimant's asylum claim in P was  clearly  unfounded,  any  appeal
      would necessarily have to progress  through  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and, if appropriate, reach the Upper Tribunal before that  case  could
      result potentially in any country guidance.   That  would  necessarily
      take some  time.   Such  a  possibility  (or  indeed  the  speculative
      possibility of  another  country  guidance  decision)  cannot  justify
      adjourning this appeal.

  14. For those reasons,  at  the  hearing  I  concluded  that  it  was  not
      appropriate to adjourn the hearing to an unspecified date.

  15.  Having  refused  the  Secretary  of  State's   application   for   an
      adjournment, Mr Richards  indicated  that  his  instructions  were  to
      withdraw the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   That
      is an application by the Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  its  case
      within rule 17(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698).  By virtue of rule 17(2) such a withdrawal cannot
      take effect without the consent of the Upper Tribunal.

  16. Mr Hodgetts did not raise any objection to the  Secretary  of  State's
      application to withdraw her case. I see no basis upon  which  I  could
      properly refuse consent to the  Secretary  of  State  withdrawing  her
      appeal.  No purpose can be served in continuing with  this  appeal  if
      the First-Tier tribunal's decision to allow the appeal  is  no  longer
      challenged by the Secretary of State. Consequently, I consent  to  the
      withdrawal of the Secretary of State's case (her appeal to  the  Upper
      Tribunal).

  17. Consequently:

           a) The Secretary of State's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
              withdrawn;

           b)  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
              appellant's appeal under Articles 3 and 8  of  the  ECHR  and
              under the Immigration Rules stands.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















