
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00547/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2014                           |On 17 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS NEMAH SHEHADEH
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
                    MacKay, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  by  a
    panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Wallace and Dr C J Winstanley.  The panel allowed an appeal by
    Ms Nemah Shehadeh (hereinafter referred to  as  "the  claimant").   The
    appeal was brought against a  decision  dated  18  March  2014  by  the
    Secretary of State refusing to revoke a deportation order.

 2) The nationality of the claimant  is  disputed.   She  claims  to  be  a
    stateless person originating from the Palestinian Territories  but  the
    Secretary of State considers her to be Jordanian.  Her date of birth is
    recorded as 25 November 1954.

 3) The First-tier Tribunal records that the claimant was recommended by  a
    court for deportation following her conviction  in  2005  for  using  a
    false instrument and attempting to obtain services  by  deception,  for
    which she was sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  4  months.   An  appeal
    against the deportation decision was unsuccessful, as was a  subsequent
    judicial review.  The claimant was removed to Jordan  in  January  2008
    but was refused entry after she claimed to  be  Palestinian.   She  was
    returned to the UK.

 4) The Tribunal further records that the claimant was  born  in  the  West
    Bank and lived there until  her  marriage  in  1979.   Following  their
    marriage, the claimant and her husband lived in Saudi Arabia until they
    separated in 2002.  The couple had  2  children,  both  born  in  Saudi
    Arabia.  The claimant's right to live in Saudi Arabia was by virtue  of
    her husband's work and she lost this right following the  breakdown  of
    the marriage.  According to the claimant she came to the UK  in  August
    2002 on a  properly  issued  travel  document  issued  to  her  by  the
    Jordanian authorities as a Palestinian when she lived in the West Bank.
     The claimant had a visit visa but became an overstayer.

 5) The present appeal arose from a claim by the  claimant  to  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.  She alleges that she would face  mistreatment
    in Jordan due to her political opinion  and  her  religious  conversion
    from Islam to Christianity.

 6) Notwithstanding the fears expressed by the claimant, the focus  of  the
    panel's attention was on the claimant's  nationality.   The  conclusion
    the panel came to was  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that the claimant  was  Jordanian  and  that  there  was  a
    country to which she could be safely returned.  The other issues in the
    appeal were said to be peripheral to this core issue and the appeal was
    allowed.

 7) In the application by the Secretary of State for permission  to  appeal
    it was submitted that the panel was incorrect to place  the  burden  of
    proof on the Secretary of State in  respect  of  the  question  of  the
    claimant's national origins.  It was contended that the claimant  never
    asserted that she was Palestinian prior to her deportation  to  Jordan.
    If she was Palestinian she should have made this clearer to immigration
    authorities at an earlier stage.  Her son was removed to Jordan in 2006
    on his own passport.  It was the claimant who had asserted that she was
    of a nationality other than the one that she had presented to the  Home
    Office and the burden rested on her to prove that she was  Palestinian.
    The burden was also on the claimant to show that she  came  within  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention  or  that  her  deportation  would
    breach her human  rights.   The  panel  had  failed  to  make  adequate
    findings and give adequate reasons on  these  matters.   If  the  panel
    members had correctly directed themselves as to the burden of proof and
    had considered the evidence properly they would  have  found  that  the
    appeal should be dismissed.  The evidence demonstrated on  the  balance
    of probabilities that the claimant was Jordanian and had claimed to  be
    Palestinian simply to frustrate her deportation and make a false asylum
    claim.  She had previously made an unsuccessful  asylum  claim  on  the
    basis of a fear of returning to Jordan.

 8) In granting permission to  appeal,  the  judge  noted  that  the  panel
    appeared to have allowed the appeal on asylum grounds but in  so  doing
    stated that the Secretary of State had failed to show that the claimant
    was Jordanian and that there was a country to which the claimant  could
    be safely returned.  This was arguably an error given that  the  burden
    was upon the claimant to substantiate her asylum claim.

 9) At the hearing before us, Ms Pettersen referred us to  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal indicating that the claimant was a  citizen  of
    Jordan.  Ms Pettersen confirmed there was no finding by the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the claimant was a refugee  or  that  her  removal  would
    infringe her human rights.  The panel did not find  that  the  claimant
    was a Palestinian but only that the Secretary of State  had  not  shown
    that she was Jordanian.

10) Mr Caskie submitted on behalf of the  claimant  that  if  she  was  not
    Jordanian then she was a stateless Palestinian.   It  was  pointed  out
    that this would require the Tribunal to assess her fear of  persecution
    by reference to the country  of  her  former  habitual  residence.   Mr
    Caskie submitted that this was most likely Saudi Arabia.  The Secretary
    of State was nevertheless proposing removal to  Jordan.   The  claimant
    had only lived in Saudi Arabia for temporary purposes.

11) After some discussion it became apparent that both parties acknowledged
    that the First-tier panel  had  not  made  proper  findings  either  in
    relation to nationality or in relation to the claimant's  alleged  fear
    of persecution or of a breach of her protected human rights.   In  view
    of the lack of relevant findings made by the First-tier  panel  we  are
    satisfied that the  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary for the decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal,  in  terms  of  Practice
    Statement 7.2(b).  The  appeal  is  accordingly  remitted  for  hearing
    before a differently constituted Tribunal with none of the findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, such as they were, preserved.

12) We further noted that it was unclear which of the original  grounds  of
    appeal the claimant now relies upon and we direct the claimant  to  re-
    formulate her grounds of appeal for the remitted hearing.

Conclusions

13) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of errors on points of law.

14) We set aside the decision.

15) The appeal is remitted for rehearing before a  differently  constituted
    First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  No
    application has been made for such an order and we see no reason of
    substance for making such an order.



Signed      Date 16 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
