
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00327/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 28th October 2020                 |On 3rd November 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Walid [R]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Blair, Counsel instructed by Wesley Gryk Sols


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent is a national of France born on the 16th November  1993.
    Although he has lived in  this  country  since  he  was  a  child,  the
    Secretary of State now wishes to deport him, pursuant to Regulation  27
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  That  is
    because the Respondent was, between November 2010 and  September  2016,
    convicted 16 times for 23 offences.


 2. On the 5th February the First-tier Tribunal (Judge R. Cassell)  allowed
    the Respondent's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  deport  him.  The
    decision was made on two alternative bases. First  the  Tribunal  found
    that the Respondent qualified under Reg 27(4)  for the highest level of
    protection against expulsion because  he  has  accrued  well  over  ten
    years'  continuous  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  so  that  the
    Secretary of State would be required to show that there were imperative
    grounds  for  his  expulsion:  this  the  Secretary  of  State  frankly
    conceded, she could not do. In the alternative  the  Tribunal  was  not
    satisfied that the Secretary of State had shown, pursuant to Reg 27(5),
     that the Respondent's behaviour represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society, or that it would be proportionate to remove him today.

 3. The Secretary of State has sought,  and  been  granted,  permission  to
    appeal against that decision.  Grounds are advanced against both of the
    Tribunal's alternative findings.



    The Legal Framework

 4. Regulation 27 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 reads:
           27.-(1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means  an  EEA
           decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public  security
           or public health.

           (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

           (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a  person
           with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except on
           serious grounds of public policy and public security.

           (4) A relevant decision may not be taken  except  on  imperative
           grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

            (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
            at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

            (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in
            the best interests of the person concerned, as provided for in
            the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General
            Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.

           (5) The public policy and public security  requirements  of  the
           United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred  by
           these Regulations in order to protect the  fundamental  interests
           of society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of
           public policy or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles-

                 (a) the decision must comply with the principle of
              proportionality;

                 (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;

                 (c) the personal conduct of the person must represent a
                 genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                 one of the fundamental interests of society, taking into
                 account past conduct of the person and that the threat does
                 not need to be imminent;

                 (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;

                 (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                 themselves justify the decision;

                 (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
                 in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                 the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

         (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of  public
   health-

           (a) a disease that does not have epidemic potential as defined
           by the relevant instruments of the World Health Organisation or
           is not a disease listed in Schedule 1 to the Health Protection
           (Notification) Regulations 2010(18); or

           (b) if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, any
           disease occurring after the three month period beginning on the
           date on which the person arrived in the United Kingdom,

         does not constitute grounds for the decision.

         (8) A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
         this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy,  public  security  and   the   fundamental   interests   of
         society etc.).



 5. The relevant part of Schedule 1 is paragraph 7:
         7.  For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

         (a) preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration
         laws, and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the
         immigration control system (including under these Regulations) and
         of the Common Travel Area;

         (b) maintaining public order;

         (c) preventing social harm;

         (d) preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

         (e) protecting public services;

         (f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of an
         EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that
         person is likely to cause, or has in fact caused, public offence)
         and maintaining public confidence in the ability of the relevant
         authorities to take such action;

         (g) tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an
         immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but where
         there is wider societal harm (such as offences related to the
         misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border dimension as mentioned
         in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
         Union);

         (h) combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly in
         relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be
         unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);

         (i)  protecting the rights and freedoms of others, particularly
         from exploitation and trafficking;

         (j) protecting the public;

         (k) acting in the best interests of a child (including where doing
         so entails refusing a child admission to the United Kingdom, or
         otherwise taking an EEA decision against a child);

         (l) countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared
         values.



 6. Before me the parties agreed that of the  three  levels  of  protection
    against expulsion set out in Regulation 27, I  only  need  be  directly
    concerned with two. That is because of the effect of  the  decision  in
    Vomero[1]: the Respondent will only be entitled to the highest level of
    protection under Reg 27 (4) if he can show  that  he  already  met  the
    requirements for permanent residence alluded to at  Reg  27(3).  If  he
    cannot, then the operative tests are those set out at Reg 27(5).


 7. The principles to be applied calculating whether  the  Respondent  "has
    resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at  least  ten
    years prior to the relevant decision" are these:

                    i) The "relevant decision" is the  decision  to  deport.
                       The period must be calculated by counting  back  from
                       then.


                   ii) The Respondent would have to show  that  during  that
                       time frame he qualified for permanent residence, that
                       is to say there was a period of five years  in  which
                       he was either a  qualified  person  himself,  or  the
                       family member of one

                  iii) Any period of imprisonment will not necessarily break
                       integrative links but it is a  factor  that  must  be
                       taken into account.


    Error of Law: Discussion and Findings


 8. As to principle (i) as outlined above  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant had lived in this country since 1999 on the basis of
    a concession made by the HOPO at the  hearing.  Before  me  Mr  McVeety
    maintained that concession.   The decision to deport was taken  on  the
    7th December 2017.   It is therefore the case that the Appellant  lived
    in this country for a continuous period of ten years  between  the  7th
    December 2007 and  the  7th  December  2017.  Although  the  First-tier
    Tribunal itself did not  identify  that  as  the  operative  ten-  year
    period, it is  a  matter  that  is  uncontrovertibly  resolved  in  the
    Respondent's favour.


 9. In respect of (ii) the First-tier  Tribunal  properly  directed  itself
    that the burden of proof lay on the Respondent, and that  the  standard
    of proof was the balance of probabilities.    The  Tribunal  then  gave
    consideration to the evidence relating to the Respondent's childhood in
    this country. It had before it evidence from a  community  organisation
    who supported the family  during  that  period  (the  Haringey  Migrant
    Support Centre) to the effect that  the  Respondent's  mother  suffered
    from some kind of brain condition or injury which meant  that  she  was
    volatile. It was a very difficult time for the Respondent who ended  up
    being taken into care.   The  writer  of  the  letter  noted  that  the
    Respondent's mother had become too unwell to  work.  She  had  been  in
    receipt of Disability Living Allowance and the writer had deduced  from
    this that she was being treated as a qualified person:  she  would  not
    otherwise have been entitled to that  benefit.  The  Tribunal  directed
    itself that there is no prescribed format by which  an  entitlement  to
    permanent residence may be established and found, having regard to  the
    letter from the community group, that it was  sufficient  to  discharge
    the burden of proof.  Having made that finding, the Judge proceeded  to
    determine the matters arising under Regulation 27 on the basis that the
    Secretary of State had to show 'imperative grounds' for the deportation
    of the Respondent. Unsurprisingly the Tribunal was not  satisfied  that
    this test was made out and the appeal was allowed.


10. The Secretary of State submits that the First-tier Tribunal erred in so
    doing. The writer of the letter from Haringey  Migrant  Support  Centre
    was not qualified to speak to whether the  Respondent's  mother  was  a
    qualified person at the relevant time.  There was before  the  Tribunal
    no objectively verifiable evidence that she had ever worked (i.e.  from
    HMRC,  payslips  etc).  Nor  was  there  any  evidence  -  beyond   the
    supposition of the unqualified  community  worker  -  that  the  lady's
    receipt of DLA meant that she had been "temporarily unable to work as a
    result of illness of accident" as stipulated in Regulation 6.

11. Before me Ms Blair candidly admitted that the  evidence  from  Haringey
    Migrant Support Centre was all she had to  establish  the  Respondent's
    position prior to his imprisonment in 2016. Although he has  since  his
    release been in continual employment, before that he was a student, who
    without comprehensive sickness insurance or his own means could not  be
    deemed to be a qualified person. As to  his  mother  the  evidence  was
    difficult. Her illness meant that her lifestyle had been chaotic and it
    had been difficult to pinpoint what she had been doing  and  when.   It
    was correct to say that there was no evidence at all of her ever having
    worked, and to that extent it  was  supposition  on  the  part  of  the
    community worker that because she was in receipt of DLA she  must  have
    been 'qualifying' at some point.  I am accordingly satisfied  that  the
    Secretary of State's ground is here made out.  No  matter  how  helpful
    Haringey Migrant Support Centre might have tried to be, the reality was
    that that letter was not capable of discharging the  burden  of  proof.
    The writer had, frankly speaking, little idea of what the  Respondent's
    mother might have been doing since 1999.  It follows  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in finding  that  the  Appellant  had  accrued  the
    highest level of protection, since he could not demonstrate that he had
    acquired permanent residence at any time in the many years that he  has
    spent here.


12. I now turn to address the alternative basis upon which the  appeal  was
    allowed.  In addressing matters arising under Reg  27(5)  the  Tribunal
    considered the  Respondent's  integrative  links,  work  since  he  was
    released from prison and the evidence of his rehabilitation.  Directing
    itself that the burden lies on the Secretary of State to show that  the
    Respondent's conduct represents a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society,  the
    Tribunal noted that this must involve an assessment of the Respondent's
    propensity to reoffend. Having regard to the most recent evidence  from
    the probation service, the Tribunal was satisfied that the risk was not
    made out.

13. The grounds challenge that finding on the basis that  the  multi-agency
    evidence relating to his offending was "strongly  indicative"  that  he
    would continue to offend in the future. The ground also  refer  to  the
    Appellant's "potential" rehabilitation.

14. It is correct to say that the  decision  nowhere  recognises  that  the
    Respondent was at the relevant time placed  under  the  supervision  of
    'Multi-agency Protection Arrangements'. It is also  true  that  at  the
    date of the original 'OASys' report, dated November 2017, revealed  the
    Respondent to be recalcitrant, and to the extent that he was in denial,
    unrepentant: the officer conducting  it  concluded  that  the  risk  of
    reoffending remained  high.  That  report  was  not  however  the  only
    evidence before the Tribunal.

15. The Respondent's life trajectory can be separated  into  three  phases.
    Brought  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  child  with  his  mother,  he
    experienced a difficult and chaotic childhood. His mother was obviously
    unwell and not able to give him the care, and  the  guidance,  that  he
    required. At the age of sixteen he entered the care system, and  within
    a short time embarked on a six-year spree of criminality. Some  of  his
    many offences  are  indisputably  low  level,  such  as  possession  of
    cannabis. Some are very serious indeed, such as the robbery which  sent
    him to prison in 2016. In between committing crimes and  being  caught,
    the Respondent fell out of  the  care  system  and  onto  the  streets:
    Haringey Migrant Support Centre's records show  he  ended  up  homeless
    during that time. The OASys report, and the decision to  place  him  in
    the MAPPA framework, come at the end of that  phase.  The  third  phase
    began when the rehabilitation plan set out in the OASys report  is  set
    in motion, and the Respondent released from his sentence.  We  are  now
    almost  four  years  into  that  phase.  The  word  that  appears  most
    frequently in the evidence, and the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  to
    describe this phase is  "stable".  The  Respondent  has  worked  almost
    continually since his release from prison, and has ceased contacts with
    his former associates. He has got somewhere to live,  and  is  treating
    this as a new beginning. He has, importantly, not committed any further
    crimes.    It was in this context that the First-tier Tribunal made its
    assessment of that OASys report, and had regard to the latest  evidence
    of the probation service,  which  confirmed  that  the  Respondent  has
    successfully completed his licence period  and  all  requirements,  has
    secured stable employment and accommodation and is "open" and "engaged"
    with measures designed to prevent him falling backwards.


16. I am not satisfied that, having regard to that context and the totality
    of the evidence before it, the Tribunal can be said to  have  taken  an
    irrational or otherwise unlawful approach to the question of risk.  The
    OASys report is expressly addressed in the  report,  but  the  Tribunal
    quite properly refused to view it in isolation.

17. Finally the Secretary of State submits that  in  reaching  its  finding
    that the Respondent is "fully  integrated"  into  British  society  the
    Tribunal has failed to have regard to the Court of Appeal authority  in
    Binbuga v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    551 to the effect that social and cultural integration can be  expected
    to be legitimate, and being involved in criminality is not.  I  am  not
    satisfied that this ground is made out. Firstly Binbuga should in  this
    context be viewed with caution. This Respondent is an EEA national  who
    has been exercising treaty rights  in  this  country  for  over  twenty
    years. Binbuga was a career criminal from a non-EEA  state  who  relied
    upon his associations with other gang members to establish that he  was
    'integrated'  here.  The  Court  of  Appeal   rightly   rejected   that
    contention.   The case is not however authority for the proposition for
    which it is cited here: that any criminal  activity  demonstrates  that
    you are not integrated. Indeed in the context of the  Regulations  that
    would be expressly  prohibited  by  Reg  27(5)(e).     Furthermore  the
    criticism made in the grounds is not borne out by the decision  itself:
    the Tribunal  expressly  refers  itself  to  the  guidance  in  Essa  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1718 to  the
    effect that "recidivist offenders, career  criminals,  adult  offenders
    who have failed to engage with treatment programmes" may fail  to  meet
    the test.


18. Whilst I   am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  err  in
    concluding  that  the  Respondent  attracted  the  highest   level   of
    protection under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016,  I am satisfied that on the central matter in issue - whether the
    Respondent could be deported under Reg 27(5) - the decision is free  of
    error. The Tribunal properly directed itself to the relevant principles
    and made a decision open to it on the evidence.



    Decisions

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld, and the Secretary of
    State's appeal is dismissed.


20. I make no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     28th
                                October 2020
                           -----------------------
[1] B v Land Badem-Wurtemburg and Secretary of State for the Home
Department v Vomero (Directive 2004/38/EC) Joined cases C-316/16 and C-
424/16

