
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00517/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 April 2021 via Skype for       |On 29 April 2021                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Robert Nistor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    The respondent did not appear and was not
represented


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were the Secretary of  State's  grounds
of appeal, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  Tribunal's  own
file, the contents of which I have recorded.
The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: the  Secretary  of  State,  as  the
only party in attendance, raised no  concerns  about  the  fairness  of  the
hearing

 1. This is an appeal of the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on 30  January  2019.   The
    judge allowed an appeal brought by Robert Nistor, a citizen  of  Poland
    born on 30 September 1979, against a decision of the Secretary of State
    dated 1 August  2018,  supplemented  by  a  further  decision  dated  4
    December 2018, to deport him from the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
    Regulations").

 2. For convenience, in this decision I will use the  term  'appellant'  to
    refer to Mr Nistor.

 3. I note that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  promulgated
    over two years ago.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Scott Baker on 1 December 2020.   It  appears  that  the
    Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal was  made  in
    time, on 5 February 2019.  The reasons for the delay on the part of the
    First-tier Tribunal are not clear.

Absence of the appellant

 4. The appellant was removed from the United  Kingdom  to  Poland  by  the
    Secretary of State on 2 September 2018. This was ahead of  his  appeal,
    pursuant to regulation 33 of the 2016 Regulations.  He did  not  attend
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, nor  participate  in  those
    proceedings in any way.  The same was true of the proceedings  in  this
    tribunal.

 5. The notice of hearing was sent to the appellant's last known address in
    this country.  Neither the tribunal, nor the  Secretary  of  State,  of
    whom enquiries were made, has an email address for  the  appellant,  or
    contact details for him in Poland.

 6. Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  provides
    that the Upper Tribunal may proceed with a hearing if a party fails  to
    attend a hearing if (a)  it  is  satisfied  that  the  party  has  been
    notified of the hearing, or that reasonable steps have  been  taken  to
    notify the party of the hearing; and (b) considers that it  is  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed.

 7. In relation to (a), I was satisfied  that  reasonable  steps  had  been
    taken to notify the appellant of the hearing.  There  was  little  more
    that the tribunal could do than send a notice of  the  hearing  to  the
    appellant's  last  known  address.    The   appellant   brought   these
    proceedings, and even  though  he  has  been  removed  to  Poland,  the
    responsibility rests upon him to notify the tribunal with  his  updated
    contact details.  He has not.

 8. As to whether it was in the interests of  justice  to  proceed  in  the
    appellant's absence, I explained to Mr Lindsay that I had some concerns
    that the appellant had been  removed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    circumstances in which she may be unlikely to do so again.  I explained
    that pursuant to the Secretary of State's concession in R (oao  Mendes)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ  924,  so-
    called interim removals appear not to be pursued by  the  Secretary  of
    State in the absence of a full EU law proportionality  exercise,  which
    does not appear to have taken place in this  case.   See  [18]  of  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment.  That was a factor going to the fairness of
    proceeding the appellant's absence,  as  an  operative  factor  in  the
    appellant not being present in the UK to attend his appeal  hearing  in
    person was the Secretary of State's action in removing him from the UK,
    without,  it  seems,  having  conducted  the  EU  law   proportionality
    assessment which she now accepts she must conduct before  carrying  out
    such interim removals.

 9. Notwithstanding the above concerns,  I  decided  that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed.  The appellant  has  not  remained  in
    contact with the tribunal, something which would be  very  easy  to  do
    from Poland (for example, by email), meaning  that  responsibility  for
    the tribunal's inability to contact him rests with him.   Remaining  in
    touch with the tribunal is entirely within  his  gift.   The  appellant
    enjoys the ability to be readmitted in order to  present  his  case  in
    person, a step he appears not to have taken.

10. I decided that, in the event I were to dismiss the Secretary of State's
    appeal, the appellant would suffer  no  prejudice.   The  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal were such that, if I allowed  the  appeal,  a
    complete rehearing with full findings of fact would be  necessary,  and
    the matter could be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
    afresh by a different judge.  I decided it was  fair  to  proceed  with
    this hearing in his absence.  Indefinitely adjourning  the  proceedings
    would have been inconsistent with the overriding objective which is  to
    deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  is
    compatible with the proper consideration of the issues.

Factual background

11. The appellant claims to have entered the UK thirteen years  before  his
    appeal hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, although  the  Secretary  of
    State disputes the length and quality of his residence for the purposes
    of the 2016 Regulations. What is clear, however, is that the  appellant
    amassed 22 convictions between 2009 and 2018  for  offences  of  theft,
    possession of drugs and bladed articles, and breaches of court  orders.
    Most offences took place from  2016  to  2018.   During  his  offending
    history, the  appellant  was  made  subject  to  various  non-custodial
    disposals,  such  as  community   orders   with   drug   rehabilitation
    requirements, some of which he breached, leading to  their  revocation,
    and the substitution of custodial sentences.  The penalties  culminated
    in a sentence of 20  weeks'  imprisonment  for  two  charges  of  theft
    (shoplifting) and a single charge of failing to surrender  to  custody,
    imposed by the West Yorkshire Magistrates' Court on 15 May 2018.

12. According to the Secretary of  State's  supplementary  decision  letter
    dated 4 December 2018, the appellant's offending between February  2018
    and May 2018 involved repeated thefts, including some thefts  from  the
    same retail outlets.  The appellant failed to surrender  to  bail,  and
    committed his most recent offences while subject to a community  order.
    Failing to surrender to custody at the appointed time demonstrated that
    he had not taken responsibility for his actions, and that he had little
    regard for the orders imposed upon him by the courts  and  the  police.
    The pattern of offending demonstrated a propensity to reoffend, and the
    frequent attempts by the courts to require the appellant to engage with
    the underlying causes of his behaviour had been in vain.  There  is  no
    evidence the appellant had sought to improve his  behaviour,  or  learn
    from his past mistakes. The nature and seriousness of the offences  for
    which the appellant had been convicted increased in time, demonstrating
    an escalation in  the  seriousness  of  his  offending.  The  appellant
    demonstrated no remorse and showed no understanding of  the  impact  of
    his actions on his victims. Shoplifting was not a victimless crime. For
    those reasons, he continued to pose a current  threat,  considered  the
    Secretary of State.  The Secretary  of  State  decided  to  deport  the
    appellant, on the grounds of  public  security,  maintaining  that  the
    appellant represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

13. Having set out the procedural and factual background, and the  relevant
    legal framework, the judge reached her operative findings at [21]:

         "Regulation 27 (5) makes it clear  that  an  individual's  previous
         convictions do not, in themselves, justify  the  decision.  I  have
         looked at the evidence presented by the respondent see what conduct
         other  than  the  appellant's  previous  convictions  justify  this
         decision. There is no evidence from the appellant to show  that  he
         has completed  any  rehabilitation  courses  whilst  in  prison  to
         address the reasons for his offending behaviour. But equally  there
         is no evidence before me to say that such courses were available to
         him, were offered and were refused by  him,  given  the  relatively
         short periods of time during which he was incarcerated. The  burden
         is upon the [Secretary of State] and I am not  satisfied  that  she
         has shown, on the balance of probabilities, that there  is  conduct
         other than [the appellant's]."

    The judge allowed the appeal.

Ground of appeal.

14. The Secretary of State's single ground of  appeal  is  that  the  judge
    erred in concluding that the Secretary of State had erroneously  solely
    relied on the appellant's previous convictions.  In  the  supplementary
    decision letter, the Secretary of State set out  a  series  of  reasons
    based on the appellant's underlying conduct which led to the conclusion
    that he represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society.  Moreover,  the
    judge failed to have regard to the considerations in Schedule 1 to  the
    2016 Regulations, concerning the "fundamental  interests  of  society."
    There is no evidence  before  the  tribunal,  contend  the  grounds  of
    appeal,  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  in  any   way   be
    disproportionate.

Legal framework

15. Regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations governs  decisions  to  remove  a
    person on grounds of public policy, public security, or public  health.
    Central to this appeal is regulation 27(5),  which  lists  a  range  of
    proportionality considerations.  Sub-paragraph (e) provides:

         "a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision."

16. Regulation 27(8) provides that a court or tribunal considering  whether
    the requirements of the regulation are met must "(in  particular)  have
    regard to the considerations contained  in  Schedule  1".   Schedule  1
    provides, where relevant:

         "Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national  has
         received a custodial sentence, or is  a  persistent  offender,  the
         longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the  convictions,  the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence  in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society."

Discussion

17. In developing the grounds of appeal, Mr Lindsay drew attention to  what
    he submitted was the detailed analysis contained in the 4 December 2018
    supplementary decision letter, contending  that  it  featured  detailed
    consideration of the appellant's underlying conduct, and did not simply
    seek to rely on the mere fact of his convictions,  without  more.   The
    judge plainly had seen the letter, for she summarised its  contents  at
    [2] to [8].  The judge had misapplied regulation  27(5)(e),  conflating
    the mere existence of previous convictions with  the  concerns  arising
    from the underlying conduct which led to the convictions.

18. I accept the Secretary of State's submissions.  The prohibition against
    relying  on  previous  convictions  contained  in  regulation  27(5)(e)
    targets decisions which rely on the mere fact of previous  convictions,
    rather than the threats posed by the underlying conduct  which  led  to
    the convictions.  So much is clear from the sub-paragraph's use of  the
    qualifying term "in themselves".  It represents a crucial  distinction.
    In and of themselves, previous  convictions  reveal  little  about  the
    underlying conduct of an offender, and cannot form the sole basis for a
    decision under regulation 27.  By contrast, the details of the facts of
    the offences, the offender's circumstances, and any  wider  pattern  of
    offending allow a qualitative assessment to be conducted of the risk  a
    person poses to the host Member State.  As Mr  Lindsay  submitted,  the
    logical conclusion of the judge's analysis would be that any offending,
    no matter how heinous, would have to be accompanied by some  additional
    reprehensible non-conviction conduct in order to meet the threshold for
    deportation under the 2016 Regulations.  That cannot be right, and  nor
    is it consistent with the plain wording of regulation 27(5)(e) and  its
    emphasis, consistent with Article 27(2) of Directive  2004/38/EC,  that
    "a person's previous  criminal  convictions  shall  not  in  themselves
    constitute grounds for taking such measures..."

19. The Secretary of State's  supplementary  decision  letter  set  out  at
    length a range of concerns arising from the underlying conduct  of  the
    appellant which led to his convictions. Those concerns related  to  the
    persistence  of  the  offending,  the  appellant's  resistance  to  the
    rehabilitative qualities of community orders  and  other  non-custodial
    disposals, the nature of the underlying offences, and a range of  other
    matters.  There was plainly material  before  the  tribunal  that  went
    beyond the mere fact of the appellant's previous convictions, which the
    judge did not assess.  Nor did the judge consider any of the factors in
    Schedule 1.  This is not,  of  course,  to  say  that  the  appellant's
    conduct does meet the regulation 27 threshold for deportation.   Rather
    it is the case that the judge's analysis that he didn't was flawed, for
    the reasons set out above.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside with no findings preserved.  Given  the  extent
    of the factual findings that will be required upon the  decision  being
    remade, it is appropriate that the matter be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal, to be heard by a different judge.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Hawden-Beal involved the making of  an  error  of  law
and is set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard  by  a
different judge.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith              Date 21 April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith























