
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 00563 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Vladas Juocys
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co,
solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against  a  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal to allow an appeal against a decision of  the
    Secretary of State to deport the respondent following his conviction and
    sentence to five years' imprisonment for very serious tax offences.

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Lithuania and therefore of an EEA  state.
    It is trite law that EEA nationals who commit criminal offences  in  the
    United Kingdom are not in the same position as foreign  nationals.   The
    power to make a deportation order  against  them  is  regulated  by  the
    European Economic Area Regulations of 2006 which  purposefully  make  it
    difficult to remove a person from the jurisdiction if they are  in  fact
    an EEA national.

 3. The correct test was clearly identified by the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    said at paragraph 35 of the determination that it was looking to see  if
    there was sufficient evidence that the appellant  currently  presents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  public.   It
    concluded that he  did  not  and  its  main  reason  for  reaching  this
    conclusion is supported by the NOMS report which said that there  was  a
    low risk of reoffending.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal invited  criticism  because,  perhaps  a  little
    thoughtlessly, it adopted an observation of the  sentencing  judge,  His
    Honour Judge  Leonard  QC,  without  explaining  what  it  meant.   When
    imposing the sentence of five years' imprisonment the learned  judge  in
    the Crown Court  made  it  plain  that  he  was  not  concerned  by  the
    appellant's  previous   convictions.    The   appellant   has   previous
    convictions and they are things of which he ought to be ashamed.  He has
    been convicted of driving with excess alcohol and using a vehicle whilst
    uninsured, failing to surrender  to  custody  and  interfering  with  an
    insurance document with intent to deceive and  again  for  driving  with
    excess alcohol.  When issues of  public  safety  are  considered  excess
    alcohol offences can be a very considerable concern. However, if  I  may
    respectfully so comment, it was unlikely  that  these  things  made  any
    difference to the  punishment  appropriate  to  the  tax  offences.  The
    Tribunal however was  concerned  with  the  danger,  if  any,  that  the
    appellant's continuing presence presented to the public  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. Any suggestion that the  Tribunal  ignored  these  convictions  when  it
    reached its decision is clearly wrong.   Firstly,  it  referred  to  the
    convictions expressly in the determination and  secondly,  it  makes  it
    plain that it  appreciated  that  the  conclusion  of  the  officer  who
    prepared the NOMS report was made in the knowledge not only of  the  tax
    offence for which there was a five year term of imprisonment, but of the
    other offences as well.  In other words, it is plain from  the  face  of
    the determination that the Tribunal relied on a NOMS report which itself
    made an evaluation of the  appellant's  likelihood  to  reoffend  having
    regard to all of his previous convictions. The  Tribunal  did  not  mean
    that the other convictions could not be relevant  to  its  decision  but
    that they were not relevant because the respondent had put  them  behind
    him.

 6. For my part I can see nothing  that  approaches  irrationality  in  this
    conclusion, still less anything that looks like a material misdirection.
     As far as I can see, when the determination is read carefully there  is
    nothing whatsoever wrong with the reasoning or the conclusion.

 7. It follows that in the circumstances I dismiss the Secretary of  State's
    appeal and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 December 2013                |








