

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00934/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2nd November 2015                     |On 5th November 2015              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                 SAMI DAJQI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Notice of hearing was sent to the appellant through his solicitors  on
      20th October 2015. By fax  dated  26th  October  2015  the  solicitors
      notified the Tribunal that they  were  no  longer  instructed  by  the
      appellant and they provided an address for him.  Their  letter  stated
      they had been unable to  obtain  instructions.  There  is  nothing  to
      indicate that the solicitors did not, given they are  on  the  record,
      notify the appellant of the hearing date. The appeal proceeded.


   2. FtT judge  Ransley  granted  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  a
      decision of  First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow sitting at Taylor  House
      dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent refusing to
      revoke a deportation order  made  on  13th  September  2007.  The  FtT
      dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds. The FtT  also
      dismissed the appeal on the grounds that he was not entitled to an EEA
      family permit.

   3. Permission had not been sought to appeal the human  rights  or  asylum
      grounds. Permission had been sought solely on the ground that the  FtT
      judge had erred in law in finding that  the  appellant  did  not  come
      within the Surinder Singh principle because he was not married to  his
      partner.


   4. Although the appellant had not specifically applied  for  a  residence
      card as an EEA national in a durable relationship, the  respondent  in
      the decision the subject of appeal had taken account of his claim that
      he was in a durable  relationship  with  a  British  Citizen  who  had
      allegedly been exercising Treaty Rights in  Belgium  whilst  they  had
      been living there as a couple and that they had then returned  to  the
      UK as a couple where she claimed to  be  continuing  to  exercise  her
      Treaty Rights, thus falling within the Surinder Singh principle.


   5. The decision the subject of the appeal stated:


             44. You have stated that  your  client's  partner,  Ms  Caton,
             worked as a hairdresser in Belgium from May to September 2011,
             exercising her right to free movement  pursuant  to  Directive
             2004/39/EC, and as such your client has a right to  reside  in
             the UK as her family member. Your client cannot  benefit  from
             the EEA regulations as, firstly, there is no evidence provided
             to show that his partner did work during her time in  Belgium.
             It is also considered that as an unmarried partner your client
             cannot benefit from these regulations as he has  not  acquired
             an EEA Residence Card.


   6. The FtT judge held


             16. On a balance of probabilities it has been  established  in
             the round that they [the appellant and  Ms  Caton]  are  in  a
             subsisting and genuine relationship and that this relationship
             has endured the vicissitudes of the appellant's  circumstances
             and conduct  over  the  years.  Notwithstanding  the  lack  of
             documentary evidence it is accepted  that  the  parties  lived
             together in Belgium for about five months and that the partner
             worked as a hairdresser earning cash in hand....
             ...
             24. ....Furthermore it has not been established that  he  [the
             appellant]  meets  the  requirements  of  reg  9(2)  and  (3).
             Accordingly reg 9 does not avail the appellant to  an  initial
             right of residence as provided for in reg 13. The  claim  that
             the appellant should be  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit
             fails.




   7. In her Rule 24  response  dated  11th  March  2015  to  the  grant  of
      permission the respondent states


             The failure to consider Kamila Santos is not a material  error
             because the appellant has failed to establish that his British
             partner was exercising treaty rights  in  Belgium.  The  judge
             found against them on Reg 9(2) on this  very  point,  for  the
             record, there was no concession by  the  SSHD  regarding  this
             point at [44] RFL it was stated ......
             Further the fact that the  appellant  is  claiming  to  be  an
             extended  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  (through   an
             extension of the Surinder Singh principle) would not have  led
             the appeal against revocation of a deport to be  allowed.  The
             appellant is only entitled to a residence  card  only  at  the
             SSHD's discretion under Reg 17(4) not as a matter of law,  his
             claimed status as an OFM is not  such  a  material  change  of
             circumstances as to compel the revocation of  the  deportation
             order.


   8. The appellant through his solicitors did not  reply  to  the  Rule  24
      response and no request to admit further  evidence  under  rule  15(2)
      Procedure Rules was made.


   9. There was no evidence before the FtT that the appellant's partner  was
      exercising treaty rights in Belgium. The respondent had  not  accepted
      that she was exercising such rights. It appears likely the  FtT  judge
      omitted the word "not" in [16] of his determination given [44] of  the
      respondent's reasons for refusing to revoke the deportation order  and
      the finding by the FtT judge  in  [24]  that  he  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of  regulation  9(2)  or  9(3).  Even  if  it  is  not  a
      typographical error in [16] it is plain that the finding  in  [23]  is
      sustainable given the  lack  of  any  documentary  evidence  that  the
      appellant's partner is working either in the  UK  or  in  Belgium  and
      given the reference to the lack of evidence in [44] of the decision by
      the respondent.


  10. The Surinder Singh principle was not, on the evidence before the  FtT,
      engaged and even if it were, and the appellant could show that he  was
      an extended family member, that would merely lead  to  the  respondent
      considering whether to issue a residence card. It would not result  in
      a  successful  appeal  against  a  decision  refusing  to   revoke   a
      deportation order.


  11. No other grounds being relied upon  by  the  appellant,  there  is  no
      identifiable error of law in the decision of the FtT  to  dismiss  the
      appeal.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision is  set
    aside.


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



[pic]

                                    Date 3rd November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
