
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00040/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 1 December 2017                     |On 1 December 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MILEMBA KAPITA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mrs E Norman instructed by JM Wilson Solicitors.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell  who  allowed  Miss  Kapita's
        appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to deport her
        from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European
        Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

Discussion



     2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State  on  a
        renewed application on the 29 September 2017 on the  basis  it  was
        arguable the Judge should have applied  the  Immigration  (European
        Economic Area) Regulations 2016 rather than the 2006  version,  and
        that the Judge had erred  in  the  analysis  that  Miss  Kapita,  a
        Belgium national, had a right of permanent residence in the UK.
     3. Miss Norman did not seek to argue that the  finding  by  the  Judge
        that Miss Kapita had acquired a right  of  permanent  residence  is
        infected by  legal  error.  The  Judge  clearly  made  findings  in
        relation to the way in which it was said Miss Kapita was exercising
        treaty rights which are legally incorrect. The  key  element  being
        the finding that because she  was  studying  she  was  a  qualified
        person whereas the requirement for exercising treaty  rights  as  a
        student includes a need to prove additional elements  such  as  the
        existence of comprehensive sickness insurance which the Judge fails
        to mention or make findings upon.
     4. The issue in the appeal is the materiality of this  error.  It  had
        always been Miss Kapita's case that this  was  a  one-off  incident
        which led to her conviction and that she did  not  pose  a  serious
        threat to anybody in the United Kingdom. At [74]  of  the  decision
        under challenge the Judge finds "There is no basis to conclude that
        the appellant is likely to  reoffend  and  commit  further  serious
        offences in the future".
     5. The Secretary of State's representative  responsible  for  drafting
        the grounds of challenge  makes  no  reference  to  this  important
        finding and permission was not granted to enable Mrs Aboni to do so
        by the Upper Tribunal  Judge  who  granted  permission.  It  is  an
        important finding for unlike deportation under domestic provisions,
        where the offence leading to the decision to deport can  in  itself
        form the reason for removing a  person  from  the  United  Kingdom,
        under the EEA Regulations there is a requirement to establish  that
        a person represents a  sufficient  and  serious  threat  such  that
        interference with a right of free movement is warranted.
     6. The key question relating to materiality is therefore  whether  the
        finding Miss Kapita  did  not  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
        sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
        interests of society is within the  range  of  findings  reasonably
        open to the Judge on the evidence.
     7. The Judge finds at [56]:


             56.  The Secretary of Status argued that the  appellant  is  a
                  medium  risk  of  offending  and  a  medium  risk  to  the
                  community.  Having  considered  the   evidence   and   the
                  submissions made  on  this  point,  I  conclude  that  the
                  assessment  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State   is   not
                  sustainable. The offending manager has had the opportunity
                  to assess the appellant and has made a  judgement  in  the
                  OASYS  report  which  appears  to  be   both   sound   and
                  unchallengeable on  the  facts  before  this  tribunal.  I
                  therefore  conclude  that  the  risk  of   the   appellant
                  offending in the future is low and there is a low risk  to
                  the public. The appellant has not committed  any  offences
                  in the past which warranted a  custodial  sentence.  There
                  appears to be no real prospect of her reoffending  in  the
                  future.


     8. This is a finding reasonably open to the Judge following a  careful
        consideration of the evidence and it has not been established  that
        in finding Miss Kapita posed a low risk of offending with  no  real
        prospects of her reoffending in the future the Judge has  erred  in
        law in a material manner.
     9. As the unchallenged finding is that Miss Kapita does not present  a
        genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
        the fundamental interests of society finding her appeal  should  be
        allowed was within the range of reasonable conclusions open to  the
        Judge on the evidence.
    10. Accordingly, I find the Secretary of State has failed to  establish
        any arguable legal error material to  the  decision  to  allow  the
        appeal that warrants  the  Upper  Tribunal  interfering  with  this
        decision.


Decision

    11. There is no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Judge's
        decision. The decision shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 1 December 2017












