
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00522/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th September 2019               |On 29th November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               MR. MARIJUS [Z]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. M Chaggar, Counsel instructed by Goshen
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Robertson promulgated on 30th April 2019 dismissing the appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016
    ("the EEA Regulations") against the respondent's decision to make a
    deportation order.





Background


 2. The appellant is a national of Lithuania.  He claims to have arrived in
    the UK in February 2006.  The appellant first came to the adverse
    attention of the authorities in the UK in June 2006.  on 29 June 2006,
    the appellant was convicted at Stratford Magistrates Court of a number
    of driving offences including driving whilst disqualified, driving
    otherwise than in accordance with a licence and using a vehicle whilst
    uninsured.  The appellant continued to offend and on 20 June 2018 he
    was convicted at Snaresbrook Crown Court of having a bladed article
    which was sharply pointed in a public place. The appellant was
    sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.


 3. The appellant was served with notice of liability to deportation on 5
    July 2018. The appellant was notified that the respondent intended to
    make a deportation order against the appellant on grounds of public
    policy/public security in accordance with Regulation 23(6)(b) and
    Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations. Representations were received
    from the appellant and following consideration of the representations
    made on 13th and 16th July 2018, the respondent decided to deport the
    appellant from the UK for the reasons set in a letter dated 30 July
    2018.  That decision that was the subject of the appeal before FtT
    judge Robertson.


The decision of FtT Judge Robertson


 4. Judge Robertson sets out the numerous convictions that the appellant
    has amassed in the courts at paragraph [2] of her decision. The judge
    refers to the evidence given by the appellant at paragraph [7] of the
    decision and the evidence given by the appellant's partner at paragraph
    [8] of her decision.  The submissions made on behalf of the appellant
    are set out at paragraph [10] of the decision.


 5. The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [11] to
    [30] of the decision.  The judge noted that it is common ground between
    the parties that the appellant has acquired a permanent right of
    residence having resided in the UK in accordance with the EEA
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years. At paragraph [14],
    the judge states:


         "It is clear from the appellant's criminal record that he is
         repeatedly prepared to put himself and others at risk by his
         behaviour. Although lesser offences, his numerous driving offences
         reveal a blatant disregard for the law and the safety of others.
         His submission that his activities were related to his particular
         circumstances and drinking problem does little to explain his
         willingness to take risks."


 6. The judge referred to the OASYS report and noted the report records
    that alcohol has never been a problem. Furthermore, the appellant
    confirmed in his evidence that he had stopped drinking prior to his
    most recent offence. The judge noted that the evidence from the
    Probation Service refers to the appellant attending appointments and
    engaging in supervision sessions. She noted the Probation Officer
    assesses the appellant to be a "medium risk of serious harm to the
    public". The judge noted the appellant's concerns as to the effect of
    his behaviour on his children but noted also that his concern for his
    family has not proved to be a preventing influence in the past.  At
    paragraph [17], the judge stated:


         "Since being in the UK the appellant has committed a series of
         offences which I find to show a pattern of offending behaviour. He
         is undeterred by previous convictions and has repeatedly shown
         disregard for the law, continuing with his antisocial behaviour
         with no apparent consideration for the consequences."


 7. The judge refers to Regulation 27(5) and the principles set out. The
    judge reminded herself that the fact of the appellant's criminal
    convictions does not, in itself, provide sufficient justification for
    the decision to deport him. She also reminded herself that matters
    isolated from the particulars of the appellant's case, or which relate
    to considerations of general prevention, do not justify the decision.
    At paragraphs [19] to [22] of her decision, the judge stated:


         "19. I have had regard to the nature and severity of the
         appellant's convictions. Many of the appellant's convictions in the
         UK may be for summary offences but due to the frequency and nature
         of his offending they cannot be dismissed as minor. His most recent
         offence which resulted in 12 months imprisonment highlights his
         readiness to take unacceptable risks. Although I accept that he may
         have taken steps to address his use of alcohol it is not clear that
         this is at the root of his offending. His propensity to ignore the
         possible risk and impact on society of his behaviour is serious.


         20.  I have considered whether the evidence supports the submission
         that the appellant does not represent a genuine, present and
         sufficiently serious threat. On the limited evidence before me, and
         for the reasons set out above, I concur with the respondent's view
         that the appellant presents a risk of harm to the general public.
         In terms of the likelihood of further offences being committed, I
         have taken into account the appellant's apparent lack of insight by
         virtue of the fact that although engaged in one to one sessions
         with his probation officer, he is still assessed to be at medium
         risk of serious harm to the public.


         21.  In the light of the above I consider it likely that the
         appellant will continue to reoffend and will continue to pose a
         risk of harm to the public. That threat is genuine, present and
         sufficiently serious to justify his deportation on grounds of
         public policy.


         22.  I have considered the appellant's age, state of health, family
         and economic situation, his length of residence in the United
         Kingdom, his social and cultural integration into the United
         Kingdom and the extent of his links with his country of origin. The
         appellant is a man now aged 40 years old has been in the UK since
         2006. The evidence before me does not support finding that he has
         any significant health problems or disabilities. He is not
         currently in employment, but he has worked in the past and has the
         capacity to work to support himself."


 8. The judge went on to note that the appellant has presented some
    evidence of social and cultural integration into the UK but noted that
    his criminal behaviour would suggest that he is not someone who is
    integrated well into the society and culture of this country.


 9. At paragraphs [24], the judge refers to the appellant's partner and his
    two children who are settled in the UK. She noted that they are all
    Lithuanian nationals and the appellant's partner has family in the UK
    that were able to provide support when the appellant was in prison. The
    judge noted the appellant's partner is a student but is also self-
    employed as a pet breeder. The judge noted that both children are in
    education and the eldest child is preparing to take her GCSEs next
    year. The judge refers, at [25], to the links that the appellant and
    his partner continue to have to Lithuania. The judge noted there is
    some support available to the appellant on his return, if only for a
    temporary period whilst he finds employment and accommodation. She
    noted that the appellant would have no difficulty with language and can
    transfer any skills gained whilst in the UK to obtain employment. The
    judge considered the impact the appellant's deportation would have on
    his family. At paragraph [26], the judge stated:


         "The appellant's deportation would clearly have a detrimental
         impact on his family. However, his partner is currently supporting
         the family financially and has the support of her extended family
         to continue to do so. The children are settled in school. The
         youngest child has lived in the UK all his life and the older child
         for most of her life. They have a genuine relationship with their
         father but were able to adapt to his absence during his
         imprisonment. Their mother is their main carer, having provided
         consistent care throughout. It is open to the family to return to
         Lithuania with the appellant should they choose, though I note that
         the eldest child is at an important stage in her education. Whilst
         I accept that such a move would prove difficult for the children
         given the change in language and culture, they would be guided and
         supported by their parents. Alternatively it is possible for the
         family to remain in the UK, maintaining contact with the appellant
         via social media and visit. It is a matter of choice for the
         family, but I do not find either option to be unduly harsh."


10. The judge also considered the impact of deportation upon the
    appellant's rehabilitation. She noted that there has been no
    rehabilitative work in the UK to interrupt and found there is no reason
    why the appellant could not work towards rehabilitation in Lithuania.
    At paragraph [28] the judge concluded as follows:


         "... having had regard to all of these matters and to all of the
         circumstances of the case, I am satisfied that the requirements of
         the regulations are met, that there are grounds of public policy,
         and that deportation is a proportionate response to the appellant's
         conduct. Deportation is conducive to the public good and in the
         public interest given the appellant's conviction and sentence to 12
         months imprisonment.".


The appeal before me


11. The appellant claims the judge made a number of material errors of law.
    It is said the judge appears to have been motivated to dismiss the
    appeal largely on the basis of the appellant's offending history,
    whereas Regulation 27(5)(e) provides that a person's previous criminal
    convictions do not in themselves justify the decision. The appellant
    contends the judge failed to have proper regard to Regulation 27(8)
    that requires a Tribunal considering whether the requirements of the
    regulation are met, to have regard to the considerations contained in
    Schedule 1 (consideration of public policy, public security and the
    fundamental interests of society etc).  The appellant claims the
    judge's consideration was too restrictive, and the judge did not look
    beyond the appellant's offending or placed excessive weight on the
    appellant's previous convictions.  Furthermore, a number of the
    previous convictions should be treated as spent pursuant to the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 and should not have been relied
    upon by the respondent to discharge the burden of proving the
    appellant's deportation is necessary.


12. The appellant claims the judge fails to address the point that the
    burden of proving that the appellant represents a genuine present and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
    of society under the EEA Regulations, rests upon the appellant. The
    appellant refers to the decision in MG and VC [2006] which emphasises
    the assessment of future risk is crucial, and that deportation measures
    are not be used as further punishment or a deterrent in themselves.


13. The appellant claims that in his sentencing remarks, the Crown Court
    judge noted the appellant did not point the knife, and the appellant
    had, subsequent to the events of that day, reflected, and, before the
    jury, indicated remorse that he had felt in hindsight, as to his
    behaviour.  It is said the appellant has engaged well with the
    probation service and in a letter that was before the Tribunal, the
    Probation Officer noted that "there is no evidence to suggest any
    further offending at this present time".   The appellant also claims
    that the index offence was committed in 2016 but took over two years to
    get to Court.  It is said that demonstrates the appellant had not re-
    offended for a number of years as at the date upon which his appeal was
    heard.  It is said that the various factors should have formed part of
    the Judge's assessment, and it is difficult to see how the judge
    arrives at the conclusion that the appellant represents a genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society.


14. The appellant also claims the judge failed to understand the impact of
    the decision upon the appellant's children, particularly the eldest
    child, and the suggestion that the children can keep in touch with
    their father through modern means of communication and/or visits to
    Lithuania, does little to engage with the evidence of the eldest child.
    The appellant claims the judge has failed to give anxious scrutiny to
    the claim, has ignored parts of the evidence, and misunderstood other
    parts.


15. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on
    20th June 2019.  Judge Keane considered it arguable, that the judge
    took into account an irrelevant consideration in according excessive
    weight to the appellant's convictions, contrary to Regulation 27(5)(e)
    of the EEA Regulations.


16. Before me, Ms Chaggar adopts the grounds of appeal and maintains the
    judge attached excessive weight to the criminal offending of the
    appellant, that is set out at paragraph [2] of the decision. She
    submits the index offence for which the appellant was convicted and
    sentenced in June 2018, was one committed in 2016, and the judge failed
    to have regard to the fact that the appellant had not reoffended for a
    number of years, before the hearing of his appeal. She referred me to
    the letter that was before the Tribunal from the Probation Service
    Officer dated 26th November 2018. The author of that letter confirmed
    the appellant was released from prison on 18th October 2018, subject to
    licence conditions. Although the appellant had previously attended
    weekly supervision sessions, that had been reduced to fortnightly
    appointments and the author notes the appellant's attendance had been
    very good. It was noted the appellant is punctual for his appointments
    and engages well in the supervision sessions.  Ms Chaggar accepts the
    author of the letter confirms, "... Mr [Z] is assessed as a medium risk
    of serious harm to the public.", although, she submits, that was about
    five months before the hearing of the appeal.  The author of the letter
    confirmed that the appellant will be subject to post-sentence
    supervision until 2nd July 2019 and appeared to be motivated to engage
    with probation and complete his licence period. The author stated; "...
    There is no evidence to suggest any further offending at this present
    time.".


17. Ms Chaggar submits that in reaching her decision, the Judge failed to
    have proper regard to the impact the deportation of the appellant will
    have upon the children. There was a letter that had been written by the
    eldest child, before the Tribunal.  She confirmed that she has her
    GCSE's coming up next year.  She stated that it will be extremely
    difficult for her and her brother to return to Lithuania because it
    will be damaging to their education. She confirms that she was very
    upset and saddened when her father was in prison, and she and her
    brother were completely heartbroken. She is happier since her father's
    release from prison and she has been able to concentrate on her studies
    and has been supported by her father tremendously. Ms Chaggar submits
    the judge does not properly engage with the evidence.  She submits the
    impact the appellant's deportation would have upon the children at a
    critical stage in their lives, is such that the deportation cannot be
    proportionate.


18. In reply, Mr Mills accepts submission made by Ms Chaggar that
    criminality and convictions, cannot in themselves justify deportation.
    However, he submits the judge properly reminded herself at paragraph
    [18] of the decision that the fact of the appellant's criminal
    convictions does not, in itself, provide sufficient justification for
    the decision to deport him. Mr Mills submits the judge made a number of
    relevant findings regarding the question whether the appellant
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society, having had regard to the
    appellant's conduct and properly noting, at [15], that the appellant's
    probation officer assesses him as being a medium risk of serious harm
    to the public. That is consistent with the letter referred to by Ms
    Chaggar, that was before the Tribunal from the Probation Service
    Officer dated 26th November 2018.  Mr Mills submits that at the time
    the letter was written by the Probation Officer, the appellant had been
    out of prison only for a few weeks.  Mr Mills submits that a careful
    reading of paragraphs [20] to [22] of the decision in particular,
    demonstrates the judge had in mind the proper approach to the
    principles set out in Regulation 27(5) of the EEA Regulations.


19. Mr Mills submits that Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations confirms the
    fundamental interests of society in the United Kingdom include
    excluding or removing an EEA national with a conviction and maintaining
    public confidence in the ability of the relevant authorities to take
    such action. It also includes combating the effects of persistent
    offending, particularly in relation to offences which if taken in
    isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the requirements of
    Regulation 27.


20. Mr Mills submits the judge carefully considered whether the decision
    complies with the principle of proportionality, and was entitled to
    conclude at [28], that the requirements of the regulations are met, and
    the deportation is a proportionate response to the appellant's conduct.
    It is, as the judge noted, open to the appellant's partner and children
    to return to Lithuania with the appellant. Alternatively, it is open to
    the appellant's partner and children to remain in the UK. As the judge
    noted, it is a matter of choice for the family.  Mr Mills submits it
    was open to the judge to conclude that either option would not be
    unduly harsh.


21. Finally, Mr Mills submits the judge recognised that the deportation of
    the appellant would clearly have a detrimental impact on his family.
    He submits that is undoubtably correct, but there was no evidence
    before the Tribunal that the family was simply unable to cope when the
    appellant was in prison. In reaching her decision, the judge took into
    account the evidence given by the appellant and his partner regarding
    the impact upon the children, but it was in the end open to the judge
    to conclude that the strong public interest in deportation is not
    outweighed by the best interests of the children, and the impact the
    appellant's deportation, would have on the children.


Discussion


22. It is useful to begin with the European Regulations.  Regulation
    23(6)(b) provides that an EEA national who has entered the United
    Kingdom may be removed if the respondent has decided that the person's
    removal is justified on grounds of public policy, public security or
    public health in accordance with regulation 27.  Regulation 27 insofar
    as it is material to this appeal provides:


             '27. -   (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means
             an EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
             security or public health.


             ...


             (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except on serious grounds of public policy and public
             security.


             ...


             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred
             by these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision is taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-


                  (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
                  proportionality;


                  (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;


                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must represent a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society, taking into
                  account past conduct of the person and that the threat
                  does not need to be imminent;


                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                  which relate to considerations of general prevention do
                  not justify the decision;


                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                  themselves justify the decision;


                  (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds,
                  even in the absence of a previous criminal conviction,
                  provided the grounds are specific to the person.


             (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of
             public policy and public security in relation to a person
             ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the decision
             maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
             state of health, family and economic situation of P, P's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social and
             cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of
             P's links with P's country of origin.


             ...


             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of
             public policy, public security and the fundamental interests
             of society etc.).'


23. Schedule 1 insofar as it is relevant provides:


         '...


         The fundamental interests of society


         7.   For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-


             ...


             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
             an EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct
             of that person is likely to cause, or has in fact caused,
             public offence) and maintaining public confidence in the
             ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;


             ...


             (h)  combating the effects of persistent offending
             (particularly in relation to offences, which if taken in
             isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the requirements
             of regulation 27);


             ...'


24. To justify interfering with the appellant's rights to free movement and
    residence in the UK, the respondent must establish the appellant's
    removal is justified on grounds of public policy and public security.
    It is uncontroversial that the appellant has acquired a permanent right
    of residence. The respondent was therefore required to establish that
    the appellant's deportation is justified on serious grounds of public
    policy and public security.


25. By operation of Regulation 27(5), the decision must be taken in
    accordance with the principles set out.  Regulation 27(5)(c) operates
    so that the personal conduct of the appellant must represent a genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society, considering the past conduct of the
    appellant, and that the threat does not need to be imminent.


26. I reject the claim that in reaching her decision, the judge attached
    excessive weight, and unduly focused upon the convictions that are
    referred to at paragraph [2] of the decision.  The appellant has
    amassed a number of convictions during the 12-year period between June
    2006 and June 2018. I accept that a number of the earlier convictions
    relate to driving offences, but one cannot ignore the fact that they
    include numerous convictions for driving with excess alcohol, and that
    in March 2018 the appellant was convicted for dangerous driving.  The
    appellant's convictions include a conviction for assault occasioning
    actual bodily harm in December 2011, and the index offence, that led to
    the conviction in June 2018.


27. The claim by Ms Chaggar that the index offence for which the appellant
    was convicted in June 2018 was an offence committed in 2016 and the
    appellant had been free of offending behaviour for a number of years at
    the time that his appeal was heard, is misconceived.  Although the
    index conviction may relate to an offence committed in 2016, the
    appellant was convicted, in March 2018 at Bedfordshire Magistrates
    Court for dangerous driving and sentenced at Luton Crown Court on 2nd
    July 2018, to 12 months imprisonment.  The appellant plainly continued
    to offend following the offence committed in 2016. At its highest, the
    appellant had not committed any further offences following his
    conviction for dangerous driving in March 2018, and so had been free of
    offending for just over a year before the hearing of his appeal, but
    the appellant was in prison until his release on 18th October 2018.


28. The judge reminded herself at paragraph [18] that the fact of the
    appellant's criminal convictions does not, in itself, provide
    sufficient justification for the decision to deport him. The judge
    correctly directed herself in accordance with Regulation 27(5)(e).
    There is no duty on a judge to deal with every argument presented by a
    party and it is sufficient if what is said in the decision shows the
    parties and, if needs be, the Upper Tribunal on appeal, the basis on
    which the judge had acted.  Where, as here, the judge properly directed
    herself that the appellant's previous convictions do not in themselves
    justify the decision, I must assume that in reaching her decision, she
    had proceeded upon that premise, unless the appellant can point to
    convincing reasons leading to a contrary conclusion.  I have carefully
    considered the submissions made by Ms Chaggar but in my judgement,
    there has been no misdirection of law and there is nothing to justify
    the claim that the judge appears to have been motivated to dismiss the
    appeal largely on the basis of the appellant's offending history.


29. I reject the claim that the judge adopted too restrictive an approach
    as to the public policy and public security requirements in order to
    protect the fundamental interests of society.  The judge was required
    to consider whether the threat is sufficiently serious to affect one of
    the fundamental interests of society.  Schedule 1 of the EEA
    Regulations, confirms that for the purposes of the regulations, the
    fundamental interests of society include the removal of an EEA national
    with a conviction and maintaining public confidence in the ability of
    the relevant authorities to take such action; and combating the effects
    of persistent offending (particularly in relation to offences, which if
    taken in isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the requirements
    of regulation 27).


30. In my judgement, in reaching her decision, the judge had proper regard
    to principles referred to in Regulation 27(5) of the EEA Regulations.
    The judge carefully considered the threat posed by the appellant and
    whether that threat is realistic.  In evidence the appellant confirmed
    that he had stopped drinking prior to his most recent offence.  The
    most recent offence chronologically, was the offence of dangerous
    driving for which the appellant was convicted at Bedfordshire
    Magistrates Court and sentenced at Luton Crown Court on 2nd July 2018.
    In reaching her decision, the Judge noted that there was little
    supporting evidence of there being a problem in respect of the
    appellant's drinking.  The judge had regard to the letter that is
    referred to by Ms Chaggar, and as the Judge correctly noted at [25],
    the appellant's Probation Officer assessed him as being "... A medium
    risk of serious harm to the public.".  The judge was entitled to have
    regard to the past conduct of the appellant and the assessment of the
    future risk was equally crucial. The judge noted that concern for his
    family has not proved to be a preventing influence in the past, and the
    appellant has shown disregard for the law with no apparent
    consideration for the consequences. The judge noted at [20], that she
    had considered whether the evidence supports the submission that the
    appellant does not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat. The judge concluded that on the limited evidence before
    her, she concurs with the respondent's view that the appellant presents
    a risk of harm to the general public. The judge considered the
    likelihood of further offences being committed and in reaching her
    decision, considered the assessment by the Probation Officer as set out
    in the letter relied upon by the appellant. At paragraph [21], the
    judge concluded that she considers it likely that the appellant will
    continue to reoffend and will continue to pose a risk of harm to the
    public. She concluded that the threat his genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious to justify his deportation on grounds of public
    policy. In my judgement, the judge properly considers the risk of
    reoffending/offending, the triggers and the extent to which these have
    been addressed.  The judge also properly considered the appellant's
    history of offending in reaching her decision.


31. Although the judge does not state in her decision that the burden of
    proving the appellant represents a genuine present and sufficiently
    serious threat of affecting one of the fundamental interests of society
    under the EEA Regulations rests upon the respondent, she was not
    required to do so.  The First-tier Tribunal is a specialist Tribunal.
    As Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372,
    "reasons should be read on the assumption that, unless he has
    demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew how he should perform his
    functions, and which matters he should take into account". Some
    principles are so firmly embedded in judicial thinking that they do not
    need to be recited. It would be surprising to see in every civil
    judgment, a paragraph dealing with the burden and standard of proof.  I
    accept that the reader of any judicial decision must be reassured from
    its content that the court or tribunal has applied the correct legal
    test to any question it is deciding, but there is nothing within the
    decision here to indicate that the judge did not appreciate that the
    relevant burden rests upon the respondent.


32. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal does not provide an opportunity to
    undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to see if they are
    wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits. In reaching her
    decision that the personal conduct of the appellant represents a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society, the judge correctly directed herself
    as to the law and reached a conclusion that is neither irrational,
    unreasonable or a decision that is not supported by the evidence.


33. I reject the claim that the judge failed to understand the impact of
    the decision to deport upon the appellant's children. At paragraph
    [26], the judge accepted that the deportation would clearly have a
    detrimental impact on the appellant's family. On appeal, the Tribunal
    should resist the temptation to subvert the principle that it should
    not substitute its own discretion for that of the judge, by a narrow
    textual analysis which enables the Tribunal to conclude that the judge
    misdirected herself.  The judge had regard to the children's length of
    residence in the UK, their schooling and accepted that the children
    have a genuine relationship with their father. The judge was entitled
    to take into account the way in which the family had adapted during the
    appellant's absence whilst he was in prison.  The findings and
    conclusions reached by the judge were neither irrational nor
    unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or findings and conclusions that
    were wholly unsupported by the evidence.


34. In my judgement it was properly open to the Judge to dismiss the appeal
    for the reasons set out in her decision promulgated on 30th April 2019.
    It follows that I dismiss the appeal before me.


Notice of Decision


35. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date     26th November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


36. I have dismissed the appeal and I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          26th November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

