
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00096/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates' Court        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2014                               |On 31 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          JAMAL ABDULAH MOHAMED ATO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    promulgated on 9 April 2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly and Mr J
    H Eames which allowed the respondent's appeal against deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this determination,  I  refer  to  Mr  Ato  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Holland and was born on 7 March 1994.

 4. The background to this matter is that on 18 June 2103 the appellant was
    convicted of three offences of burglary of a dwelling house  with  five
    further live offences being taken into account. He was sentenced  to  2
    years imprisonment in a Young Offenders Institution.

 5. It is also undisputed that the appellant has been in the UK  exercising
    Treaty rights since 2006 and that his deportation fell to be considered
    against the "serious grounds of public policy or public security"  test
    set by in Regulation 21 (3) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).

 6. As it indicated at [4] of its determination,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    also had to consider the provisions of Regulations 21 (5) and (6)  when
    making their decision. These are as follows:

        Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
        grounds


        ...


        (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
        or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
        preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
        with the following principles-


           (a)  the  decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
           proportionality;


           (b) the decision must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
           conduct of the person concerned;


           (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent
           a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
           of the fundamental interests of society;


           (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or  which
           relate to considerations of general prevention  do  not  justify
           the decision;


           (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do   not   in
           themselves justify the decision.


        (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
        policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
        in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
        considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
        economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
        in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
        into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
        his country of origin.

 7. Although the grounds begin in paragraph 1 by stating  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant did not pose a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat so as justify deportation,  the  substance  of  the  grounds  is
    really that of challenges to the substance of the reasons given by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the weight  they  apportioned  to  the  various
    competing factors rather than there being inadequate reasons.

 8. The grounds at paragraph 1 go on to argue that the First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to weigh whether  the  appellant  had  addressed  his  offending
    behaviour, how his family would be able to exert  sufficient  influence
    over him when they had been unable to do  so  previously  and  that  he
    would be returning to the  same  area  where  he  had  encountered  the
    negative influences that had  played  a  part  in  his  offending.  The
    grounds also maintain that the panel "failed to provide any reasons  as
    to his future risk of re-offending."

 9. It was my judgement, however, that the First-tier  Tribunal's  approach
    to the appellant's criminal history and risk of re-offending was sound.
    The panel was entitled to rely on the professional  assessment  of  the
    risk of re-offending as set out in the Pre-Sentence report; see [9] and
    [21]. The panel considered the remarks of the sentencing judge at [21].
    The full offending history was set out at [20], including the  fact  of
    the appellant having committed offences whilst on bail,  so  the  panel
    clearly had that in mind also when reaching its conclusions as to there
    being "a present" threat to a fundamental interest of society.

10. The Pre-Sentence report indicated that the appellant:

             "...  accepted  full  responsibility  for   committing   these
             offences. He very much regretted his actions, and if given the
             opportunity is prepared to apologise to  the  victims.  During
             interview he presented as able to reflect  on  his  behaviour,
             learn from his mistakes and motivated to make positive changes
             in his life."

11. That was the tenor of the appellant's evidence at  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal; see [12]. The  panel  was  entitled  to  place
    weight on that evidence when concluding at [21] that the appellant  was
    genuinely remorseful.

12. The appellant indicated in his witness statement that the length of his
    sentence precluded access to courses whilst in detention  but  that  he
    had looked into an employability course in order built a better future.
    There is no suggestion that his evidence in that regard was not correct
    or that the inability to attend specific courses addressing reoffending
    was considered to be  a  significant  matter  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole on the risk of re-offending.

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not place any  weight  on  the  ability  of
    appellant's family acting to influence his  future  behaviour  so  this
    also did  not  appear  to  me  to  be  a  point  that  could  have  any
    materiality.

14. The panel also found in terms at [21],  in  line  with  the  sentencing
    judge, that it was not peer influence that lay behind  the  appellant's
    offending. That finding is not challenged so the question of  the  role
    of returning to negative influences in his home cannot be a  matter  of
    importance when assessing the risk of reoffending.

15. In short, the panel's approach to the  appellant's  criminal  behaviour
    and risk of re-offending was sound, took into account material  matters
    and did not rely on immaterial matters. I did not find that the grounds
    showed any error in that regard.

16. The grounds also argue that the First-tier Tribunal  was  in  error  in
    finding that the appellant did not have ties in  the  Netherlands.  The
    appellant had spent the first 9 years of his life  there,  those  being
    formative years and had been educated there.

17. Mr Diwyncz conceded at the hearing that this ground  had  little  merit
    given that the appellant had spent over half of his life  and  most  of
    his formative years in the UK. That appeared to me  to  be  a  sensible
    concession where those facts were so and the panel accepted at [18] the
    evidence of the appellant's mother that he had little if any  knowledge
    of Dutch and no longer had contacts there.

18. For completeness sake I noted that the grant of  permission  to  appeal
    refers to the question of the appellant having almost acquired 10 years
    residence as an EEA national by the time of his conviction.  The  panel
    indicated in terms at [22] that they did not accept that the  appellant
    was entitled to any weight on a "near  miss"  argument.  EEA  case  law
    indicates that they were required to assess the degree of  integration,
    the appellant's length of residence being clearly material to  such  an
    assessment; Onuekwere (Case C-378/12) CJEU (Second Chamber), 16 January
    applied. No error arises from the approach  taken  to  the  appellant's
    length of residence.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 25 July 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
