
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/00080/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2019                   |On 13 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                              TRIBHUVAN DINESH
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Symes, of Counsel, instructed by Ronald
Fletcher and Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms I Vijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 1 November 2019 in  respect
         of  the  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Veloso,
         promulgated on 18 July 2019 following a hearing at Hatton Cross  on
         18 June 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Portuguese national of Indian ethnicity born  on
         8 March 1999. He claims to have entered the UK in October 2014.  He
         was issued with a residence card under the EEA  Regulations  on  26
         January 2017 but thereafter received three convictions for offences
         involving violence and for failing to comply with the  requirements
         of a community  order.   A  deportation  order  was  signed  on  21
         November 2018.

      3. Judge Veloso heard oral evidence from the  appellant,  his  parents
         and his  sister  but  found  that  their  evidence  was  internally
         inconsistent and also at odds  with  one  another's  accounts  with
         respect to what the appellant had  done  here  since  his  arrival,
         where he had been living, whether he had  lived  continuously  with
         them as a family,  whether  he  or  his  family  had  travelled  to
         Portugal and whether he had relatives in  Portugal  or  India.  She
         found that the appellant had not accepted  responsibility  for  his
         actions and had taken no steps to address his offending  behaviour.
         She considered that rehabilitation would be available  for  him  in
         Portugal. She concluded that  he  had  not  completed  five  years'
         residence in the UK and that his continued presence  represented  a
         genuine and sufficiently serious threat affecting the  fundamentals
         interests of society. As a decision had been made on  human  rights
         by the respondent, the judge also proceeded to consider  article  8
         but found that there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
         appellant's   integration   into   Portugal   and   no   compelling
         circumstances. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

      4. The grounds for permission to appeal  essentially  argue  that  the
         judge failed to carry out an adequate  proportionality  assessment,
         that she  failed  to  take  account  of  matters  relating  to  the
         offending (although these are not specified), matters  relating  to
         the health and economic situation  of  the  appellant  and  matters
         relating to rehabilitation. It is maintained that there is  a  high
         threshold for the respondent to satisfy  in  such  cases  and  that
         consideration of the suitability of deportation or the availability
         of  other  less   onerous   alternatives   is   absent   from   the
         determination.

      5. The grounds also argue that the judge erred in considering  article
         8 factors and the provisions of ss. 117A-D,  matters  found  to  be
         beyond the court's jurisdiction in EEA appeals.




         The Hearing

      6. Mr Symes relied upon the grounds in his submissions at the  hearing
         on 6 December 2019. He submitted that the  judge  did  not  mention
         proportionality until paragraph 53 and that was after findings  had
         already been made. He referred to the matters the  judge  was  said
         not to have considered (as at paragraph 4 above) and relied on Essa
         (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration)   [2013]   UKUT   00316   (IAC).
         Reliance on an unreported case was withdrawn. He submitted that the
         judge had also  erred  in  looking  at  article  8  which  was  not
         appropriate although he accepted that was not his strongest  point.
         He submitted that an immediate re-hearing would not be  appropriate
         because there were five witnesses. He  sought  a  de  novo  hearing
         before the First-tier Tribunal.

      7. In response, Ms Vijiwala submitted that the grounds  were  no  more
         than a disagreement with the judge's decision. Contrary to what was
         argued, the judge  had  considered  the  appellant's  health,  age,
         personal circumstances and the offence at paragraph  51;  paragraph
         53 contained her conclusion after consideration  of  those  matters
         and after findings had been made. She had also given  consideration
         to the availability of rehabilitation in Portugal. She  noted  that
         the appellant had taken no steps to rehabilitate himself in the  UK
         or to address his behaviour and his  further  offending  was  taken
         into account (at 24 and 27). His economic situation was  considered
         at paragraph 50. Adverse credibility findings were made in  respect
         of all the witnesses. The judge found that there  were  connections
         to Portugal, that the appellant's grandfather had lived there, that
         his father had been too and that the appellant could go  there  and
         his family could assist him.

      8. It was submitted that the judge addressed article 8 because it  had
         been considered by the Secretary of State. Ms Vijiwala argued  that
         usually there were no removal directions in EEA cases  and  so  the
         consideration of article 8  was  unnecessary  but  as  this  was  a
         deportation case, removal was a  pertinent  issue.  The  judge  was
         right to consider article 8. No challenge had been  made  to  those
         findings; only the fact that  she  had  considered  article  8  was
         criticised. In any event, that ground was immaterial as  the  judge
         had fully considered the case under the EEA Regulations.

      9. Mr Symes replied. He submitted that whilst the judge had considered
         rehabilitation in Portugal, she had not taken account of the  steps
         towards rehabilitation taken in the UK. When  I  asked  what  those
         steps were, Mr Symes said the appellant had stopped  drinking.   He
         submitted that the appellant had shown remorse in that he had  felt
         bad about what how his actions had affected his family. It did  not
         matter that he had not referred to the victims in  his  expressions
         of remorse. The determination failed to engage  with  the  evidence
         and the efforts at rehabilitation. The decision should be set aside
         and the matter remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         decision to be made.

     10. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.




         Discussion and Conclusions

     11. I have considered all the evidence before me and have had regard to
         the submissions  made.  I  reach  my  decision  only  after  having
         considered the evidence as a whole.

     12. The  grounds  and  the  submissions  raise  no  matters  that  were
         disregarded by the judge in her determination. The outcome may  not
         have been what the appellant was hoping for but that does not  make
         mean that there are errors of law  in  the  judge's  decision.  The
         complaint  raised   about   the   proportionality   assessment   is
         essentially a matter of format over  substance  in  that  the  term
         'proportionality' was not referred to earlier in the determination.
         There is no merit in that argument. It is plain that the judge  was
         fully aware of her obligations under the Regulations (at 9-10)  and
         that her reasoning and  findings  (at  15-54)  show  that  she  was
         assessing the proportionality of the decision.  Had  she  not  have
         been doing so, it is difficult to understand what the consideration
         of all the factors set out at length in those paragraphs was  aimed
         at.

     13. The grounds and Mr Symes' submissions complain that  three  matters
         were not considered by the judge. The first was matters relating to
         the offending. What these matters were has  never  been  clarified.
         Other than this blanket assertion in the grounds, no specifics  are
         given and Mr Symes  did  not  address  this  at  the  hearing.  The
         appellant's history of offending is set out at paragraph 2. This is
         further discussed at paragraphs 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26,  27
         and 32.  Without knowing what matters should have been included,  I
         cannot find any merit in the first complaint. It is plain that  the
         judge did have regard to the appellant's offending.

     14. The second complaint is that the judge failed  to  have  regard  to
         matters relating to the appellant's  health,  family  and  economic
         situation. That is wholly inaccurate. The  appellant  was  born  in
         March 1999 (at 1). There is nothing remarkable about  the  fact  of
         his  age.  He  is  neither  a  minor  nor  elderly.  His  age   was
         specifically taken into account,  however,  at  paragraph  51.  The
         judge also noted the issue of health, noting  that  no  issues  had
         been raised about his health (at 50). She found that he was healthy
         (at 51). The probation officer was also satisfied that  there  were
         no mental health issues (at 20). It is difficult to see  what  more
         could  have  been  said  in   those   circumstances.   His   family
         circumstances were dealt with at length,  with  the  judge  finding
         that the evidence of the  appellant  and  his  family  members  was
         significantly discrepant to the extent that they contradicted  each
         other over whether or not they had always lived together in the UK,
         about the appellant's schooling, whether or not  he  had  lived  in
         Leicester and what he had been doing  here.  No  explanations  have
         been offered for the inconsistencies on  such  basic  matters.  For
         those reasons, the judge properly concluded that she could  not  be
         satisfied that the appellant had shown any established  connections
         with his parents and siblings (at 47). There was no evidence called
         or placed before the judge as to the appellant's economic situation
         but it was a matter she nevertheless considered  (at  50-51).   She
         found that he would be able to work.

     15. The third complaint is that the judge did not  consider  the  steps
         taken towards rehabilitation. This turns out to be  one  step;  the
         claim  of  having  stopped  drinking.  The  judge  noted  that  the
         appellant's  attempt  to  blame  all  his  offending   on   alcohol
         consumption, which he claimed was a problem for him,  did  not  fit
         well with the evidence (at 17-23). She also, contrary  to  what  is
         argued, did have regard to his claim to have stopped  drinking  (at
         17, 23, 29, 30 and 31). She  noted,  however,  that  there  was  no
         supporting evidence of this claim such as the attendance of any  AA
         meetings or any other group. It  is  unclear,  therefore,  what  is
         meant  by  the  submission  that  the  appellant's  steps   towards
         rehabilitation in the UK were not considered. It is  not  suggested
         that his family could assist  him  in  addressing  his  behavioural
         problems; indeed, they do not seem to have helped  at  all  in  the
         past. Nor is it maintained that  the  appellant  has  attended  any
         groups or classes to address his  offending.  In  fact,  the  judge
         found that he had continued to minimise his offending and had shown
         no remorse for the impact of his behaviour on his  victims.  Whilst
         Mr Symes argued that was immaterial, the judge was entitled to take
         it into account when  assessing  all  the  evidence.  The  evidence
         before the judge was of a man who had continued to  offend  over  a
         number of years, who had shown little regard for the law; in  fact,
         the second more violent assault he committed was at a time when  he
         was the subject of a Community Order (at 27 and 32).  The  evidence
         of his ties and integration was weak and inconsistent. It was  open
         to the judge, on the evidence, to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
         continued presence in the UK represented  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently serious threat affecting the fundamental interests  of
         society (at 53).

     16. There was no obligation on the judge to consider other alternatives
         to deportation and indeed no submissions were made to her  on  that
         point.

     17. The next ground was that the judge erred by considering article  8.
         It is plain that she did so because the respondent had made a human
         rights decision (at 55). Furthermore the appellant  himself  raised
         article 8  in  his  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         decision. At paragraphs 10-15, it was maintained that the appellant
         has established a private and family life in the UK which should be
         assessed. In those circumstances, it is difficult to  see  how  the
         judge can be criticised for doing exactly what the appellant  asked
         for.

     18. I have considered Amirteymour [2017] EWCA Civ 353 relied on in  the
         grounds and in Mr Symes' submissions; however, that related  to  an
         appeal brought against the refusal of a derivative residence  card.
         The issue there was whether a human  rights  challenge  to  removal
         could be brought where no s.120 notice had been served and where no
         decision to remove had been made. In this case, a s.120 notice  was
         served (page 6 of the decision letter of 14 November 2018) and,  as
         Ms Vijiwala pointed out, the issue of removal  was  live.   In  any
         event, even if the judge erred in this regard, it is immaterial  as
         she considered the matter under the EEA quite separately.

     19. It follows, therefore, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  no
         material errors of law and her decision stands.







         Decision

     20. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands.  The  appeal  is
         dismissed.




         Anonymity

     21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  order  and  no
         request for one was made to me.




    Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 9 December 2019
