
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00193/2013
     AA/01510/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 19 September 2014                         |On 12 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SCS
                                     IFD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss L Mair, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondents SCS and IFD are respectively citizens  of  Jamaica  and
    Zimbabwe.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondents as the first  and
    second appellants and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent  (as
    they appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  April  1998.   In
    January 2010, he pleaded guilty to two counts of possession of a  class
    A drug with intention to supply and was sentenced to  three  years  and
    four months' imprisonment.  The second appellant,  having  entered  the
    United Kingdom initially as a visitor in 2002, was served with a notice
    of intention to remove in April 2007.  She appeals against the decision
    to remove her on human rights and asylum grounds.  In her determination
    at [55], Judge Foudy, in a determination  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    second appellant's asylum appeal  and  allowed  the  first  appellant's
    appeal against deportation and the second appellant's appeal  on  human
    rights grounds, wrote:

         ... [the second appellant's]  human  rights  appeal  overlaps  very
         significantly with that of the first appellant as they are partners
         and have a young child together.  The respondent concedes  that  it
         is unreasonable to separate that family unit therefore if the first
         appellant succeeds in his appeal the second appellant will  succeed
         in her human rights appeal.  I shall  therefore  turn  now  to  the
         appeal of the first appellant.

 3. The second appellant has not appealed against the decision of the judge
    to dismiss her asylum/Article 3 ECHR  appeal.   The  first  appellant's
    family circumstances are complicated.  He has two children  (K  and  S)
    who are British citizens.  He has a further son (JJ) whose  nationality
    is not certain.  He does not appear to be a British citizen.  He has  a
    nephew (M) who has leave to remain as does another son (J).  JJ is  the
    natural child of the first and second appellants.

 4. The deportation decision in respect of the first appellant is dated  14
    January 2013.  In a thorough and detailed  determination,  Judge  Foudy
    rejected as incredible the  second  appellant's  account  of  being  at
    serious risk of harm in  Zimbabwe.   She  found  [65]  that  the  first
    appellant is a good father to his children.   She  properly  considered
    the  severity  of  the  first  appellant's  offending  and  the  public
    revulsion which it might generate [60].  She found, however, [63]  that
    the first appellant is not an habitual offender but "a weak man who saw
    an easy way to obtain money when he  was  facing  financial  hardship."
    She found that it was unlikely that the first  appellant  would  offend
    again.  Navigating her way through  the  complex  family  relationships
    between siblings, half-siblings and cousins, she  considered  that  the
    interests of J and M were, if taken alone, insufficient to displace the
    public  interest  concerned  with  the  appellant's  deportation  [67].
    However, she considered it important in her Article 8 ECHR analysis  to
    have regard to J and M as part of a "wider sibling group."   She  heard
    evidence from a number of witnesses, including  the  first  appellant's
    former partner.  She considered that it was unlikely that, if the first
    appellant was deported, that contact would continue between J and M and
    K and S; there is considerable hostility between the appellant's former
    wife and his former partner.  The judge concluded at [70] that, if  the
    first appellant were deported,  "all  meaningful  contact  between  the
    older and  younger  siblings  would  quickly  cease."   The  judge  was
    assisted in reaching that finding by the  sight  of  a  CAFCASS  Report
    concerning K and S.   As  with  the  other  children,  when  viewed  in
    isolation, the judge was not persuaded that the interests of  JJ  alone
    would outweigh the public interest.  However, she regarded JJ  also  as
    part of the wider sibling group.  At [74], she concluded:

         I therefore conclude that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  is
         certainly not in the best interests of  K  and  S  who  would  risk
         losing more than just a father in their  everyday  lives  but  also
         siblings.  Moreover, I find that the public interest in reinforcing
         family life and  avoiding  the  need  for  state  intervention  and
         childcare would not be met by the appellant's deportation.

 5. In her helpful skeleton argument, Miss Mair  analyses  the  grounds  of
    appeal as follows:

         (a)  The judge erred in law by  failing  to  make  findings  as  to
             whether  paragraph  399  of  HC  395  applied  to  the   first
             respondent's Article 8 rights; the judge proceeded to  conduct
             a balancing exercise.

         (b)  the public interest was  not  properly  balanced  against  the
             first respondent's circumstances; the factors falling  against
             the first respondent were not properly balanced with reference
             to the public interest considerations in OH Serbia

         (c)  the  second  respondent's  Article  8  assessment  was  flawed
             because the judge did not

                  'Consider whether there were any arguably good grounds  to
                  consider Article 8 outside of the  Immigration  Rules  and
                  whether  there  were  any  compelling  circumstances   not
                  sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules as per
                  Nagre'

 6.  Having  considered  the  papers  carefully  together  with  the   oral
    submissions of both representatives,  I  find  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal should be dismissed.  I have reached that conclusion for
    the following reasons.  First, I agree with Miss Mair  that  the  judge
    did not err  in  law  by  carrying  out  a  balancing  exercise  having
    concluded (albeit briefly) that the first appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules.  I find that it
    is not helpful to speak in terms of a "hurdle" or "test."  An appellant
    must show that there exist exceptional  circumstances.   In  MM  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985 the Court of Appeal observed at [129]

         Sales J's  decision  therefore  follows  the  logic  of  Laws  LJ's
         statements in [38]-[39] of AM(Ethiopia), analysed  above.  However,
         there is  a  difference  in  that  in  Nagre  the  new  rules  were
         themselves attempting to cover, generally, circumstances  where  an
         individual should be allowed to remain  in  the  UK  on  Article  8
         grounds; whereas in AM(Ethiopia) and in  the  present  appeals  the
         rule challenged stipulates a particular requirement that has to  be
         fulfilled before the applicant will be allowed to enter or  remain.
         The argument in each case is that it is that  specific  requirement
         that offends Article 8. Nagre does not add anything to the  debate,
         save for the statement that if a particular person is  outside  the
         rule  then  he  has  to  demonstrate,  as  a   preliminary   to   a
         consideration outside the rule, that he has an arguable  case  that
         there may be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the
         rules.  I  cannot  see  much  utility  in  imposing  this  further,
         intermediary, test. If the applicant cannot satisfy the rule,  then
         there either is or there is not a further  Article  8  claim.  That
         will have to be determined by the relevant decision-maker.

    Likewise, in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at  [44]  the  Court  of
    Appeal indicated that a balancing exercise was likely to be necessary:

         We would, therefore, hold that the new rules are  a  complete  code
         and that the exceptional circumstances  to  be  considered  in  the
         balancing exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality
         test as required by the Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  We  accordingly
         respectfully do not agree with the UT that  the  decision-maker  is
         not "mandated or directed" to  take  all  the  relevant  article  8
         criteria into account (para 38).

 7. Secondly, as I have noted above, the judge was  very  careful  to  give
    proper weight  to  the  severity  of  the  first  appellant's  criminal
    offending.  I find that she adequately considered the  public  interest
    concerned with his deportation.  The  Secretary  of  State  appears  to
    argue that the judge should have  given  even  greater  weight  to  the
    public interest but, with respect, that is  not  the  point.   This  is
    certainly not a case in which the judge has ignored or played down  the
    public interest.  Indeed, she has made it very clear  that  the  appeal
    has  only  succeeded  because  of  the  complex  interaction   of   the
    relationships between the various children involved.  She was right  to
    point out that, viewed in isolation, that  the  rights  of  each  child
    would not have been sufficient to outweigh the public interest.  I find
    that the outcome of the appeal was clearly available to the  judge  and
    she has supported it with cogent and adequate reasoning.

 8. Finally, there is no merit in the Secretary of State's assertion in the
    grounds of appeal that the  judge  improperly  allowed  the  Article  8
    appeal of the second appellant.  The grounds overlook the  contents  of
    [55] of the determination which I have set out above.  I  can  find  no
    reason to doubt that, before the First-tier Tribunal, the  respondent's
    representative made the concession which the judge records at [55] that
    it is not possible for the respondent  to  seek  to  resile  from  that
    concession at this stage.

 9. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 14 November 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 19 November 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





