
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00342/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 October 2014                              |On 10 November 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR IEAN THOMAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reference the parties are referred  to  hereafter  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal  so  that  Mr  Thomas  is  now  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State is the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 9 April 1979.  On
    4 February 2014 the respondent decided  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him.  It was said in the decision that on 11 June 2013 at Inner
    London Crown Court he was convicted of supplying a  controlled  drug  -
    Class A - cocaine.  In fact this  was  clearly  a  mistake  and  it  is
    apparent that his conviction was in fact some nine years earlier  on  4
    May 2004.  In respect of that conviction he received a sentence of four
    years' imprisonment on each of  five  counts  of  supplying  controlled
    drugs, such sentences to run concurrently.

 3. It does not appear to be in dispute that on 31 July 2010 the  appellant
    applied for a certificate of marriage but this was refused on 23  March
    2011 as he was an overstayer having arrived here on  1  November  2000.
    He was cautioned by the police for assault on  16  September  2011  and
    convicted on 10 June 2013 of possessing a Class  B  controlled  drug  -
    cannabis resin - and given a conditional discharge for twelve months.

 4. The appellant appealed against the  decision  to  deport  him  and  the
    matter  came  before  a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In   a
    determination promulgated on 9 June 2014 the panel allowed the  appeal.



 5. The respondent sought permission to  appeal.   In  the  grounds  it  is
    asserted that although the panel correctly identified that "exceptional
    circumstances"  means  "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences"  or   "very
    compelling reasons" they have undertaken a standalone consideration  of
    what is unjustifiably harsh without considering  the  entirety  of  the
    family and private life Rules.  Had they directed themselves  correctly
    they would have noted that as the appellant was sentenced to  a  period
    of imprisonment of at least four years the government's view,  endorsed
    by Parliament, is that deportation would  ordinarily  be  proportionate
    even if the appellant (sentence notwithstanding) met  the  requirements
    of paragraph 399(a) of the said Rules.

 6. The submission is that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its  assessment
    of the public interest.  The panel failed to provide sufficient reasons
    why the effect of deportation on the  appellant's  children  outweighed
    the public interest in deporting the appellant.   In  considering  that
    public interest the panel gave great weight to the lack of reoffending,
    which is arguably irrelevant given the seriousness of  the  appellant's
    criminal history or, if  not  irrelevant,  then  the  "last"  important
    public interest consideration.  Given that the appellant is still using
    drugs and has not rehabilitated he runs the risk  of  being  in  prison
    once more and therefore it would not be in his best interests to remain
    in the UK.

 7. It is further submitted that the Tribunal also failed to recognise that
    a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years  reflects  the  most
    serious level of offending so that a sentence of more than  four  years
    can never be spent.  Although there may have been a delay  in  pursuing
    the appellant's deportation after his conviction (in 2004) there is  no
    evidence that the Secretary of State was aware of his conviction  until
    the deportation was pursued.  Given that he was refused  a  certificate
    of approval due to overstaying there is no  evidence  that  a  criminal
    conviction check was required to be carried out.  It is submitted  that
    there is no evidence that the Secretary  of  State  even  knew  of  the
    appellant's whereabouts until the  application  for  a  certificate  of
    approval was made as he had used an alias in the  past.   It  is  clear
    that the appellant has not rehabilitated as he has been found to be  in
    possession of cannabis recently and has denied responsibility for  this
    by blaming a friend and claiming it was  a  lesser  category  of  drugs
    which  completely  ignores  the  fact  that  it  is  still  an  illegal
    substance.  It clearly demonstrates also that the  appellant  is  still
    associating with  negative  influences  so  there  remains  a  risk  of
    reoffending and harm to the public in future.

 8. The final submission is that the Tribunal has failed  to  carry  out  a
    thorough  assessment  taking  into  consideration  society's  revulsion
    against  such  serious  crime  and  the  deterrence  of  other  foreign
    criminals.

 9. In his oral submissions Mr Avery said that the appellant was  tried  in
    2004 in a different name and he had given a different  date  of  birth.
    There is no reason why the Secretary of State would have been  notified
    of the conviction and the criticism in the determination about delay is
    unjustified.  The alleged  delay  formed  a  significant  part  of  the
    panel's reasoning in the appeal being allowed.

10. Before me the appellant said that he had told officers  his  real  name
    but they simply told him to tell the judge, and he did so.

11. On a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal
    the judge granting permission found that it is arguable that the  panel
    erred in its approach to the balancing exercise when it considered  the
    issue of exceptionality.  The panel did not refer  to  paragraphs  398,
    399 and 399A of the Immigration  Rules.   The  panel  appears  to  have
    assumed that paragraphs 399 and 399A were not applicable and  therefore
    did not need to be mentioned.  However, in so doing, it arguably failed
    to appreciate that as the appellant's case fell within paragraph 398(a)
    his circumstances and those of his partner and children had to be  over
    and above those set out in paragraphs 399  and  399A  to  outweigh  the
    State's interests.  If the panel has made this  error  it  is  arguable
    that it did not  approach  the  balancing  exercise  from  the  correct
    starting point.

12. The judge granting permission wrote also that it is  evident  that  the
    circumstances of this family are unusual.  In addition it may  be  that
    the long delay in the respondent taking deportation  action  after  the
    conviction for which the appellant was sentenced  to  a  term  of  four
    years' imprisonment reduces the weight  to  be  given  to  the  State's
    interests.  The comment is also made that unusual as the  circumstances
    may be in this case it is not possible to say that there  is  only  one
    outcome on the facts as found by the panel.

My deliberations

13. I note that the appellant was unrepresented at the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  He appeared in person before me also.  The panel  heard  oral
    evidence from him and made a finding that he is an honest and  credible
    witness who did not seek  to  embellish  his  evidence  at  any  stage.
    Examples were given and there  is  no  challenge  to  that  credibility
    finding.  From what they wrote therefore the panel must  have  accepted
    that the appellant's alias of Simon Merchant was imposed  upon  him  by
    the arresting police officer in 2004 and that  the  appellant  notified
    the judge at his trial of his true identity as Iean Thomas.

14. It is reasonable to conclude, as the panel did,  that  the  appellant's
    release from prison in 2006 coincided with the (then) Home  Secretary's
    criticism of the Home Office's conduct  relating  to  foreign  national
    prisoners.  The panel found it unusual that  the  appellant's  criminal
    conduct did not fall for consideration at that time.  The  panel  noted
    that the appellant established  a  stable  domestic  existence  shortly
    after his release  from  prison  and  came  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities in 2011 and 2013.  He also made  direct  contact  with  the
    respondent in 2010 when he sought permission to marry.  His application
    for a certificate of approval was refused on the exclusive  grounds  of
    his immigration status as an overstayer.  No reference was made to  his
    first conviction which the panel found and was entitled  to  find,  was
    reasonable to expect was within the respondent's  contemplation   "with
    relative ease".

15.  The  respondent  finally  took  exception  to  the  appellant's  first
    conviction nine years after the event and seven years after his release
    from prison.  The respondent  did  not  assert  that  the  caution  and
    conditional discharge in 2011 and  2013  respectively  formed  part  of
    their decision to make  a  deportation  order  but  in  any  event  the
    sentences in relation to the subsequent offences demonstrate  that  the
    appellant was not considered to be of any significant threat to law and
    public order.

16. The panel recognised that under Rule 396 of the Immigration  Rules  the
    presumption shall be that where a person is liable to  deportation  the
    public  interest  requires  deportation  and  later  stated  that   "it
    therefore follows  that  the  appellant  must  demonstrate  exceptional
    circumstances to succeed at appeal".  The  panel  recognised  that  the
    appellant's  claim  under  Article  8  "may"  also  be  considered   in
    conjunction with Rule 398 of the Immigration Rules.  Although  the  use
    of the word "may" is not seemingly appropriate, in context it does  not
    appear to be a material misdirection.

17. The panel has not referred specifically to paragraphs 399 and 399A  and
    their relationship to paragraph 398.  The  panel  recognised  and  made
    findings in relation to the appellant's demonstration that  exceptional
    circumstances  must  exist  in  accordance  with  the  Rules  and  that
    "significant evidence" had  to  be  provided  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deporting the appellant from the UK.

18. Although it may be a matter of argument  as  to  whether  the  evidence
    considered  in  the  round  demonstrates   that   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences would befall the children should the appellant  leave  the
    UK (para 59) the panel reasoned why it came to  that  conclusion.   The
    panel was mindful of the  circumstances  in  which  the  children  find
    themselves.  There are five of them - one is the appellant's  stepchild
    - and the youngest child was found to be especially vulnerable  as  she
    has Down's Syndrome.  Enquiries of the  appropriate  Children  Services
    brought the response that:

         "It is imperative that Mr Thomas  is  involved  in  the  children's
         lives due to the high levels of concern raised by professionals  in
         relation to his partner's care of all 5 children, and  that  should
         the appellant not be granted Leave to Remain in  the  UK  it  would
         cause a high level of stress to the children's  lives  as  well  as
         disruption in their daily routines and in my  view  would  be  very
         detrimental to the children's safety as  well  as  their  emotional
         well-being."  (Paragraph 21 of the refusal letter)

19. I note that the respondent telephoned Children's Services earlier  this
    year who informed  the  respondent  that  the  children  had  not  been
    attending  school  but  that  steps  were  underway  to  assist   their
    reintegration into school.  The person  of  whom  enquiries  were  made
    stated that in her opinion should  the  appellant  be  deported  "they"
    would have serious concerns as to the children's  mother's  ability  to
    cope with the needs of the children, particularly in  relation  to  the
    youngest who has Down's Syndrome.

20. In the report of 17 October 2013 it was said that the main  worries  in
    terms of unmet needs were not in relation to  the  children's  physical
    care but to their emotional care.  It was evident that their mother was
    causing emotional harm to all  her  children  through  harsh  emotional
    expression to them and carrying such negative feelings to them.

21. The panel was especially mindful that the children may find  themselves
    in residential care should the appellant leave the UK and decided  that
    it could not be in the children's  best  interests  to  be  taken  into
    residential care if  that  happened.   The  panel  went  on  to  decide
    (paragraphs  52  and  53)  that  the  evidence  demonstrates  that  the
    appellant does not pose a  risk  to  wider  society.  The  respondent's
    failure to act with reasonable diligence and  the  appellant's  general
    conduct since 2006 supports that finding.   Had  the  respondent  taken
    action to deport the appellant in 2006 or within a reasonable timescale
    thereafter the panel's conclusion may well have been different.

22. Although the respondent takes exception to the comment that it is clear
    that the appellant's whereabouts were known to the authorities  at  all
    material times and  the  respondent  only  chose  to  act  against  the
    appellant almost one decade after the event there is no good reason  to
    suppose that the respondent could not have ascertained the  appellant's
    whereabouts upon or after release.  In those circumstances although the
    appellant's status in the UK could be said to be precarious so much has
    happened since his release from prison  in  terms  of  his  family  and
    private life that the  panel  reasoned  and  found  that  those  events
    outweigh the public interest in deporting the appellant  from  the  UK.
    Read in the round it is clear enough that the  panel  appreciated  that
    the appellant's circumstances and those of the children and his partner
    had to be of greater exception than those set out in paragraphs 399 and
    399A to outweigh the State's interests. This is a thorough and reasoned
    decision.

23. For these reasons and although it was not the only conclusion to  which
    the panel could have come I do not find that there are such  errors  in
    the determination that  require  the  decision  to  be  set  aside  for
    material error of law or for any other good reason.

24. Having made that finding and announced it at the hearing  I  note  with
    interest a letter dated 29 May 2014 from the appellant's solicitors who
    are acting for him in relation to his role as father of the children in
    care proceedings. That letter was before the panel but at the time  the
    outcome of the care proceedings was not known.

25. The appellant produced a further letter from those solicitors dated  16
    October 2014 which although not relevant to the application  before  me
    indicates that the children's mother has refused to take responsibility
    for the ongoing care of the children. An order has now been  made  that
    the children should live with Mr Thomas and they do so in accommodation
    separate from their mother. The appellant is  therefore  currently  the
    children's sole carer, it appears.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel stands.

27. I was not addressed on the matter of anonymity but  in  the  particular
    circumstances and because the children have  not  been  named  in  this
    decision I do not find that  the  circumstances  require  that  such  a
    direction be made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton               7 November 2014

