


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
DA/00381/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                 |              Decision & Reasons      |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 1 February 2018                  |              On 5 February 2018      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                BRAJAN DROZD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS




   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      ('SSHD') against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  ('FTT')  dated
      20 September 2017, in which it allowed the appeal  of  the  respondent
      ('the claimant').


   2. The claimant was assisted by a Mr Tomeczek  of  Bluestone  Legal  Ltd,
      during the course of the hearing.  Mr Tomeczek accepted  that  he  was
      not qualified in this jurisdiction but was able to assist the claimant
      to understand the  submissions  being  made  and  the  relevant  legal
      framework, in order to respond to the SSHD's grounds of appeal.



Background

   3. The claimant is a citizen of Poland, and therefore an EEA citizen.  He
      was born in 1997 and entered the UK with his mother in  2006  when  he
      was 8 years old.  He has remained in the UK since this  time  and  not
      returned to Poland.


   4. In her decision dated 27 June 2017 making a deportation order  against
      the claimant, the SSHD  noted  that  the  claimant  was  convicted  of
      robbery on 15 February 2016 and burglary on 5 May 2016, and  sentenced
      to a total of 45 months detention in  a  Young  Offender  Institution.
      The SSHD did not accept that the claimant acquired a  permanent  right
      of residence or had resided in the UK for a continuous  period  of  10
      years and therefore assessed whether his deportation was justified  on
      grounds of public policy or public security.

FTT decision under appeal

   5. The FTT focused its attention almost entirely upon whether or not  the
      claimant had acquired a period of  10-years  residence  prior  to  his
      detention and concluded that he had.  The FTT therefore found that the
      claimant was entitled to benefit from the enhanced level of protection
      i.e. that his removal must  be  justified  on  imperative  grounds  of
      public security.


   6. The FTT decided this issue in the claimant's favour at [27].  The  FTT
      dealt with the issue in brief terms, finding that by the time that the
      claimant was "sent into detention...he had been lawfully  resident  in
      the UK for 10 years".

Grounds of appeal / submissions

   7. In her grounds of appeal, the SSHD submitted that  the  claimant  fell
      short of the requisite 10 years by some 8 months.  This was calculated
      as follows:  the only evidence supporting the claimant's residence  in
      the UK dated back to November 2006; and therefore by the time  of  his
      detention from 15 February 2016, he had not been  in  the  UK  for  10
      years.  The grounds of appeal did not clearly point out that following
      SSHD v MG [2014] EUECJ C-400/12 the 10-year  period  must  be  counted
      back from the date of the deportation  decision.   That  is  also  the
      position under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  ('the  2016
      Regulations') which state as follows (my emphasis):


                 "Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public
                 security and public health
                 27.-(1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an
                 EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
                 security or public health...
                 (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on
                 imperative grounds of public security in respect of an EEA
                 national who-
                 (a)has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                 period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                 decision; or..."

   8. I decided that this was an arguable obvious error of law, in the sense
      explained in Robinson v SSHD [1997] Imm AR 568, and granted  Mr  Bates
      permission to argue the point.


   9. Mr Bates also drew my attention to B v Land Badem-Wurttemberg and SSHD
      v Vomero (Directive 2004/38/EC), Joined Cases C-316/16  and  C-424/16,
      Opinion of AG Szpunar, delivered on 24 October 2017.  In response to a
      request for a preliminary ruling from the Supreme Court the AG reached
      the following conclusions:


   i) The acquisition of permanent residence is a pre-requisite  to  qualify
      for enhanced protection.
  ii) The 'previous ten years' residence required  for  enhanced  protection
      must be continuous, subject to reasonable absences.
 iii) Imprisonment allows doubt to be cast on integrative links  but  should
      not be excluded from the calculation of the 10-year period.
  iv) The expression  'the  previous  ten  years'  must  be  interpreted  as
      referring to a continuous period, calculated by looking back from  the
      precise time when the question of expulsion arises, that includes  any
      periods of absence  or  imprisonment,  provided  that  none  of  those
      periods of absence or imprisonment has had the effect of breaking  the
      integrative links with the host Member State.
   v) The overall assessment of integrative links cannot be confined  solely
      to the criteria of long-lasting settlement in the  host  Member  State
      and the absence of any link with the  Member  State  of  origin.  That
      assessment must instead take account of all the  relevant  factors  of
      the individual  case  and  must  take  place  at  the  time  when  the
      authorities are ruling on the expulsion decision.

  10. I then heard from the claimant and Mr Tomeczek, who reminded  me  that
      the FTT made an express finding of fact in the claimant's favour.


Error of law discussion

  11. The relevant legal framework is undoubtedly  complex  but  it  is  now
      sufficiently clear that the 10-year residency necessary for the  grant
      of enhanced protection in  Article  28(3)(a)  must  be  calculated  by
      counting back from the date of the  decision  ordering  that  person's
      expulsion - see regulation 3 of the 2016 Regulations  and  MG  v  SSHD
      (Case C-400/12), [2014] 2 CMLR 40, Warsame v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  16,
      SSHD v Vomero [2016] UKSC  49,  the  AG's  recent  opinion  in  Vomero
      (supra).


  12. In this case that would mean counting back from the deportation  order
      dated 27 June 2017.  The FTT did not adopt this approach  and  instead
      counted back from the date of the claimant's detention.   This  is  an
      error of law.  This error necessarily involved a further error of law.
       The First-tier Tribunal failed to consider all the  relevant  factors
      and  the  degree  of  integration  involved,  given   the   claimant's
      imprisonment from February 2016 for two serious offences, prior to the
      deportation decision.

  13. In MG (prison-Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Direction) Portugal  [2014]
      UKUT 392 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  made  it  clear  that  the  ECJ's
      judgment in SSHD v MG should be understood as meaning that a period of
      imprisonment during the relevant 10 years does not necessarily prevent
      a person from qualifying for enhanced protection  if  that  person  is
      sufficiently integrated, albeit a period of imprisonment must  have  a
      negative impact in so far as establishing  integration  is  concerned.
      In Warsame (supra) the Court of Appeal appears to have accepted at [9]
      that there is a "maybe" category of case where a person has resided in
      the host state for the 10 years prior to imprisonment depending on  an
      overall assessment of whether integrating links have been broken,  and
      that in such cases it might be relevant to  determine  the  degree  of
      integration in the host state and the extent to which links  with  the
      original member state have been broken.  The  AG  in  Vomero  made  it
      clear that  imprisonment  did  not  necessarily  break  continuity  of
      residence, albeit integrative links needed to be carefully considered.


  14. On any view, the FTT was required to count back from  June  2017,  and
      failed to do so.  It therefore failed to consider the  impact  of  the
      claimant's detention on his integrative links.   This  constitutes  an
      error of law and needs to be re-examined.

  15. Mr Bates submitted that this should be done afresh by another FTT.  Mr
      Bates also submitted that no findings  of  fact  should  be  preserved
      because the FTT provided inadequate reasons for finding  the  claimant
      had been continuously resident in the UK from 2006.   This  is  not  a
      criticism to be found in the grounds of appeal and it was too late  to
      raise this at the hearing.  There was no 'Robinson-obvious'  point  of
      law arising from the FTT's finding of fact that the  claimant  resided
      in the UK from 2006.  The FTT provided adequate reasons for  accepting
      this aspect of the claimant's evidence.  The reasons for this  finding
      are to be found at [25-27] and are adequate and were entirely open  to
      the FTT.  The FTT did not specify when in 2006 the claimant arrived in
      the UK and this is a matter that can be addressed upon remittal.

  16. This FTT has already assessed the evidence available to  it  and  made
      factual findings open to it that the appellant has  lived  in  the  UK
      continuously since 2006 and it would be proportionate for the same FTT
      to make further findings albeit counting back from  the  date  of  the
      deportation decision.

  17. There is the additional issue of whether  possession  of  a  right  to
      permanent residence is necessary for there to be enhanced  protection.
      Although the AG has concluded that it is a prerequisite, it should  be
      noted that the majority in the Supreme Court did not support that view
      (see [27] of its decision), and we are yet to hear from the ECJ on the
      subject.  The FTT shall need to reflect on the best course  given  the
      stage of the proceedings in Vomero and the extent  to  which  this  is
      likely to be a live issue in any event as the claimant resided in  the
      UK as a child / student for well over five years.

Remittal

  18. The decision should be remade by the FTT.  I have had regard  to  para
      7.2 of the relevant Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  and  the
      nature and extent of the factual findings  required  in  remaking  the
      decision, and I have decided that this is an appropriate case to remit
      to the same FTT.


  19. The FTT has already made factual  findings  regarding  the  claimant's
      residence in the UK.  These factual  findings  are  not  infected  any
      error of law.  The FTT has omitted to count back from  June  2017  and
      omitted to assess  integrative  links,  in  light  of  the  period  of
      detention.  It would be proportionate for the  same  FTT  to  consider
      these issues and make any further findings of  fact  relevant  at  the
      date of hearing bearing in mind that the claimant  has  been  released
      from prison on licence.

Decision

  20. The FTT decision contains a material error of law and is set aside.


  21. The appeal is remitted  to  the  same  FTT,  which  shall  remake  the
      decision in line with the preserved factual finding that the  claimant
      has resided in the UK since 2006.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
2 February 2018

