
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00110/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 August 2013                             |On 30 August 2013            |
|Prepared 23 August 2013                       |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                          walter emmanuel osejindu

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, who is believed to be a citizen of Nigeria, born  on  20
    April 1984 appeals, with permission, against  a  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Brenells and Mr G
    H Getlevog (Lay Member)) who in a determination promulgated on  16  May
    2013 dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to make a deportation order under the provisions  of
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant had been convicted on 17 May 2012  of  possession/control
    of identity documents with intent.  He was sentenced to fifteen months'
    imprisonment, the sentencing judge His Honour Judge Jones stating:-

         "You have pleaded guilty to possessing  false  identity  documents.
         You were endeavouring to get a national insurance number  with  the
         document you were using.  I give you full credit for admitting your
         guilt in relation to that matter  at  an  early  stage.   You  have
         antecedents which declare that you were born in 1984 and I am  told
         that  your  details  are  not  known  to  the  Nigerian  or  French
         authorities.  You have been before the courts on several occasions,
         some of those in  relation  to  motoring  offences,  no  insurance,
         driving whilst disqualified and the like but  on  one  occasion  on
         16th July 2010 you were before Maidstone Crown Court for possessing
         a false identity document when you  received,  following  a  prompt
         guilty plea, six months' imprisonment.  I am told that the document
         involved is the same or  a  copy  of  the  same  document  that  is
         involved on this occasion.  My hesitation in relation  to  sentence
         was whether on a guilty plea the  sentence  that  I  should  impose
         should be one of eighteen months' imprisonment or  a  little  less.
         The sentence  I  am  going  to  pass  is  one  of  fifteen  months'
         imprisonment having regard  to  that  previous  conviction,  it  is
         reduced from two years, the starting point on a contested matter to
         fifteen months' imprisonment.  You don't serve all of that time  in
         custody, you will serve no more than half  of  that  time,  seventy
         seven days I'm told by my clerk have  been  served  on  remand  and
         count towards that sentence in any event."


3.   Thereafter on 20 December 2012 the Secretary of State made  a  decision
    that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

4.   Having referred to the appellant's various offences  and  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules  the  notice  stated  that  it  was  noted  that  the
    appellant had a daughter with an  ex-girlfriend,  Jodie  Grimshaw,  but
    that there was no evidence that that  relationship  was  subsisting  or
    that the appellant had any relationship with his daughter.

5.   It was accepted that  the  appellant  had  a  partner,  Miss  Dominique
    Richardson who had visited him in prison.  It was considered  that  she
    would  be  able  to  accompany  the  appellant  to  Nigeria.   It   was
    emphasised, however,  that  the  appellant  had  not  put  forward  any
    evidence that his partner was a British citizen or that she was in  the
    United Kingdom legally.  In any event it was stated that the  appellant
    had  provided  no  documentary  evidence  that  would  demonstrate  the
    relationship was subsisting.  If it were, however, there was no  reason
    why Miss Richardson could not follow the appellant to Nigeria.

6.   Grounds of  appeal  lodged  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  stated  the
    appellant was of unconfirmed nationality but he believed  that  he  had
    been brought to Britain by his mother  whom  he  believed  was  French-
    Portuguese as a young child and that his mother had told  him  that  he
    had been born in France.  It was  claimed  in  the  grounds   that  the
    appellant had never known his father.  The grounds stated he had had  a
    number of relations in Britain of Nigerian origin.  It was claimed that
    the  appellant  had  endeavoured  to  establish  his  identity  without
    success.

7.   The appellant sent various letters to the UKBA asserting  that  he  had
    lived in Britain for many years and referring to his studies here.   He
    referred to visiting the French Embassy and expressing anger that there
    was no record of his birth in France.  He said that he had visited  the
    Home Office to "dig for  records  on  my  parents".   He  asserted  his
    honesty.

8.   The appellant had also referred to an application  which  he  had  made
    for a British passport and to his studies here.  He  gave  evidence  of
    some work which he had undertaken.

9.   The appellant's appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal  on  2  May
    2013.   Much  of  the  determination  is  a  recitation   of   relevant
    Immigration Rules but it is noted that the Tribunal recorded  receiving
    oral evidence from the appellant, Miss  Dominique  Richardson  and  Mrs
    Tracy Richardson.  They also noted various statements from  friends  of
    the appellant and his uncle, Benson Osejindu.

10.  In paragraphs 14 onwards they set out their  findings  of  fact.   They
    emphasised that there was no  documentary  evidence  to  establish  the
    appellant's claim that he had lived in Britain continuously for  twenty
    years.  They gave clear reasons for  that  decision  referring  to  the
    various statements produced by the  appellant's  friends.   They  noted
    that the respondent submitted documentary  evidence  which  showed  the
    appellant had registered with a GP practice in 2002 and had  stated  on
    that occasion that he had entered Britain in 2001.

11.  In paragraph 19 onwards they referred to the issue of  the  appellant's
    Article  8  rights.   They  accepted  the  appellant   had   formed   a
    relationship with Miss Richardson.  They stated there was  no  evidence
    to show that she would be unable to accompany the appellant to  Nigeria
    and that at the hearing she had indicated that she would  go  with  the
    appellant to Nigeria as she wanted her relationship with the  appellant
    to continue.  They found that Article 8 was engaged, that the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law and  would  be  for  a
    permissible reason.

12.  In paragraph 24 they stated:-

         "The Appellant has not established that he has ever had  the  legal
         right to be in the United Kingdom.  He has a  history  of  motoring
         offences including repeatedly driving whilst uninsured and  without
         having a licence.  There has been no evidence showing that  he  has
         ever passed a driving test  or  had  a  driving  licence.   On  two
         occasions he has been convicted of using false identity  documents,
         namely a French identity card or a copy of a French identity  card.
         He clearly wishes to remain and work in  the  United  Kingdom,  but
         having no right to do so is prepared to commit crimes in  order  to
         remain and work here.  He has said nothing which indicates that  he
         is prepared to cease offending.   Given  his  lack  of  immigration
         status he can only remain here by committing  further  offences  in
         order to do so - save in the  extremely  unlikely  event  that  the
         Secretary of State has a change of mind.  Given these  findings  we
         have concluded that the respondent's decision  is  a  proportionate
         response in all the circumstances considered in the round."


13.  They  therefore  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds as well as dismissing his appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.
    The appellant appealed, stating that he had known Miss Richardson since
    2009 and denying that Miss Richardson's daughter had said that she  had
    met him on her 19th birthday.  He said that he accepted the  fact  that
    he had never had the right to be in Britain and said that he had stated
    the reasons for his criminal history "was simply because I  have  never
    had a passport or an identity card that I can call mine and  lay  claim
    and ownership to".  He emphasised that he had "never been one  to  just
    wake up one morning and decide to break the law" and set out a  lengthy
    list of serious crimes which he had not committed.

14.  Although his application was refused in the First-tier, on  renewal  in
    the Upper Tier permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dawson.

15.  In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson stated:-

         "The grounds settled by the  appellant  refer  to  aspects  of  his
         private and family life in the UK and his concerns  about  what  he
         might face in Nigeria.  Whilst no arguable error can  be  found  in
         the Tribunal's treatment of the case under the  Immigration  Rules,
         the same cannot be said of its sparse discrete treatment of the Art
         8 grounds.   There  is  no  evaluation  of  the  private  life  the
         appellant refers to in his grounds nor  is  it  apparent  from  the
         determination what was said about this  at  the  hearing  when  the
         appellant appeared  in  person.   The  absence  of  clear  findings
         indicates arguable error.  It is arguable  that  the  treatment  of
         proportionality does not include the balancing exercise required of
         the  Tribunal  which  focuses  principally   on   the   appellant's
         criminality.  It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in predicating
         a continuation of private life on the basis that the appellant  can
         only remain by committing further offences."

16.  The grounds of appeal to which Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Dawson  referred
    did make various assertions that the appellant would  not  be  safe  in
    Nigeria, that he had nobody there, that his future  was  realistic  and
    achievable in Britain, that just because he had a Nigerian name he  was
    not necessarily a Nigerian, asked  "how  can  the  Secretary  of  State
    actually prove I am Nigerian?" and asserted that  he had never owned  a
    Nigerian passport and he had always believed that  he  was  British  or
    born in France prior to 2010.  He appeared to suggest that  because  he
    was the eldest child in the family his uncles might not wish to support
    him although he pointed out that the rest of the  family  were  all  in
    Britain.  He did say however that  he  had  been  to  colleges  and  to
    several universities and "meant to be studying for  my  MBA".   He  was
    also in a band, had a gig and kept an online blog site. He preferred to
    have a "very creative life".

17.  At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  the  appellant  appeared  in
    person.  I emphasised to him that he had  to  show  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination of the Tribunal.

18.   The appellant stated that firstly his partner was  now  pregnant  (she
    had not been pregnant at the time of the hearing) and that  he  had  no
    future in Nigeria.  He denied that he had ever indicated to the surgery
    that he had come to Britain in 2001 as alleged by  the  respondent  and
    said that he had visited the surgery on many  occasions.   He  said  he
    never claimed benefits and he had merely attempted to use the  identity
    card to obtain a national insurance number so he could work  here.   He
    said he tried to regularise his stay  in  Britain  by  applying  for  a
    British passport.  He referred to the letters from his various  friends
    here. The appellant referred to a letter dated 18 July  2013  which  he
    had written to the Upper Tribunal in which he  made  reference  to  the
    Magna Carta.  He  claimed  that  he  had  placed  "a  judiciary  review
    request" and emphasised that he considers that he was stateless  as  he
    did not have a Nigerian passport and that taking him away from his home
    in the United Kingdom "would be a breach of Article 4". In  the  letter
    he referred to his application for naturalisation in  2010  and  to  an
    application for a British passport.    That letter referred to the fact
    that his girlfriend was pregnant and stated that he believed  that  his
    father lived in Canada. The letter did not advance his claim there  was
    an error of law in the determination.

19.  Mr Tufan argued that the Tribunal had reached  conclusions  which  were
    open to them on the evidence.  He referred to the appellant's  criminal
    convictions and stated the appellant could not regularise his stay here
    - he did not qualify for a passport.  He referred to the  determination
    of the Tribunal in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set  aside)  [2013]
    UKUT 85 (IAC) arguing that it was not necessary  for  the  Tribunal  to
    give each and every reason for their decision.

20.  In reply the appellant stated that there were reasons as to why he  had
    been convicted for the motoring offences but he had not meant to  drive
    without insurance.

21.  I find that there are no material errors of law  in  the  determination
    of the Tribunal.  While I consider that it is odd  that,  in  paragraph
    24, when they deal with the issue of the proportionality of removal the
    Tribunal  did not refer  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  Miss
    Richardson  the  reality  is  that,  in  paragraph  20  when  they  had
    considered whether or not Article 8 was engaged, they had accepted that
    relationship and noted that Miss Richardson had said that she would  go
    with the appellant to Nigeria and they had found that there was nothing
    to suggest that she would be unable to accompany him.

22.  They were correct to place weight  on  the  appellant's  use  of  false
    identity documents and their comment that given that the appellant  had
    no right to work here he is prepared  to  commit  crimes  in  order  to
    remain and work here is actually a statement  of  fact.   He  used  the
    false documents in order to obtain a national  insurance  number  which
    would enable him to work here.

23.  I accept that they did not mention the appellant's studies here or  the
    fact that he has worked but the reality is that the appellant has never
    been entitled to work here and that those who come here  to  study  are
    expected to return to their own countries at the end of their  studies.
    It was obviously not an error of law  for  the  Tribunal  not  to  have
    anticipated that, after the hearing, Miss Richardson  might  find  that
    she was pregnant.

24.   It has not been argued that there was no power  in  law  to  make  the
    decision and, taking into account the fact that this is  a  deportation
    under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

25.  In all I consider that the conclusions of the  Tribunal  were  open  to
    them and that they are fully comprehensible.  I note the head  note  of
    the determination in Shizad which reads as follows:-

         "(1) Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation  of
             the conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material
             accepted by the judge.


         (2)  Although a decision may contain an  error  of  law  where  the
             requirements to give adequate reasons are not met,  the  Upper
             Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-
             tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of law, the
             fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the  relevant...
             unless the conclusions the judge draws from the  primary  data
             were not reasonably open to him or her."

26.  I consider that the determination is  intelligible  and  that  relevant
    factors have been taken into account  and  the  law  properly  applied.
    Nothing the appellant said pointed to any error of law and the  reality
    is that the   grounds of appeal, the correspondence form the appellant,
     and his assertions before me, particularly with regard to  his  family
    and  internally inconsistent to the extent that it would  be  difficult
    to believe anything that the appellant said.

27.  Having concluded that the determination of  the  Tribunal  contains  no
    material error of law I find that the decision dismissing  this  appeal
    on immigration and human rights grounds shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
