
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00882/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2017                            |On 13 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Hanson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Naik, Counsel and Mr A Bandegani, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the minor family members.

The Appeal

 2. This appeal was brought against a decision made on 29 April 2014  which
    refused to revoke a deportation order made in 2011 against MP.  MP  now
    seeks to argue that his deportation would amount to a  disproportionate
    breach of his rights under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. For the purposes of this decision I refer to MP as  the  appellant  and
    the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  as  the  respondent
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 4. This appeal has a somewhat complicated history. I set  out  only  those
    parts of the history that are relevant to this re-making of the Article
    8 ECHR challenge to the refusal to revoke the deportation order.

 5. MP was born in the Democratic Republic of  Congo  (DRC)  in  1987.   At
    around 2 years old his birth  mother  relinquished  responsibility  for
    him. Thereafter his father and his father's wife had responsibility for
    the appellant. There was no dispute before me that the appellant's step-
    mother has acted as his mother since he was aged  2  years  old  and  I
    refer to her in this decision as his mother.

 6. The appellant's father came to the UK in approximately 1993.  His  wife
    and their other two children joined him in approximately 1998  but  the
    appellant  remained  behind  with   paternal   relatives   because   of
    insufficient finances to enable him to travel as well. MP's parents and
    two siblings were granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  (ILR)  on  an
    exceptional basis on 1 May 2000.

 7. MP came to the UK illegally with a friend of his father's in  September
    2001.  He was just under 14 years old at that time. He was granted  ILR
    in line with the rest of his family on 18 September 2003.

 8. Between 2003 and 2004, whilst still a  minor,  the  appellant  received
    convictions for street robbery, possession of an offensive  weapon  and
    assault on a police officer. By way of sentence, he received a referral
    order for 12 months, a supervision order and a community rehabilitation
    punishment order of 100 hours as well as compensation  in  the  sum  of
    �50.

 9. On 15 November 2005 the appellant was arrested for robbery. On 12 April
    2006 at Blackfriars Crown Court he was convicted of robbery  and  on  8
    June 2006 he  was  sentenced  to  five  years'  detention  in  a  young
    offender's institute to serve a  minimum  of  2  years  and  6  months'
    imprisonment.

10. The sentence issued on 8 June 2006 was made together with an order that
    the appellant  be  placed  on  an  indeterminate  sentence  for  public
    protection (IPP sentence) with a  minimum  tariff  of  2  years  and  6
    months.  An IPP sentence such as that imposed on this appellant had  to
    be imposed for specific offences if the sentencing judge considered the
    offender to be dangerous and there was a significant  risk  of  serious
    harm to the public.

11. On 14 March 2011 the respondent made a deportation  order  against  the
    appellant.  On 7 July 2011 the appellant made a  refugee  claim.   That
    was refused on 17 October 2011.  The appellant  appealed  against  that
    refusal and against deportation.  His appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    was dismissed on all grounds on 2  December  2011  and  his  rights  of
    appeal were exhausted on 6 January 2012.

12. The appellant made further submissions and, after litigation concerning
    certification of a decision refusing  to  find  those  submissions  had
    merit, on  29  April  2014  the  respondent  made  the  decision  under
    challenge here to refuse to revoke the deportation order.

13. On 28 August  2014  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  revoke  the
    deportation order came before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal  was
    allowed on asylum and human rights grounds  on  the  basis  of  country
    evidence showing risk for failed asylum seekers and criminal  deportees
    in the DRC.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was issued  on  26
    September 2014.

14. On 5 February 2015 the Upper Tribunal found that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error of law such that it  had  to  be
    set aside to  be  remade.   The  error  of  law  finding  concerned  an
    incorrect approach to the issue of risk to failed  asylum  seekers  and
    criminal deportees in the DRC.

15. There were various developments over the  next  2  �  years  concerning
    aspects of the appeal which are no longer relevant. Once  those  issues
    resolved, it was agreed that the appeal would proceed on the  basis  of
    Article 8 ECHR only.

Preliminary Issue

16.  At  the  hearing,  the  appellant  applied  to  admit,  amongst  other
    documents, an expert report dated 20 October 2017 on country conditions
    in DRC. The respondent objected to the report being admitted late.

17. As part of the assessment of whether to admit  the  country  report,  I
    considered to the litigation history leading up to the  hearing  on  26
    October 2017. After it was agreed that  the  re-making  of  the  appeal
    would address only an Article 8 ECHR challenge to the refusal to revoke
    the deportation order, a hearing was listed for 16 December 2016,  this
    hearing being altered to  a  case  management  hearing  listed  for  22
    December 2016. That hearing  did  not  take  place  but  the  appellant
    provided a lengthy skeleton argument dated 22 December 2016 setting out
    his Article 8 ECHR case.

18. After various attempts, finally, a substantive hearing was listed for a
    full day on 5 September 2017. For the  5  September  2017  hearing  the
    appellant served a bundle of evidence  on  25  August  2017  comprising
    eleven sections and running to  well  over  five  hundred  pages.   The
    appellant also filed  a  supplementary  bundle  dated  31  August  2017
    containing a further witness statement of the appellant's sister  dated
    31 August 2017 and an expert report dated 30 August 2017 addressing IPP
    sentences.

19. The hearing on 5 September 2017 did not proceed as the  respondent  had
    not had sufficient time to address the extensive  new  materials.   The
    appeal was set down for hearing on 26 October 2017.   A  direction  was
    made on 13 September  2017  for  the  respondent  to  file  a  skeleton
    argument by 26 September  2017  and  indicating  that  the  case  would
    proceed on the grounds set out in  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument
    dated 22 December 2016.

20. There was no need for further directions for the appellant as his  case
    had been prepared already, for the hearing  adjourned  on  5  September
    2017. However, on 20 October 2017, six days  before  the  hearing,  the
    appellant's legal representatives served a second supplementary bundle.
    This comprised three sections and over 100 pages  of  further  evidence
    and including a supplementary skeleton argument dated 16  October  2017
    and the report dated 20 October 2017  on  country  conditions  in  DRC.
    Nothing suggests that there had been any reference to an  intention  to
    submit these documents either at the hearing on  5  September  2017  or
    thereafter. They could not have been anticipated by the Tribunal or the
    respondent, therefore. An application under Rule 15(2)(a) of the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules for the  Tribunal's  permission  for  the  new
    materials to be admitted was made only on 24 October 2017.

21. In the meantime, the Secretary of State served her skeleton argument  a
    month late on 23 October 2017. In a letter dated 23  October  2017  the
    respondent objected to the expert report on conditions in DRC dated  20
    October 2017 being admitted.

22. The assessment of whether to admit the country report therefore had  to
    be made in the following context. The appeal has  been  outstanding  in
    the Upper Tribunal for over 2 �  years.  A  substantive  hearing  on  5
    September 2017 was adjourned because of late service of  documents  for
    the appellant. The appellant's case was stated to have been ready as of
    5 September 2017. The country report refers to instructions having been
    sent by the appellant's legal representative only on 16  October  2017,
    that is 10 days before the re-listed hearing. It was  provided  only  6
    days before the new substantive hearing. The  application  required  by
    the Tribunal Procedure Rules for the country report to be admitted  was
    not made until 2 days before the hearing.

23. There is no possible conclusion other than that the country report  was
    submitted significantly late. Ms Naik's submissions as to why this  was
    so and how it could be in the interests of justice to extend time  were
    necessarily  limited  to  the  instructions  provided  to  her  by  the
    appellant's legal representatives. Those instructions  did  not  appear
    include any good reason for lateness. The only explanation provided was
    that there had been a review of the case following  the  hearing  on  5
    September 2017 and a decision made then to obtain a country report.  It
    had taken from 5 September  2017  to  16  October  2017  to  locate  an
    appropriate expert. There was no explanation as to why the Tribunal and
    the respondent were not put on notice of the report having been  sought
    or for the failure to make a proper application for it to  be  admitted
    until 2 days before the hearing.

24. Against that background, the respondent's objection that the report was
    provided extremely late, without any proper reason for  that  lateness,
    where it was wholly unexpected and where that was in the context of  an
    appeal that  urgently  required  final  determination  had  significant
    merit. My conclusion was that the appeal could be conducted fairly  and
    justly without the country report. I refused to admit the report.

25. The  respondent  also  raised  concerns  about  the  proposal  to  call
    additional witnesses to those identified in correspondence prior to the
    hearing  and  to  a  further  additional  witness  statement  from  the
    appellant's sister being provided.  In the  event,  Mr  Hanson  took  a
    pragmatic approach and indicated that he would be  able  to  deal  with
    those new materials and no further decision on  admission  of  evidence
    was required.

The Hearing

26. I heard evidence from  the  appellant,  his  father,  his  mother,  his
    sister, his two  younger  brothers,  his  brother-in-law  and  a  close
    friend.  Following the oral evidence, I heard oral submissions from  Mr
    Hanson and Ms Naik. I reserved my decision.

The Law

27. The appellant maintains that the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to
    revoke his deportation order breaches his Article 8 ECHR  rights.   The
    structured approach  set  out  in  Section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002  Act)  and  part  13  of  the
    Immigration Rules, in  particular  paragraphs  390  to  399A,  must  be
    applied when assessing whether a breach of Article 8 ECHR arises  in  a
    deportation case.

28. The parties were in agreement that because  the  appellant  received  a
    sentence of 5 years' imprisonment, the test he must meet  in  order  to
    make out an Article 8 ECHR case is that set out in Section  117C(6)  of
    the 2002 Act:

         The public interest requires  deportation  unless  there  are  very
         compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described   in
         Exceptions 1 and 2.

29. Exception 1, relevant to this appellant, is set out  in  s.117C(4)  and
    states that it applies where:

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to cease integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

30. The correct approach to the "very  compelling  circumstances"  test  is
    well set out by the Court of Appeal in [28] - [39] of NA  (Pakistan)  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, thus:

         "28.  The next question which arises concerns the meaning of  "very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2". The new para. 398 uses the same  language
             as  section   117C(6).   It   refers   to   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those  described  in  paragraphs
             399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the 2014 rules refer
             to the same subject matter as Exceptions 1 and  2  in  section
             117C, but they do so in greater detail.
          1. In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to  those  provisions.  The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". As we have indicated  above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.
          1. In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. One might describe that as  a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2",  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.
          1. An interpretation of  the  relevant  phrase  to  exclude  this
             possibility would lead to  violation  of  Article  8  in  some
             cases, which plainly was not Parliament's intention. In  terms
             of relevance and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under
             Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description   in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 will apply with  greater  or  lesser  force
             depending on the specific facts of a particular case. To  take
             a simple example in relation to  the  requirement  in  section
             117C(4)(a) for Exception 1, the offender in  question  may  be
             someone aged 37 who came to the UK aged 18 and hence satisfies
             that requirement; but his claim under Article 8 is  likely  to
             be very much weaker than the claim of an offender now aged  80
             who came to the UK aged 6 months, who by dint of  those  facts
             satisfies that requirement. The circumstances  in  the  latter
             case might well be highly relevant  to  whether  it  would  be
             disproportionate and a breach  of  Article  8  to  deport  the
             offender, having regard to the guidance given by the ECtHR  in
             Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47, and hence highly relevant  to
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."
          1. Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  "near  miss"
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". He would need to have a far stronger case than that by
             reference to the interests protected by  Article  8  to  bring
             himself within  that  fall  back  protection.  But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision maker, be it the
             Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters
             relied upon collectively, in order to determine  whether  they
             are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public
             interest in deportation.
          1.  Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.
          1. The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
             Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013] 1  AC  338  at  [145].
             Nevertheless, it is a consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that
             offenders may be separated from their children for many years,
             contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  those  children.   The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace of family life. That is not usually a sufficiently
             compelling circumstance to outweigh the high  public  interest
             in deporting foreign criminals. As  Rafferty  LJ  observed  in
             Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  CT  (Vietnam)
             [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:
                  "Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the  respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances  which  outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation."
          1. The Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) that  paras.  398  to
             399A of the 2012 rules constituted a complete code.  The  same
             is true of the sections 117A-117D of the  2002  Act,  read  in
             conjunction with paras. 398 to 399A of  the  2014  rules.  The
             scheme of the Act and the rules together provide the following
             structure for deciding whether a foreign criminal  can  resist
             deportation on Article 8 grounds.
          1. In relation to a medium offender, first see whether  he  falls
             within Exception 1 or  Exception  2.  If  he  does,  then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next  stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  "sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". If there are, then the Article 8  claim  succeeds.  If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim fails. As was the case
             under the 2012 rules (as explained in MF (Nigeria)), there  is
             no room for a general Article 8 evaluation  outside  the  2014
             rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.
          1. In relation to a serious offender, it will often  be  sensible
             first to see whether his case involves  circumstances  of  the
             kind described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  both  because  the
             circumstances so described set  out  particularly  significant
             factors bearing upon respect for private  life  (Exception  1)
             and respect for family life (Exception 2) and because that may
             provide a helpful basis on which an  assessment  can  be  made
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2"  as  is  required
             under section 117C(6). It will then be necessary  to  look  to
             see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions 1 and
             2 are of  such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
             conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered by the
             circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy
             the test in section 117C(6).
          1. Against that background, one may ask what is the role  of  the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence? In particular,  how  does  one  take
             into account important decisions such as  Uner  v  Netherlands
             (2007) 45 EHRR 14 and Maslov v Austria?  Mr  Southey  QC,  who
             represents KJ and WM,  rightly  submits  that  the  Strasbourg
             authorities have an important role to  play.  Mr  Tam  rightly
             accepted  that  this  is  correct.  The  answer  is  that  the
             Secretary of State and the  tribunals  and  courts  will  have
             regard to the Strasbourg jurisprudence when applying the tests
             set out in our domestic legislation. For example,  a  tribunal
             may be considering whether it would be "unduly  harsh"  for  a
             child to remain in England without the deportee; or it may  be
             considering whether  certain  circumstances  are  sufficiently
             "compelling"  to  outweigh  the  high   public   interest   in
             deportation of foreign criminals. Anyone applying these  tests
             (as required by our own rules and legislation) should heed the
             guidance contained in the Strasbourg authorities. As  we  have
             stated above, the scheme of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and paras.
             398-399A of the 2014 rules is to ensure  compliance  with  the
             requirements of Article 8 through a structured approach, which
             is intended to ensure that  proper  weight  is  given  to  the
             public interest in deportation whilst also  having  regard  to
             other relevant factors as identified  in  the  Strasbourg  and
             domestic caselaw. The new regime is not  intended  to  produce
             violations of Article 8.
          1. Even then it must be borne  in  mind  that  assessments  under
             Article 8 may not lead to  identical  results  in  every  ECHR
             contracting state. To the degree allowed under the  margin  of
             appreciation and bearing in mind that the ECHR is intended  to
             reflect a fair  balance  between  individual  rights  and  the
             interests of the general community,  an  individual  state  is
             entitled to assess the public interest which may be  in  issue
             when it comes to  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  and  to
             decide  what  weight  to  attach  to  it  in  the   particular
             circumstances  of  its  society.  Different  states  may  make
             different assessments of what weight should be attached to the
             public  interest  in  deportation  of  foreign  offenders.  In
             England and Wales, the weight to be  attached  to  the  public
             interest  in  deportation  of  foreign  offenders   has   been
             underlined by successive specific  legislative  interventions:
             first by enactment of the 2007 Act, then  by  promulgation  of
             the code in the 2012 rules and  now  by  the  introduction  of
             further primary legislation in the form of Part 5A of the 2002
             Act and the new code in the 2014 rules. Statute requires  that
             in carrying out Article 8 assessments in relation  to  foreign
             criminals  the  decision-maker   must   recognise   that   the
             deportation of foreign criminals is "conducive to  the  public
             good" (per section 32(4) of the 2007 Act) and "in  the  public
             interest" (per section 117C(1) of the 2014 Act)."

31. Following this learning, the approach I must take is to assess  whether
    the appellant  meets the requirements of Exception 1 set out in Section
    117C(4) and then include that assessment as a factor  when  considering
    whether there are "very compelling circumstances over and above"  those
    covered by the Exception. As indicated by the Court of Appeal  in  [37]
    of NA (Pakistan):

         "It will then be necessary to  look  to  see  whether  any  of  the
         factors falling within Exceptions  1  and  2  are  of  such  force,
         whether by themselves  or  taken  in  conjunction  with  any  other
         relevant factors not covered  by  the  circumstances  described  in
         Exceptions 1 and 2, as to satisfy the test in Section 117C(6)."

32. As indicated by the Court of Appeal at  [38]  of  NA  (Pakistan)  there
    remains a place for ECtHR jurisprudence  within  the  "very  compelling
    circumstances" assessment.  The parties were in agreement that this was
    also in line with the approach approved by the  Supreme  Court  in  the
    later case of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60  albeit  that  case  was
    decided without reference to the provisions and structure  provided  by
    Section  117C.   The  Supreme  Court  in  Hesham  Ali  considered   the
    appropriate role for Strasbourg jurisprudence at [115]:

         "115.     A consistent thread running through  the  cases  which  I
             have  discussed  (and  others  which  preceded  them  such  as
             Benhebba v France (Application No 53441/99, [2003]  ECHR  342)
             (unreported) 10 July, 2003 and Mehemi v France (2000) 30  EHRR
             739  )  is  the  need  to  review  and  assess  a  number   of
             specifically identified factors in order to conduct  a  proper
             article 8 inquiry. Another theme is that this examination must
             be open-textured so that sufficient emphasis is given to  each
             of the factors as they arise in  particular  cases.  Of  their
             nature factors or criteria such as these cannot be given a pre-
             ordained weight. Any attempt to do that would run  counter  to
             the essential purpose of the exercise.  This  can  be  readily
             exemplified: a significant prison sentence may  be  offset  by
             the strength of family ties or progress on  the  part  of  the
             offender post-conviction, for instance. Or expulsion might  be
             justified where the offending  is  relatively  minor  but  the
             length of time spent in the host country is  short  and  there
             are no strong  family  ties  there.  The  application  of  the
             various  factors  as  opposed  to  the  recognition  of  their
             relevance involves a holistic, open-minded approach. For  this
             reason, giving pre-emptive, indicative  weight  to  particular
             factors on a generic basis is impermissible if it distorts the
             proper assessment of these in their  peculiar  and  individual
             setting."

33. Mr Hanson set out helpfully  in  [45]  of  his  skeleton  argument  the
    potentially relevant factors from Strasbourg jurisdiction to  be  taken
    into account in the "very compelling circumstances" test, as including:



         -    the nature and seriousness of the  offence  committed  by  the
         appellant;

         -    the length of the appellant's stay in the country  from  which
             he or she is to be expelled;

         -    the time elapsed since  the  offence  was  committed  and  the
             appellant's conduct during that period;

            - the appellant's family situation;

         -    the nationalities of the various persons concerned;

         -    the solidity of the social, cultural and family ties with  the
             host country and with the country of destination;

         -    whether offences were committed as a juvenile or as an adult;

         -    whether the person came to the host country during childhood.

34. It remains important to keep in mind, however, that  in  a  deportation
    case, a "very compelling circumstances" assessment, even  where  it  is
    "holistic" and must properly take account of Strasbourg  jurisprudence,
    is not a free-standing Article 8  evaluation.  Albeit  that  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" question is not answered only by  looking  at
    the public interest in deportation, the statutory regime now  in  force
    provides that  this  must  be  at  the  forefront  of  any  assessment,
    increasingly  so  in  line  with  the  seriousness  of  the   offending
    behaviour. As indicated by s.117C(1) and (2):

               1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

               2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

Discussion

     Criminal Offences

35. In order to reflect properly the  structured  approach  of  s.117C  and
    proper weight to be given to the public interest, my starting point  in
    the "very compelling circumstances" assessment is  the  index  offence,
    the seriousness of that offence and  the  appellant's  other  offending
    behaviour.

36. The sentencing remarks of the judge in 2006 indicate that the appellant
    was one of two main perpetrators of the robbery which was  carried  out
    on two victims, one male and one female. Reports  before  the  criminal
    court described the appellant punching the female victim  twice  before
    stealing her mobile phone.   The  sentencing  judge  went  on  to  give
    further details:

         "Insofar as aggravating features are concerned then I  list  these;
         first of all there was a completely innocent victim  here  who  had
         obviously been anxious to protect [D] when you approached and  when
         you offered aggression to this person Mr [O].  Secondly this was  a
         prolonged attack involving not only you being two of the defendants
         but there were also others.  However, I am satisfied  having  heard
         the evidence which lasted a number of days that you were  the  main
         players in this offence.  Thirdly, even when Mr [O] was  trying  to
         get away and summon help on his mobile phone you saw fit to  pursue
         him and restart the attack.  He was on the floor and seen by a  bus
         driver who slowed down to let him on board.  Even then he  was  not
         safe because you, [the appellant's brother] saw fit to  follow  him
         onto the bus and to continue the  attack  as  was  evidenced  by  a
         passenger saying, "What do you want to do; kill him?"

         I have noted of course that insofar as  the  attack  was  concerned
         that involved not only punching but also kicking and kicking  while
         somebody was on the ground.  In relation to you both  this  offence
         was committed at a point in time when you were both  subject  to  a
         community sentence and therefore you are both in breach of that.

         ...

         Insofar  as  you  were  concerned,  MP,  you  have  three  previous
         convictions for robbery.  You have the one committed on 9 July 2003
         - committed 12 July 2003.  I understand  those  were  both  in  the
         nature of street robberies.  I am told and am  prepared  to  accept
         that those involved the threat of violence but not the  actual  use
         of violence.  I am also told that in relation to the offence of  21
         May 2004 of which you were convicted on 2 December that you  robbed
         a male victim of a mobile phone in the street.

         Additionally of course you have a specified offence  albeit  not  a
         serious specified offence of affray on 19 August 2004 and you  also
         have a specified offence of assault  on  a  police  officer  on  13
         October 2005.  That would appear to  have  been  committed  only  a
         matter of a very few weeks before the instant offence.  Insofar  as
         the  offence  of  possessing  an  offensive  weapon  in  public  is
         concerned I accept  that  that  is  not  a  specified  offence  but
         nonetheless I understand that you did in fact arm yourself  with  a
         nunchakus."

    The judge went on to conclude that:

         "Anybody in my view who offers that sort of violence  can  only  be
         said to pose a risk of significant harm of causing serious harm  to
         members of the public.

         Those factors coupled with your previous convictions for  specified
         offences  make  it  impossible  to  contend  that   it   would   be
         unreasonable to conclude that the assumptions of Section 229(3)  do
         not apply.  I must for the same reasons come to the conclusion that
         there is a significant risk of serious harm from the commission  by
         you of further specified offences.  Accordingly, I  am  obliged  to
         impose a sentence of detention for public protection."

37. The imposition of an  IPP  sentence  led  to  the  appellant  being  in
    criminal detention for 10 years even though the tariff for his  offence
    was 5 years' imprisonment. The IPP sentence  regime  was  abolished  in
    2012 following numerous legal challenges.  Hansard  records  that  when
    legislation was introduced to  end  IPP  sentences,  the  then  Justice
    Secretary stated that IPP sentences were "unclear, inconsistent and ...
    unjust to the people in question".

38. Materials and submissions have been put forward for  the  appellant  at
    various times during this litigation arguing that he has been  unfairly
    treated or prejudiced by the imposition of the IPP  sentence  and  that
    this should weigh on his side of the balance.  I did  not  accept  that
    there was any real basis for that to be so or that or that  any  weight
    detracted from the high public interest in his deportation or attracted
    to his side of the balance because of the IPP  sentence.  The  sentence
    was lawfully made. When the appellant  appealed  it  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal, it was upheld. The legislation revoking the  IPP  scheme  could
    have done so retrospectively but did not.

39. The public interest in the appellant's deportation remains  very  high,
    therefore, reflecting his sentence of 5 years'  imprisonment.  Further,
    albeit committed whilst the appellant was a minor and  not  capable  of
    activating the automatic deportation regime,  the  appellant's  earlier
    offending must also form part of the case against him.

    Section 117C(4) - Exception 1

40. Having set out the details of the index offence and concomitant  strong
    public interest in deportation which must remain at  the  forefront  of
    the "very compelling circumstances" consideration here, I turn  to  the
    provisions of Section 117C. As set out above,  I  must  first  consider
    whether the appellant can meet Exception 1 of s.117C(4).  For  ease  of
    reference I set out Exception 1 again here:

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
         C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
         and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to cease integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

    Lawful Residence

41. The appellant concedes that he does not come within Exception 1  as  he
    has not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of  his
    life.  He was lawfully resident with ILR from 2003  to  2011  when  the
    deportation order ended his leave. Even had it not done so, as  of  the
    date of hearing before me he could still not have  shown  that  he  had
    been in the UK lawfully for most of his life.

    Social and Cultural Integration

42. The degree of the appellant's social and cultural integration into  the
    UK was disputed by the parties. Having come to the UK in 2001  aged  13
    years and 11 months there must have been  some  integration  until  his
    imprisonment in 2005.  It is difficult to see that  the  appellant  was
    strongly integrating and conforming to the social and cultural norms of
    the UK, however, given that his behaviour was such that he was expelled
    from school in 2004 and committed the offences set out  above  in  2003
    and 2004.

43. The respondent also submitted  that  social  and  cultural  integration
    could not have taken place during the appellant's period of  detention,
    from the autumn of 2005 to the spring of 2016,  a  period  of  over  11
    years out of his 16-year presence in the UK.  The respondent relied  on
    [24] and  [25]  of  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-interrelationship  with  Rules)
    [2015]  UKUT  00415  (IAC)  which  considered  "social   and   cultural
    integration", (albeit in the context of the Immigration Rules):

          "24.    In our  judgement,  the  gravamen  of  the  new  paragraph
             399A(b) is integration in the UK. Integration must be shown to
             exist in two respects: social and cultural.  Neither  one  nor
             the other  is  sufficient.  The  term  integration  imports  a
             qualitative test: in order to assess  whether  a  person  "is"
             socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK,  one  is  not
             simply looking at how long a person has spent  in  the  UK  or
             even at whether that period comprises  lawful  residence:  but
             the fact that an appellant has spent some or all of  his  time
             in the UK unlawfully may be of relevance in  deciding  whether
             he has  integrated  in  these  two  ways.  Another  difference
             between the old and the new Rules is that whereas the previous
             rule required any period of imprisonment to be discounted, the
             new rule is silent on the matter. As a result we consider that
             it must remain open to the  decision-maker  to  consider  time
             spent in  prison  negatively,  because  it  does  not  bespeak
             integrative behaviour; but the rule no longer mandates that.


         25.  Mr Mak submitted that it is implicit  in  the  paragraph  399A
             context - a rule dealing with foreign criminals - that  merely
             being a foreign criminal cannot preclude a person from showing
             the necessary integration. With that we can easily  agree.  Mr
             Mak further submitted that the rule cannot have been  intended
             to assist only  a  few  such  persons.  With  that  we  wholly
             disagree. The new Rules make even clearer than the pre-28 July
             2014 rules that deportation of foreign criminals is always  in
             the public interest and can only be outweighed in very limited
             circumstances. In general  terms  imposition  of  a  custodial
             sentence is an indication that the person  concerned  has  not
             respected the values of the host society (cf in the context of
             EU law on deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  Case  C-400/12
             Secretary of State v MG  ECJI:EU:C2014:9  at  [31]).  Further,
             whilst in prison a person cannot be a useful member of society
             at large; during that time such a person cannot as  a  general
             rule show integration into society.  Thus,  although  the  new
             rule does not as such  preclude  time  in  prison  from  being
             considered as to whether social and  cultural  integration  is
             shown, its terms leave very little scope for such argument."

44. The respondent submitted that, albeit  the  statutory  regime  did  not
    exclude the possibility of time in prison being capable of amounting to
    cultural and social integration, there was "very little scope for  such
    argument" and that this appellant could  not  make  out  that  he  came
    within this limited category.

45. It was argued for the  appellant  that  during  his  period  in  prison
    because of the nature of the IPP regime he  had  to  undergo  intensive
    courses in order to progress towards release. He had  also  volunteered
    to take additional courses. This had allowed him to show  a  degree  of
    social and cultural integration as allowed for in Bossade.

46. All of the reports before me from the Prison Service, Parole Board  and
    Probation Service from 2009 onwards indicate that the appellant  was  a
    model  prisoner.  That  was  so  even  though,  in  2012,  after  being
    transferred to open conditions on  the  recommendation  of  the  Parole
    Board, he was returned to Category  C  detention  because  of  concerns
    raised by the respondent on the basis of his  immigration  status.  The
    Parole Board reports from  this  time  comment  on  his  resilience  in
    dealing with this set  back  and  his  determination  to  continue  his
    progress towards release nevertheless.

47. The views of the professionals on the appellant's rehabilitation whilst
    in detention are well summarised by the Probation Service letter  dated
    26 May 2016:

         "MP does not present a high and imminent risk of harm to the public
         and his case is manageable in the community.  I do not assess  that
         MP presents as a high risk of abscond or  reoffending  on  licence.
         ... his current compliance on licence demonstrates his  ability  to
         reintegrate  in  society.   MP  was  brought  back  to  the  Closed
         Conditions  on  Immigration  matters  rather  than  any  breach  of
         regimes, which together with his current  good  progress  indicates
         evidence of reformation of his character.

         Whilst at HMP Wayland and under my supervision MP  presented  as  a
         model prisoner.  ... he resided on the super enhanced open wing  at
         HMP Wayland where he was subject to less restrictive  regimes,  was
         unlocked 24 hours a day, had a key to his room, lived as part of  a
         community and had the ability to associate more freely and cook for
         himself.  MP was seen as a positive and calming  influence  on  the
         wing and his social time was spent in  the  gym  or  engaging  with
         activities in the Chapel, for example, choir practice.

         MP has a positive record of engaging with  his  sentence  plan  and
         prior to his release he completed the Resolve Programme as a  means
         of further addressing any risk  associated  with  violence  in  his
         case.  MP engaged well with this offending behaviour programme  and
         received positive feedback in his post programme report and review.
         ...

         MP  has  consistently  demonstrated  the  ability  to  engage  with
         professionals and  his  working  relationship  with  myself  was  a
         positive one.   In  my  opinion  MP  has  effected  change  and  is
         motivated to desist from reoffending in the future.   He  has  made
         use of his time within a custodial setting  to  develop  vocational
         skills to enable his positive resettlement in  the  community,  for
         example, achieving a level 2 Diploma in Carpentry.  MP  has  gained
         practical experience of employment in a custodial setting with  his
         last role being that of Offender Representative covering  a  number
         of wings.   I  believe  that  MP's  mature  and  diligent  attitude
         contributed towards him securing this trusted position and as  part
         of his role he was given the freedom to move around the prison with
         less restriction.

         I wish MP all the best in the future and am  hopeful  that  he  can
         continue to live a pro-social life within society."

48. This letter, together  with  the  very  positive  descriptions  of  the
    appellant in all reports from 2009 onwards, it  was  submitted,  showed
    that, exceptionally, he had established a degree of social and cultural
    integration whilst in detention.

49. I saw some force in that argument. Ironically, the length of time  that
    the appellant was in detention  because  of  the  IPP  system  and  the
    requirements of that system to demonstrate progress provided  him  with
    the opportunity to begin to demonstrate that he  was  someone  able  to
    respect the social and cultural norms of the UK. The evidence from  the
    professionals concerned with monitoring his progress and rehabilitation
    is consistent as to his having used that opportunity to the full.

50. Further, even accepting that social and cultural integration  can  only
    be shown to a limited degree whilst the appellant was in detention  and
    not living in society, it appeared to me that it put the appellant in a
    position to become integrated rapidly  and  substantially  on  release.
    Since his release in April 2016, he has conducted himself in  a  manner
    that is entirely consistent with UK social and cultural norms.  He  has
    demonstrated this in a number of way, including his  influence  on  his
    younger brothers.  He has encouraged one of  his  younger  brothers  to
    take up part-time work and pursue his studies  seriously  in  order  to
    take up a career in finance and accounting.  He has had an additionally
    positive influence on his other younger brother,  SP,  whose  behaviour
    had become problematic at school, culminating in the summer of 2016  on
    an alleged assault on a teacher.  The appellant intervened with SP  and
    liaised with him with the Youth Offending  Service  and  spoke  to  his
    brother's friends, also accompanying SP to counselling sessions with  a
    psychologist.  SP indicated in his evidence that  the  appellant  spent
    more time with him than their father and was a  very  significant  role
    model for him.

51. The evidence  was  also  consistent  as  to  the  appellant  playing  a
    significant and positive role in  the  lives  of  all  members  of  the
    family, including his sister, and her husband, acting as a  childminder
    for them for up to two days a week.

52. The appellant has also pursued as far as he can, given  the  limits  on
    his access to courses and finances because of  his  immigration  status
    and his criminal licence, qualifications to work as  a  plumber  and  a
    personal fitness trainer. The consistent evidence of all of the  family
    members and his  friend  MJ  was  that  he  has  become  a  stable  and
    thoughtful individual, able to tolerate the various restrictions on him
    and remain a positive force within and outside his family.

53. The evidence from the appellant and his family on  his  conduct  whilst
    living in the community since April 2016 is consistent that provided by
    the Prison Service,  Parole  Board  and  Probation  Service  materials.
    Further, a psychology report dated 18 August 2017 prepared by Ms Pagell
    reached a similar conclusion as to the unusual degree of rehabilitation
    and reduction  in  risk  of  reoffending  and  genuine  change  in  the
    appellant's thinking.  The views of the professionals involved with the
    appellant were also consistent with his own comments  on  his  previous
    behaviour, his time in prison, his remorse  and  understanding  of  the
    harm caused to his victims and the damage to his family.  His  evidence
    on these matters, supported by the professional evidence,  was,  in  my
    judgment, genuine.

54. Pulling these parts of the evidence, together,  it  was  my  conclusion
    that  the  appellant,  at  the  time  of   the   hearing   before   me,
    notwithstanding his criminal conduct and lengthy period  of  detention,
    was  someone  who  had  shown  that  he  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the UK to a substantial and significant degree.

    Significant Obstacles to Reintegration in DRC

55. The appellant left DRC at the age of 13 and 11 months. I accept the  he
    received some  education there. He will retain some  knowledge  of  the
    country. However, the appellant and his family witnesses gave  detailed
    and consistent evidence that the appellant was living in DRC at a  time
    of great disruption because of the civil war,  and  that  he  witnessed
    some of the abuses that  took  place.  His  sister  gave  corroborative
    evidence, describing her own difficult experiences whilst  in  DRC  and
    her subjective fear of returning because of what she witnessed there as
    a child.  His engagement with society and culture  in  DRC  would  have
    been disrupted as a result and those years do not form the stable basis
    for reintegration that would pertain had they been formed  in  peaceful
    civil society.

56. Further, the appellant has not been in DRC since 2001, some  16  years.
    The appellant's evidence  that  he  now  understands  some  French  and
    Lingala but does not speak either language well, his main language  now
    being English, was not disputed.  That being so is  unsurprising  given
    the age at which he came to the UK, his limited education  in  DRC  and
    the number of years that he has spent in the UK including in the prison
    system where he had very limited exposure to either French or Lingala.

57. All witnesses confirmed that the appellant would not  have  any  family
    members to look to for support on his return. It was suggested for  the
    respondent that the evidence on this point was somewhat equivocal but I
    did not find that to be so. The written and oral evidence  provided  on
    the family situation in DRC in the past and now was highly  consistent.
    After his parents left,  the  appellant  lived  in  DRC  with  paternal
    relatives, an uncle and his grandmother, but both had since  died.  The
    paternal family home had been sold.

58. It was not only that evidence was given to this effect in  the  current
    witness statements and at the hearing. In a  Probation  Service  report
    dated 28 November 2010 at page D126 of the appellant's bundle served on
    25 August 2017, he is recorded as having referred to his paternal uncle
    passing away in May 2010. The appellant's mother made a statement on 22
    November 2016 which is at B121 of the appellant's bundle  and  at  [13]
    she indicates that the paternal family  home  was  sold  and  that  his
    grandmother, the last person who was caring for him in DRC, had died in
    2011 and that she and her husband had not returned to DRC since then.

59. I accept that the appellant has no paternal relatives in DRC who  might
    assist him to integrate and that the  paternal  family  home  has  been
    sold.

60. The evidence was also consistent as to the appellant's mother's  family
    refusing to have a relationship with him after  his  biological  mother
    relinquished care of him to his father. This was why he was  left  with
    paternal relatives when his parents came to the UK. The evidence of all
    of the witnesses on this point was very consistent and  given  fluently
    and, in my judgment, entirely credibly in oral evidence. I accept  that
    the appellant has had no contact with his maternal family since he  was
    approximately 2 years' old and that they would not offer him  any  kind
    of support were he to return.

61. There was no suggestion that the appellant or his family have any other
    meaningful contacts in DRC who could offer him assistance on return.

62. The appellant's family, his mother in particular, expressed significant
    concerns about the country conditions in DRC and how someone  with  the
    appellant's profile would manage alone in what would  be,  by  now,  an
    alien environment. There was not  a  great  deal  of  country  evidence
    available against which to assess the difficulties that would be  faced
    by someone returning with a limited knowledge of DRC and the  languages
    spoken there and with no network of support. The World Bank  Report  on
    DRC for 2016 indicates that "DRC is still recovering from a  series  of
    conflicts that broke out in the 1990s creating  a  protracted  economic
    and social slump" and states that DRC "is among the  poorest  countries
    in the world and was ranked 176 out of  187  countries  on  the  latest
    United Nations Human Development Index (2015)" and  that  "the  poverty
    rate remains  high".  The  US  State  Department  Human  Rights  Report
    covering 2016, commenting on  working  conditions  indicates  that  the
    average monthly wage, were the appellant able to  find  work,  did  not
    provide a living wage.

63. I was also referred to Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813  which  states
    at [14]:

         "14. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be  deported,
             as set out in section 117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph  399A,  is  a
             broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to  find  a
             job or to sustain life while living in the other  country.  It
             is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as  subject
             to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or
             tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad
             evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life"

64. My conclusion, albeit the test is a high one, is that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to this appellant's integration in DRC.  The
    evidence indicates that there is no real basis for him to  be  able  to
    establish a private life and integrate there. He has no links to anyone
    in the country who might offer him even basic support  or  guidance  on
    his return. He has a limited knowledge of the local languages that  are
    primarily used for day-to-day life. His knowledge  of  the  country  is
    limited given the age at which he left, the disruption in civil society
    at the time that he was living there and the length of  time  since  he
    left. The country is in a  parlous  economic  state.  He  is  a  young,
    healthy person but in all the circumstances here I do not find that  he
    could be said to have the capacity to participate in  life  in  DRC  or
    have a reasonable opportunity of being accepted there.

    Very Compelling Circumstances

65. Following the guidance in NA (Pakistan), the assessment of the criteria
    in Exception 1 of s.117C(4) carries forward into the  "very  compelling
    circumstances" assessment. As explained at [30], [32] and  [37]  of  NA
    (Pakistan), it is necessary to look to  see  whether  the  Exception  1
    factors  are  of  such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken   in
    conjunction with any other relevant factors  such  as  to  satisfy  the
    "very compelling circumstances" test.

66. It appears to me  however,  that  the  "very  compelling  circumstances
    assessment" must still commence by weighing the nature and  seriousness
    of the offences and the concomitant  public  interest  in  deportation.
    Those are the first criteria set out the structured approach of s.117C.
    The index offence here which attracted  a  5-year  sentence  cannot  be
    regarded as anything other than  very  serious.  It  is  not  the  only
    offence albeit the others were much less serious and  committed  whilst
    the appellant was a minor. The public interest in  the  deportation  of
    this appellant is high.

67. Against the weight in favour of  deportation,  the  appellant,  now  30
    years old, has been in the UK for 16 years, 8 of those years with ILR.

68. Also, the index offence was  committed  12  years  ago.  The  materials
    considered above, in my judgment, show that  his  conduct  during  that
    time, albeit a great deal  of  it  in  detention,  has  been  unusually
    positive. Remorse, rehabilitation and a low risk of reoffending are not
    factors in themselves that can necessarily defeat the  public  interest
    in deportation of a foreign criminal.  The  weight  attracting  to  the
    public interest remains high for of  someone  who  has  committed  this
    index offence and is difficult to displace. Those factors are relevant,
    however. Hesham Ali identifies at [96] that "customarily, the  risk  of
    reoffending will be of predominant importance" in  the  context  of  an
    Article 8 proportionality of deportation case.

69. The discussion of social and cultural integration above concludes  that
    the appellant is part of a close family group  in  which  he  plays  an
    important practical role, for example assisting his younger brothers to
    progress and his sister in bringing  up  her  family.  His  family  are
    British. It was not disputed by the respondent that the  appellant  was
    eligible for British citizenship prior to his index  offence  but  that
    his parents were misadvised and so did  not  apply  for  him  when  the
    applications for his siblings were made. Where  that  was  so  and  the
    appellant and his family were entitled  to  view  him  as  settled  and
    eligible for citizenship in due course, this is not a  situation  where
    the appellant's private life can be properly  characterised  as  merely
    "precarious" and of little weight. The comments of Lord Reed in  Hesham
    Ali at [34] on the question of whether someone is settled or not  being
    "a more complex question than it  might  appear  at  first  sight"  are
    applicable to this appellant, certainly up until  notification  of  the
    intention to deport in 2009, if not the end of his ILR in 2011.

70. These aspects of the appellant's profile also fall to be  weighed  with
    the earlier  conclusions  that  he  has  demonstrated  substantial  and
    significant  social  and  cultural  integration  in  the  UK  and  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in the DRC.  Paraphrasing  the
    guidance at [37] of NA (Pakistan) at [37], I must, finally, look to see
    whether the factors I have identified as significant from  Exception  1
    are of such force, whether by themselves or taken in  conjunction  with
    any other relevant factors such as  to  satisfy  the  "very  compelling
    circumstances" test in Section 117C(6). That holistic  assessment  must
    afford proper weight to the public interest  in  deportation  where  an
    offence of this seriousness is committed.

71. Put simply, it is my conclusion that the unusual degree of  substantive
    rehabilitation here, shown whilst in detention over an extended  period
    of time and thereafter, the low risk of  reoffending,  the  significant
    degree  of  social  and  cultural  integration  and  very   significant
    obstacles to any meaningful integration in DRC are sufficient, together
    with the factors identified in [67]-[69] to meet the  "very  compelling
    circumstances" test. Only a "rare" case can  meet  the  high  threshold
    where the offence is so serious but my assessment of the factors  here,
    after following the structured approach required in deportation  cases,
    is that this is one of those cases.

72. For these reasons, I allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

73. The appellant is already aware of the serious implications for  him  if
    he reoffends because of the terms of his criminal  licence.  He  should
    also be fully aware that the question of  his  deportation  to  DRC  is
    likely to be looked at very differently in the  event  of  any  further
    offending.

Decision

74. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside to be re-made.

75. The appeal is re-made as allowed under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 27 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
