
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00774/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 13 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                ibrahim kone
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. There was no application or reason to direct anonymity  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and there is no reason to do so in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    particularly taking into  consideration  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign national criminals.

 2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision  and
    reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Osborne and Mrs R  M
    Bray (the panel) that was promulgated on  18  March  2015.   The  panel
    decided that the appellant was not a refugee or otherwise  in  need  of
    international protection or that his  deportation  to  Ivory  Coast  or
    Cameroon (the appellant is a national of both countries) would  violate
    his protected private and family life rights.

 3. The appellant appealed on five grounds.

          a. Procedural unfairness and insufficient reasoning in respect of
             witness evidence.

          b. Giving  weight  to  immaterial  matter  or  to  a  matter  not
             supported by evidence.

          c. Failure to apply HJ (Iran).

          d. Failure to make any or adequate findings on whether return  to
             the Ivory Coast would breach his article 8 rights.

          e. Insufficient reasoning or failure to take account  of  medical
             evidence.

 4. At the start of the hearing I remarked that the panel did not  seem  to
    have made any finding about whether the appellant had  a  well  founded
    fear of persecution in Ivory Coast which had not been conceded  by  the
    appellant.  Mr Mills and Ms Wilkins both agreed and this was added as a
    sixth ground.

 5. Having heard  from  both  representatives  and  having  considered  the
    grounds, the rule 24 reply and the decision and reasons statement, I am
    satisfied that the panel's decision contains an error on a point of law
    and must be set aside.  There is no need to go through all the  grounds
    of appeal because the error of law is in relation to  the  approach  to
    the medical evidence.

 6. The appellant relied on a medico-legal report prepared by  the  Medical
    Foundation (Freedom from  Torture).   The  author  of  the  report,  Dr
    Michael Nelki, concluded that  the  appellant's  scars  were  "entirely
    consistent with the description he gave for their  causes."   The  fact
    the doctor did not say "highly consistent" or  "typical  of"  seems  to
    have caused the panel some difficulty as indicated at paragraph 61.   I
    find the reasoning to reject the doctor's conclusion and  to  interpret
    it as meaning nothing more than  "consistent  with"  to  be  irrational
    since the ordinary meaning of the adjective  "entirely"  would  put  it
    above "highly" in context.  For this reason I conclude that  the  panel
    erred because it has not given adequate reasons for  going  behind  the
    medical opinion.

 7. Mr Mills acknowledged that  if  I  came  to  the  conclusion  then  the
    entirety of the credibility findings were unsound and the appeal  would
    have to be  reheard.   Ms  Wilkins  agrees.   It  is  because  a  fresh
    assessment of the appellant's credibility has to be made that  I  remit
    this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I do so with the following directions.

          a. Nothing is preserved from the earlier  decisions  and  reasons
             statements made in the First-tier Tribunal.

          b.  Dr  Nelki's  conclusion  "entirely  consistent"  is   to   be
             understood as meaning "highly consistent" within the  Istanbul
             Protocol.

          c.  The  rehearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  to  be  at
             Birmingham before a panel including myself  (Designated  Judge
             McCarthy) and a non-legal member other than Mrs  Bray  or  Mrs
             Hussain (who was  involved  in  an  earlier  hearing  of  this
             appeal).

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  V  Osborne
and Mrs Bray contains an error on a point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  in
line with the above directions.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
