
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00514/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2016                   |On 07 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     C A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I have made an anonymity order in respect  of  the  appellant  in  this
    case. That is solely because of the danger of identifying children  who
    are the subject of  Family  Court  Orders,  and  thus  to  protect  the
    children. Pursuant to section 97 (2) of the Children Act 1989 it is  an
    offence to publish any material it is intended or likely to identify  a
    child as being involved in any proceedings before the Court.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope, promulgated on 3 July 2014, allowing Ms
    CA's appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  22  January
    2014 to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to reg. 19  (b)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations"). The appeal against that decision is under Reg. 26 of the
    EEA Regulations.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal who while living  there  entered
    into a relationship with FF, also a citizen of  Portugal.  FF  had  two
    sons from a previous relationship; the couple  have  a  child  born  in
    2005. In 2006 the family came to the United Kingdom to  look  for  work
    which they found.  Between 2007 and 2012, the  appellant  and  FF  were
    abusive, psychologically and physically to the  two  boys,  who,  along
    with the younger child, were taken into care in 2012. They wish to have
    nothing to do with the either FF or the appellant.

 4. On 13 June 2013, the appellant and FF were sentenced to two  years  and
    three years' imprisonment respectively for offences of  child  cruelty.
    It was on account of those convictions that the respondent  took  steps
    to deport both the appellant and FF. It appears that FF  has  now  been
    deported from the United Kingdom.

 5. Prior to her imprisonment, the appellant's relationship with  FF  broke
    down, and she began a relationship with SH, who also has children  from
    his marriage which had broken down. The relationship with SH  continued
    despite the appellant's imprisonment.

 6. The appellant's case was that she had acquired the permanent  right  of
    residence, and that she had not lost it despite being  imprisoned.  She
    submits that her removal was not justified under the EEA Regulations.

 7. The respondent's case is that  there  are  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy, the protection  of  children,  which  justify  the  appellant's
    removal which, it is said is proportionate.

 8. The judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and  SH.   He  found
    that: -

      i) the best interests of the children of the relationship between  the
         appellant and FF had been settled by the family courts, none of the
         children expressing any desire  to  have  contact  with  them,  the
         youngest expressing that no contact with the appellant  was  wanted
         [22] - [25];

     ii) it was not in dispute that the  appellant  had  acquired  permanent
         residence [33], that the decision to remove was  based  exclusively
         on the personal conduct of the appellant [37]; that the interest of
         society to be protected was the prevention of the  mistreatment  of
         children [39];

    iii) the convictions related to abuse of the two older  children,  there
         being no charged in  respect  of  the  youngest,  contrary  to  the
         respondent's assumption in the refusal letter [50];

     iv) the offending behaviour was very serious indeed [54];

      v) the initial pre-sentence report concluded that the appellant  posed
         a risk of harm to children, specific to those in her care,  but  as
         there were none at that point, the risk was not imminent [61]; that
         the OASys report showed the likelihood of reconviction is  low,  as
         was the risk of serious harm to others  [62];  but,  there  was  no
         proper basis for the later conclusion in a  NOMS  report  that  the
         appellant proposes medium risk of harm [63] - [65];

     vi) there was no generalised risk from the appellant to children  as  a
         whole [72], the pattern of offending  being  clear  and  restricted
         [73] - [76]; that it was unlikely she  would  at  43  have  further
         children of her own [77]; that the risk of re offending was reduced
         because FF had been removed from  the  United  Kingdom  [83];  that
         there was no risk to the children of the family as they  no  longer
         had contact with her [84] - [85];

    vii)  although SH's children had visited him, at his house,  they  would
         not do so if the appellant were there [93]; and, albeit that he did
         not  appear  to  have  knowledge  of  the   appellant's   offending
         behaviours [96] - [97]; there was no indication  [100] - [102] that
         the probation service did see  the  appellant  cohabiting  with  SH
         would create a risk to children;

   viii) taking into account a change in the appellant's attitude,  and  the
         changed circumstances, the appellant did  not  pose  a  present  as
         serous risk to either her children,  or  those  of  SH;  or,  other
         children [117] - [123]; [127].

 9. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had erred:

      i) In failing to give adequate reasons for concluding that  there  was
         no risk to SH's children,  there  being  no  assessment  by  social
         services as to the proposed arrangements,  and  in  particular  not
         taking into account that the appellant  had  not  told  SH  of  the
         nature of her offending, indicating that she may  not  be  reformed
         and thus does pose a risk; and,

     ii) In not taking into account the  absence  of  evidence  that  social
         services were even aware that SH might cohabit with the  appellant,
         yet finding [125] that they would put measures in place to  protect
         SH's children.

10. On 7 November 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge  C  Lane  granted  permission,
    stating:

      i) The First- tier Tribunal has made findings as  regards  the  future
         care  arrangements  of  young  children  on  a  basis   where   the
         involvement of Cumbria Social services  remains  unclear  (see  the
         grounds to Upper Tribunal)  and  the  determination  at  [101]  and
         [125]. Given the nature of the appellant's offending and  the  fact
         that the welfare of children is possible at issue, I  am  satisfied
         that the Upper Tribunal should consider  the  matter  further.  All
         grounds may be argued.

The hearing on 18 October 2016

11. When the  matter  came  before  me  there  was  no  appearance  by  the
    appellant. Enquiries made to the appellant's former solicitors revealed
    that they had not had any contact with her for some two years.  I  was,
    however, satisfied that due notice of the time, date and venue  of  the
    appeal had been sent to the address given  by  the  appellant.  In  the
    circumstances, despite the delay in  these  proceedings,  I  considered
    that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed  to  determine  the
    appeal.

12. The appellant has made no statement pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, or provided any other  basis  of
    challenge to the respondent's grounds.

Did the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of  an  error
of law?

13. For the reasons set out below, I consider that it did.

14. It is, I consider, of significant concern that the judge  did  not,  in
    assessing the appellant's evidence, take  into  account  that  SH  had,
    despite having been in a relationship with the appellant since prior to
    her conviction, little knowledge of the circumstances of her conviction
    [96].  These, as set out in the sentencing remarks are as follows:

         "... you have both pleaded guilty to offences of child cruelty, the
         offences concern J and  D of whom you, FF, are the father and  you,
         CA, were their stepmother, in your case, FF you have pleaded guilty
         to seven offences, covering a period of  almost  five  years,  from
         July, 2007 to February, 2012 , In July, 2007 J was 11 years of  age
         and D was nine, you regularly hit them  with  a  belt  and  with  a
         walking stick and you slapped them with your hands, you had brought
         your sons to this country after they were abandoned by their mother
         in Portugal, they were in new  and  unfamiliar  surroundings,  they
         naturally looked to you for security, for love and for  protection,
         you, sadly, repaid that trust, in a way that no father should  ever
         treat a child, you say that you mistreated them under pressure from
         CA, by her threats to leave you, unless  you  hit  and  disciplined
         them, either you lacked the fortitude to withstand the pressure  on
         you, or you put your  relationship  with  your  partner  above  the
         welfare of your children.

         CA, you have pleaded guilty to offences, in respect of  both  boys,
         of being instrumental in the children being assaulted by FF,  in  a
         way likely to cause them unnecessary suffering or injury to health,
         in relation to J, to having slapped him, as part  of  a  course  of
         conduct, you got (I am quite satisfied from  the  evidence)  FF  to
         punish both of them, this was a sustained course of conduct by  the
         two of you,  these  children  spent  their  formative  years  in  a
         loveless environment. Finally, a neighbour spoke to Social Services
         , she was prompted to do so, when her son reported to her  'that  J
         had said, "I wish I dead,  because  nobody  wants  me"  ,  she  had
         witnessed a number of Incidents, she  had  seen  you,  CA,  slap  J
         across the face, leaving the imprint of your hand on his cheek, you
         then got, on that occasion, Fernando Ferreira to punish J  and  the
         neighbours had to intervene to stop him striking J with  a  walking
         stick, on another occasion she saw you, CA, tear up J's homework in
         front of him, calling him an idiot and FF then removed his belt and
         you struck J a number of times on the backside with that belt.

         In addition to the immediate physical harm, the emotional harm that
         must have been caused to both boys is incalculable,  they  are  now
         teenagers, on the verge of adulthood, they must live their lives in
         the knowledge of how they were treated, as young children,  by  the
         ones, who ought to have offered them warmth  and  security.  Simply
         put, it is plain that these two boys  were  unwanted  and  unloved,
         just how deep and lasting the emotional scars will  be,  only  time
         can tell, but one thing is sure, they will never forget how the two
         of you treated them.

         FF, it is apparent, from the pre-sentence report, that you have not
         recognised the true degree of your responsibility and that you have
         sought to minimise it and to blame others. CA, you too have  sought
         to play down your responsibility for the way  the  two  boys  were,
         treated, but I find it revealing that, to the author  of  the  pre-
         sentence report, you openly admitted that you saw  them  as  having
         ruined your life, I have  little  doubt  that  you  resented  their
         presence in the family and that this  motivated  you  to  encourage
         your partner to abuse them.

         I take into account in mitigation that you were both brought up  in
         families where physical chastisement took place, it is a  sad  fact
         that the way in which children are treated in their formative years
         may affect their own parenting style, that is part  of  the  damage
         that you may have inflicted on J, on D  and  also  on  their  half-
         sister B, who would have witnessed what took  place.  I  also  take
         into account that neither of you have any previous convictions  and
         that you pleaded guilty, neither of you though  pleaded  guilty  at
         the first opportunity, in your case, FF, you  pleaded  guilty  only
         about three weeks before your trial was due to take place, by  that
         stage the boys would have been anticipating that they were going to
         have to come to court to relive their experiences  and  potentially
         to be challenged about the truthfulness of their accounts. In  your
         case, CA, although you pleaded guilty to counts 12  and  13  at  an
         early stage, you continued to deny assaulting J until the trial was
         imminent."

15. Given that SH had described the appellant in his letter in  support  as
    the kindest, nicest most loving person that he has met [95],  there  is
    insufficient reason given by the judge for accepting his evidence about
    what mechanisms had been put in place  to  protect  his  children,  not
    least given the  findings  by  the  judge  as  to  the  extent  CA  had
    manipulated her partner into abusing his own children.

16. Further, that the appellant  had  clearly  not  been  candid  with  her
    partner of some years  is  not  properly  taken  into  account  in  the
    assessment of her credibility. Given a clear indication of a propensity
    to manipulate in the case of FF and the failure to be candid  with  SH,
    which  post-dates  her  conviction,  the  assessment  of  her  apparent
    acceptance of responsibility [110] - [111] is flawed. While  the  judge
    does at [110] consider that the appellant may have been  untruthful  to
    gain an advantage, what is missing from the  judge's  analysis  is  any
    appreciation  that  she  had  everything   to   gain   from   accepting
    responsibility when  questioned  by  probation  staff,  yet  she  acted
    entirely differently with her partner.  That is material, given that it
    flows into the analysis as to whether her attitude has  changed  -  see
    [113] - [114] in particular - and the  assessment  of  the  threat  she
    poses [115].

17. There is also no appreciation of the period over  which  the  appellant
    carried abused the children  in  her  care.  This  was  not  a  one-off
    incident; it was systematic and continued violence  over  a  period  of
    five years, driven by it appears the appellant's resentment of her step-
    children.

18. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the  judge's  reasoning  that
    the appellant did not constitute a risk is flawed and unsustainable.  I
    therefore set his decision aside for it to be remade.

Remaking the decision.

The Law

19. The respondent's power to deport an EEA national, and the matters  that
    must be taken into account, are set out in the EEA regulations:

         '19. (1) A person is not entitled to  be  admitted  to  the  United
             Kingdom by  virtue  of  regulation  11  if  his  exclusion  is
             justified on grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health in accordance with regulation 21.

             (1A) A person is not entitled to be  admitted  to  the  United
             Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11 of that person  is  subject
             to a deportation or exclusion order

             (1B) If the Secretary of State considers that the exclusion of
             an EEA national or the family member of  an  EEA  national  is
             justified on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
             public health in accordance with regulation 21  the  Secretary
             of  State  may  make  an  order  for  the  purpose  of   these
             Regulations prohibiting that person from entering  the  United
             Kingdom

             ...

             (3)  Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an  EEA  national  who
             has entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such  a
             national who  has  entered  the  United  Kingdom  under  these
             Regulations may be removed if-

                  (a)  that person does not have or ceases to have  a  right
                  to reside under these Regulations; or

                  (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's
                  removal is justified on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,
                  public  security  or  public  health  in  accordance  with
                  regulation 21.

         ...

         21.  (1) In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15
             except on serious grounds of public policy or public security.



             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                  decision; or ...

             (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
             policy or public security it shall, in addition  to  complying
             with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken  in
             accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
             public policy or public security in relation to a  person  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin.'

20. The appellant did not participate in the remaking. There is  no  up  to
    date material in respect of her current circumstances, nor is  it  even
    clear that she is living in the United Kingdom.

21. I have no doubt that the appellant's crimes  against  children  in  her
    care were very serious, involving as they did, emotional  and  physical
    harm, the former being likely to be far longer lasting. These offences,
    appalling in themselves, are in my view aggravated  by  the  fact  that
    these children were more vulnerable and in need of  parental  love  and
    affection as they had been abandoned by their own  mother.  The  remark
    that she considered these young, vulnerable children as  having  ruined
    her life, displays a striking degree of self-absorption  and  a  marked
    inability to look beyond her own self-  interest.   It  is  instructive
    also that, as Judge Cope noted [82], the appellant had initially sought
    to say it was she who had been coerced into abusing the children,  when
    the sentencing judge found that it was she who had encouraged FF.

22. I have considered carefully the material from  the  Probation  Service,
    but find nothing in therein that shows genuine remorse, or indeed,  any
    real attempt to identify with her victims, or the long-lasting  if  not
    permanent damage she has caused them. There is no  real  evidence  that
    she has developed any real insight  to  the  hurt  she  has  caused  to
    children, hurt motivated in a large part by  her  own  selfishness  and
    achieved through the manipulation of another.

23. There is I find, an absence of any real remorse  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant.  It is remarkable, and instructive  of  her  true  feelings,
    that much of her statements are about the consequences of  her  abusing
    children in her care impacting on her new relationship with SH, not  on
    the harm she has caused. Her own daughter, now in care,  wants  nothing
    to do with her; this does not appear to be of any concern whatsoever in
    CA's statement of 9 May 2014.

24. I accept that the risk the appellant presents has been considered as in
    some respects low, yet she is still within the terms of  reference  for
    MAPPA and is said to be of medium risk to children.  She is barred from
    working with children, a strong other indicator of the risk she  poses.
    While it might be said  that  this  removes  risk,  such  a  submission
    ignores the fact that such measures are not taken  in  respect  of  the
    general public, only against those identified as posing an unacceptable
    risk to children.  Further the NOMS assessment and indeed the report of
    Ms Robertson of May 2014 do indicate a medium risk of harm to  a  child
    in a relationship with her; that is a sustainable finding, and  is  not
    inconsistent with a lower general risk.  In  the  circumstances,  I  am
    satisfied that she does  represent  a  medium  risk  of  harm  to  some
    children.

25. There are, I accept, character references but  these  do  not  properly
    engage with the appellant's offences, or address the fact that  she  is
    guilty of abusing children  over  a  5-year  period.  That,  given  the
    appellant's own  lack  of  insight  into  her  behaviours,  is  perhaps
    unsurprising.

26. Taking these factors together, with the  very  telling  failure  to  be
    candid with SH, I am satisfied that in  reality,  the  appellant  is  a
    manipulative and unremorseful offender who abused children in her  care
    over a five-year period. I am not satisfied that she has  in  any  real
    way accepted responsibility for this, showing a callous  disregard  for
    her victims, and thus, notwithstanding the probation reports which  are
    in a sense  mechanistic,  I  am  satisfied  that  she  does  present  a
    sufficiently serious threat to children, and thus reg. 21  (5)  (c)  is
    met.  Further,  I  am  satisfied  in  this  case,  her  deportation  is
    justified on serious grounds of public policy, that is, the  protection
    of children.

27. I am satisfied that, in the circumstances,  the  respondent  has  shown
    that her decision to deport the appellant is based exclusively  on  her
    personal conduct, not reliant on general  matters,  and  is  not  based
    exclusively on her criminal offences.

28. Turning then to the factors set out in regs. 21 (6), there is no recent
    evidence of the appellant's circumstances. There is no indication  that
    her relationship with her partner, SH, subsists, or as to  whether  she
    is working or not.  I am satisfied that, on the basis of  the  material
    before me, that taking into account how long the  appellant  has  lived
    her, her deportation is, given the seriousness of  the  threat  to  the
    public which she presents, that her removal is entirely  proportionate.
    There is no subsisting family life between the appellant and her child,
    or indeed her step-children.

29. In the circumstances, taking all of these  factors  into  account,  and
    bearing in mind that what is proposed is an interference with rights of
    free movement,  I  am  satisfied  that  balancing  the  risk  that  the
    appellant pose as a result of her personal conduct and activities, that
    the decision to remove her is  proportionate  and  in  accordance  with
    Regulations 21(5) and 21(6) of the EEA Regulations.

30. I am not satisfied either, in the light of  these  findings,  that  the
    appellant's deportation is, having had regard to section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, is a breach of article 8.
    There is insufficient evidence that she meets any of the exceptions set
    out in paragraphs 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules, nor that  there
    is any other basis on which the very strong interest in  deporting  the
    appellant, who is a foreign criminal, could be outweighed.

31. Accordingly, I remake the decision by  dismissing  the  appeal  an  all
    grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law. I set it aside.

    2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

    3. The parties are reminded of the anonymity order which is in place  to
       protect the children of the appellants and to prevent them from being
       identified.


Signed   Date: 3 November 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

