
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00169/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 16 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     J O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms T Mumtaz of Crown Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Holder and Ms V S Street) allowing JO's appeal  against
    a decision taken on 14 January 2014 that s.32(5) of the UK Borders  Act
    2007 applied and that JO  was  subject  to  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions of the 2007 Act.

 3. For convenience, although this is an appeal by the Secretary of  State,
    I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya who was born on 23 September  1978.
    He arrived in the UK sometime in 1998 and claimed asylum on 7  December
    1998.  On 27 March 2001, the Secretary  of  State  refused  his  asylum
    claim and the appellant appealed.  On 4 December 2011,  an  Adjudicator
    (Mrs D Witts) allowed the appellant's appeal on the basis that  he  was
    at a refugee at risk of persecution for a Convention  reason  and  also
    serious ill-treatment contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR if he  returned  to
    Kenya.  The Adjudicator  accepted  the  appellant's  account  that  his
    parents had been  murdered  by  the  Kenyan  police  because  of  their
    politics.  As a result of that appeal, on 7 February 2012 the appellant
    was granted indefinite leave to remain and refugee status.

 5. Thereafter, between 16 August 2000 and 19 April 2005 the appellant  was
    convicted of a  number  of  criminal  offences  including  the  use  of
    disorderly behaviour or threatening, abusive, insulting words likely to
    cause harassment, alarm or distress, attempted robbery and theft.  Only
    in relation to two of  those  offences  did  the  appellant  receive  a
    custodial sentence following convictions  on  6  December  2004  and  3
    January 2005 at the North West Hampshire Magistrates' Court  for  which
    he was sentences respectively to 84 days and 28 days imprisonment.

 6. On 9 November 2005 the appellant was convicted at the Winchester  Crown
    Court of rape and he was sentenced on 2 December 2005 to  eight  years'
    imprisonment.  He unsuccessfully appealed against  his  conviction  and
    sentence.

 7. On 2 April 2009, the appellant was served with a notice  informing  him
    of his liability to automatic deportation  under  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  On 24 September 2009, the appellant was  served  with  a  notice
    informing him of  his  liability  to  have  s.72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied to his case on the  basis  that
    he had committed a particularly serious crime and was a continuing risk
    to the community.  On 16 August 2010, the appellant was served  with  a
    notice of intention to revoke his refugee  status  to  which  his  then
    legal representatives responded on 26 August  2010.   On  24  September
    2010, the appellant again was informed of his liability to have s.72 of
    the 2002 Act applied to him.

 8. On 26 May 2011, a PAROM  1  report  was  prepared  by  the  appellant's
    Offender Manager based, in part, upon interviews  with  the  appellant.
    As a result  of  that  report,  on  12  July  2011  the  appellant  was
    interviewed by an Immigration  Officer  in  relation  to  his  original
    asylum claim as there were considered to be discrepancies  between  his
    account that led to his appeal being allowed in 2001 and what  was  now
    said to his Offender Manager.

 9. On 11 October 2011, the appellant  was  issued  with  a  notice  of  an
    intention  to  cancel  his  refugee  status.   On  3  July  2013,   the
    appellant's refugee status was cancelled in a decision letter  of  that
    date under para 339A(iii) of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended)
    on the basis that the  appellant  had  misrepresented  facts  and  used
    deception in order to obtain refugee status.  The decision relies  upon
    discrepancies between the  appellant's  original  account  of  how  his
    parents died and, in particular, what he told his Offender  Manager  as
    recorded in the PAROM 1 report  and  also  in  his  interview  with  an
    Immigration Officer following that report on 12 July 2011.

10. On 10 May 2013, the Secretary of State made a deportation order and  on
    14 January 2014 made a decision that s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007
    applied.  The appellant appealed that latter decision to the First-tier
    Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

11.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  argued  that   his
    deportation was unlawful as he was a refugee and  the  cancellation  of
    his status was not in accordance with para  399A(viii)  which  provides
    that:

         "a person's grant of asylum under paragraph 334 will be revoked  or
         not renewed if the Secretary of State is satisfied that: ....

         (viii)   his misrepresentation or omission of facts, including  the
             use of false documents, were decisive for the grant of asylum;
             ..."

12. The First-tier Tribunal accepted the appellant's case in respect of the
    cancellation of his asylum  status.   First,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    rejected the Secretary of State's reliance upon  the  interview  of  12
    July 2011 by an Immigration Officer as not being reliable.  At paras 30-
    31 the Tribunal said this:

         "30. The Respondent relies  on  an  interview  with  the  Appellant
             conducted by an Immigration Officer on 12th July 201[1].  This
             was whilst the Appellant was in prison and unrepresented.

              She also relies on an interview dated 26th May 2011  with  his
             Offender Manager as part of a Parole Assessment Report.

         31.  We find that  the  12th  July  interview  was  of  45  minutes
             duration  yet  only  produced  five  pages  of  questions  and
             answers.  The interview was not taped.  We find, given  extent
             of the notes of interview relative  to  the  duration  of  the
             interview, that it is reasonably likely  that  the  documented
             questions and answers were not a verbatim account of the whole
             of that interview.  We would have expected more notes  for  an
             interview of 45 minutes.

              We also find that the  Appellant  was  unrepresented  at  that
             interview.  There is no record of whether he was asked  if  he
             wanted to be represented.

              It is clear to us from reading the questions and answers  that
             the Appellant  was  unsure  whether  he  should  be  answering
             questions about his asylum claim.  He was to say that  he  had
             told everything in his original claim and that he found it too
             emotional to go  over  again.   He  informed  the  Immigration
             Officer at the interview of 12th July, 2011 but he  was  still
             undergoing  therapy  in  prison  for  post  traumatic   stress
             disorder.

              Given the cumulative effect of the above, we do not find  that
             the interview of 12th July, 2011 is reliable."

13. Secondly, the Tribunal rejected the Secretary of State's reliance  upon
    the Offender Manager's report based upon, in part, an interview  on  26
    May 2011 which the appellant disputed.  At para 32  the  Tribunal  said
    this:

         "32. We have been provided with a copy of the  interview  with  the
             Appellant's Probation Offender Manager on 26th May, 2011.   We
             are mindful from the Appellant's  former  solicitors  and  the
             UNHCR letters that the Respondent was  fully  aware  that  the
             Appellant disputed what is allegedly reported by the  Offender
             Manager  regarding  the  past  asylum  claim.   There  is   no
             statement from the Offender Manager dealing with that  dispute
             nor did he attend the hearing to assist us.   This  is  not  a
             criticism but there is little evidence  from  either  side  to
             assist the Tribunal in resolving matters concerned  with  that
             dispute."

14. Thirdly, in any event, the Tribunal concluded  that  the  discrepancies
    relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  appellant's  various
    accounts did not exist and, if they did,  were  not  misrepresentations
    falling within para 399A(viii).  At paras 33-34 the Tribunal said this:

         "33. In any event, we do not find that we can infer  from  what  is
             stated in paragraph 7.1 of the Offender Manager's Report  that
             the Appellant and his sister were in their parent's  house  at
             the time of the fire.  The Offender Manager simply  states  at
             7.1 that 'Mr [O] and his sister are reported to have  survived
             the fire'.  The Respondent does not say in her letter of  14th
             January why she concludes that this information is at variance
             with  that  supplied  with  the  Appellant's  original  asylum
             application.

              We have considered the asylum interview and find that the gist
             of the interview is  not  at  any  significant  variance  with
             paragraph 7.1 of the Offender Manager's Report.

         34.  In any event, we do not find that  a  discrepancy  as  to  age
             undermines the core  of  his  claim  (which  included  medical
             evidence) or his  overall  credibility  when  considering  the
             determination of Adjudicator Mrs D. Witts promulgated  on  4th
             December, 2001.

              In those circumstances, we do not find that it has been  shown
             evidentially that those discrepancies exist or,  if  they  do,
             that they can be found to be ones that can  safely  be  termed
             misrepresentations."

15.  Having  reached  those  conclusions,  the  Tribunal  found  that   the
    appellant's asylum status should  not  have  been  revoked  under  para
    399A(iii) (see para 36).  Further, the Adjudicator's  findings  in  the
    appellant's favour regarding his refugee claim and in respect of Art  3
    of the ECHR, therefore, stood (see para 37).





The Secretary of State's Grounds

16. In her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the Secretary of  State
    sought to challenge the Tribunal's decision on two  bases.   First,  it
    was submitted that the Tribunal had erred in law by making no  findings
    in relation to the Secretary of State's decision under s.72 of the 2002
    Act that the appellant had been convicted  of  a  particularly  serious
    crime and that his presence in the  UK  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community of the UK.  Secondly, it was argued  that  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to provide adequate reasons for reaching its conclusion that the
    revocation of the appellant's refugee status was unlawful.

17. On 16 June 2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Zucker)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  both
    grounds.

18. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

19. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State did not pursue  ground
    1 before me.  He accepted that the Secretary of State had not relied on
    s.72 of the 2002 Act in her decision of 14 January 2014.   He  accepted
    that he could not, therefore, pursue the ground that the  Tribunal  had
    erred in law by failing to consider whether s.72 applied.

20. In my judgment, that concession is entirely appropriate.  Section 72 of
    the 2002 Act was not relied upon in the Secretary of  State's  decision
    even though the appellant had earlier been informed  that  it  was  the
    Secretary of State's intention to rely on  that  provision.   Likewise,
    there is no suggestion in the determination that the Presenting Officer
    relied upon s.72 at the hearing before the Tribunal.

21. Instead, Mr Richards focused and relied upon the Secretary  of  State's
    second ground.

22. First, Mr Richards submitted that there were significant  discrepancies
    in the appellant's accounts which  the  Tribunal  had  simply  "glossed
    over".  He submitted that the Tribunal was wrong to conclude that  para
    7.1 of the Offender Manager's report of what was said by the  appellant
    to the Offender Manager was not inconsistent with his  original  asylum
    account.  The appellant's original account was that he and  his  sister
    were not present when the family home was set on fire.   The  appellant
    told the Offender Manager that they had  "survived  the  fire"  and  Mr
    Richards submitted that that was only consistent with them having  been
    present at the fire.

23. Mr Richards submitted  that  there  were  clear  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's account of how his  parents  had  died.   In  his  original
    account, the appellant had said that the police came to the family home
    and the appellant,  thinking  they  were  thieves,  escaped  through  a
    window.  When he returned home, he found that his parents had died  and
    saw that both had had their necks cut open.  In his 2011 interview, the
    appellant had said  that  his  parents  were  shot,  and  the  Offender
    Manager's report related that the appellant had said that  his  parents
    had been killed in a fire at his family home.

24. Mr Richards submitted that the Tribunal had simply failed to deal  with
    these discrepancies in reaching its conclusion at para  34  that  there
    were no discrepancies.  In any event, the  Tribunal's  conclusion  that
    they could not be "safely termed misrepresentations" was irrational and
    not open to the Tribunal.

25. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that there was  nothing  unreliable  in
    the record of interview with the Immigration Officer on  12  July  2011
    simply because a 45 minute interview had only produced  five  pages  of
    questions and answers.

26. On behalf of the appellant,  Ms  Mumtaz  directed  my  attention  to  a
    medical report of  Dr  Michael  Seear  dated  12  November  2001  which
    identified that the appellant suffered from  PTSD.   Ms  Mumtaz  relied
    upon this to explain any discrepancies.  In any  event,  she  submitted
    that the  appellant's  account  was  consistent,  namely  that  he  had
    witnessed his parents being murdered.  Further,  she  relied  upon  the
    Tribunal's reasoning that the 2011 interview  was  not  reliable  given
    that only a five page record of a 45 minute interview existed.

27. In response to Ms Mumtaz's submission in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    mental health, Mr Richards submitted that it might have  been  open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to take into  account  the  appellant's  mental
    health to explain the discrepancies but, he  submitted,  they  had  not
    done so; they had simply stated that there were  no  discrepancies  and
    that was not properly open to them.

Discussion

28.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter  in  relation   to   the
    cancellation of the appellant's refugee status relies upon a number  of
    claimed  discrepancies  or  differences  in  the  appellant's  evidence
    including (but not restricted to) differences in his account of how his
    parents died in Kenya, his claimed ethnicity and his date of birth.  Mr
    Richards focused in his submissions upon the alleged  discrepancies  in
    the appellant's account of the attack on his family home and the  death
    of his parents.

29. First, it was not open to the Tribunal to regard the  interview  on  12
    July 2011  as  unreliable  simply  because  it  was  only  5  pages  of
    handwritten notes for a 45 minute interview.  It  is  pure  speculation
    that it is not an accurate account of what  the  appellant  said.   The
    fact that the appellant was unrepresented and  was  not  sure  that  he
    should be answering questions is not, in my judgment, justification  to
    disregard the content of the  interview  as  actually  recorded  unless
    there is good reason to doubt the answers given.  There is, so far as I
    can see, no such reason.  As  I  will  shortly  come  to,  the  medical
    evidence did not  explain  obvious  and  plain  contradictions  in  the
    appellant's evidence over time.

30. Secondly, there  are,  in  my  judgment,  clear  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence as to how  his  parents  died.   The  Tribunal  was  wrong  to
    conclude there were none.  It is simply not consistent to say that,  on
    the one hand, they were shot and, on the other hand, to say that  their
    necks were cut open.  Equally, it is not consistent to  say  that  they
    died in the fire.  There is  also  a  potential  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's evidence as to whether he and his sister were at the  house
    when his parents died and the house was set on fire or they  were  not.
    In my judgment, these inconsistencies are not necessarily  resolved  by
    the medical evidence concerning the appellant's PTSD.  Dr  Seear  says,
    for example,  in  his  report  that  PTSD  survivors  produce  "various
    fragments of memory ... from time to time".  He then continues:

         "It is only towards the end of a therapy that a  person  regains  a
         full integrated sequential understanding of what happened  to  them
         according  to  a  normal  logical  timescale.   At  that  stage  of
         retrieving the full memories in an intact manner is it possible  to
         then heal the memories and then move on in life."

31.  The  Tribunal  did  not  rely  upon  this  evidence  to  explain   any
    discrepancies in the appellant's accounts.  In fact the Tribunal  noted
    that "[h]is PTSD has  now  resolved.   He  does  not  need  therapy  at
    present" (para 14).  The primary conclusion of the  Tribunal  was  that
    there were no discrepancies.  There clearly were discrepancies.  It may
    well be that the medical  evidence  whilst  explaining  a  "fragmented"
    recall, may not assist to explain wholly inconsistent accounts  of  how
    the appellant's parents were killed.  I do not express a concluded view
    on that as that will be a matter for a future Tribunal.

32. In my judgment, the Tribunal has not  sufficiently  grappled  with  the
    evidence and the differences in the  appellant's  accounts  given  over
    time  in  reaching  its  finding  that  there  were  no  discrepancies.
    Unfortunately, the Tribunal offers little or  any  reasoning  for  that
    conclusion at para 34 of its determination.  It was incumbent upon  the
    Tribunal to both grapple with the evidence and  provide  a  stratum  of
    reasoning to explain its conclusion.   In  my  judgment,  the  Tribunal
    failed to consider, and provide adequate  reasons  for  rejecting,  the
    factual issues concerning the differences in the  appellant's  accounts
    set out in the decision letter of 14 January 2014,  in  particular  his
    account of his parents' death  and  whether  he  and  his  sister  were
    present.  Its failure to do so, in my judgment, amounted to a  material
    error of law in reaching its finding that para 399A(viii) did not apply
    so that the cancellation of the appellant's refugee status was unlawful
    and that, therefore,  the  adjudicator's  finding  in  the  appellant's
    favour that he was a refugee and that his return to Kenya would  breach
    Art 3 stood so that he could not be deported pursuant to the  automatic
    deportation provisions of the 2007 Act.

Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    involved the making of an error of law.  That decision cannot stand and
    is set aside.

34. There are substantial issues of fact to  be  determined.   Taking  into
    account para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement  and  the
    nature and extent of the fact-finding required, it  is  appropriate  to
    remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. That hearing will  be  de
    novo.

35. The Secretary of State does not rely on s.72  of  the  2002  Act.   The
    issues for the First-tier Tribunal will be whether the cancellation  of
    the appellant's refugee status was in accordance with  para  399A(viii)
    and whether, in the light of that decision, the appellant falls  within
    one of the exceptions set out in s.33 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

36. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  rehearing  on
    that basis; the Tribunal not to include Judge Holder or Ms V  S  Street
    JP.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

