
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00401/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 September 2014                             |On 23 September 2014       |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 umar zaman


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, instructed by RKS Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Umar Zaman, was born on 1 February 1978 and is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  On 2 November 2011, the appellant  was  sentenced
    to four years' imprisonment for wounding with  intent  to  do  grievous
    bodily harm with a two year concurrent sentence for assault occasioning
    actual bodily harm.  A decision was made on 18 February 2014 to  deport
    him.  The respondent appealed against that decision to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Shimmin; Mrs S A Hussain)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 2 June 2014, allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.  I shall hereafter refer to the appellant as the
    respondent and the  respondent  as  the  appellant  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. In summary, the grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed to  have
    proper regard for the public interest concerned  with  the  appellant's
    deportation (see SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  550);  failed  to  have
    proper regard to the fact that the appellant had been  violent  towards
    his wife from 2001-2010; failed to have regard to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been the sole cause of the necessity for police and local
    authority intervention in his family's life when the  panel  had  found
    that the appellant's remaining in the  United  Kingdom  would  indicate
    that there would be "less intervention and support in the lives of  the
    family from statutory bodies"  [55];  wrongly  found  that  there  were
    special circumstances in  the  present  case  justifying  allowing  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR; based its assessment on a  false  premise,
    namely that the appellant had been provoked into committing violence by
    an incident in 2008 [41]; the sentencing remarks of the judge  indicate
    that the  court  found  the  appellant's  behaviour  to  be  completely
    unjustifiable.

 3. I find the Secretary of State's appeal should  be  dismissed.   I  have
    reached that conclusion for the following reasons.  First, I accept  Mr
    Hussain's submission that, on the facts of this case, the dismissal  of
    the  appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  inevitable.   The
    appellant had attacked with a cricket bat an individual  with  whom  he
    had grievance and injured both that individual and  his  wife.   In  an
    even-handed and balanced determination,  the  Tribunal  considered  the
    relevant facts in detail.  It is true to say that the Tribunal did find
    [53] that the appellant's violent  conduct  had  been  "prompted  by  a
    family feud and provocation".  That statement is perhaps  qualified  by
    what the Tribunal says at [41] ("Although no excuse for the appellant's
    actions, we accept that he was provoked by the violent incident in 2008
    and by taunting from  the  victim  immediately  before  the  July  2010
    incident.").   It  is  clear  that  the  Tribunal  does  not  refer  to
    "provocation" in any technical legal sense but has simply  acknowledged
    that the appellant had attacked  his  victim  as  a  consequence  of  a
    previous incident and what he perceived to be the  victim's  aggressive
    and taunting behaviour.  I do not find that the Tribunal has considered
    this "provocation" to have justified the appellant's  actions;  indeed,
    the Tribunal  says  more  than  once  in  the  determination  that  the
    appellant's behaviour was inexcusable and unjustifiable.  I  find  that
    it has used the word "provocation" simply in order to give  an  account
    of the causation for the violent attack and to distinguish it  from  an
    entirely random act of violence upon a stranger.  That distinction  was
    worth making because, as the  OASys  Report  acknowledged,  whilst  the
    appellant's risk to a "known adult" might remain high the risk  of  his
    injuring children or strangers has been variously described  as  medium
    or low.  I find that the Secretary of State  has  failed  to  establish
    that the Tribunal has based its analysis on  a  false  premise,  namely
    that the appellant may have been justified in attacking his  victim  on
    account of being provoked by him.

 4. As regards to domestic violence, the Tribunal notes at  [35]  that  the
    appellant's wife stated in evidence that her husband  did  not  have  a
    violent temper and had never been violent towards  the  children.   The
    incidents of domestic violence  since  2010  appeared  to  have  ceased
    completely (they are described in the determination  as  "totally  non-
    existent").  I find there  is  nothing  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds at [11] which undermines those findings.  As  for  the  reduced
    intervention of statutory bodies in the family's lives,  I  agree  that
    the point made in the grounds [12] is a  good  one;  it  had  been  the
    appellant's own  conduct  which  had  led  to  those  statutory  bodies
    becoming involved in  the  first  place.   However,  the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to conclude that the presence of the appellant in  the  family
    home, would, in the  future  enable  the  family  to  flourish  without
    assistance from social services and other state bodies.

 5. For the most part, the grounds are little more than a disagreement with
    the findings of the Tribunal and the outcome of the appeal.  I find, in
    particular, that the Tribunal has  had  proper  regard  to  the  public
    interest and  has  not  sought  to  diminish  the  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's  criminal  offending.   It  is  also  the  case  that   the
    appellant's probation officer, in a letter dated 15 May 2014,  somewhat
    unusually supported the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  deportation
    order.  It is also clear that the child, A, has  learning,  linguistic,
    physical and behavioural difficulties which the  social  work  evidence
    indicated would be assisted by the presence of  the  appellant  in  the
    family home.  To that extent,  the  circumstances  of  the  family  are
    unusual and a matter to which the  Tribunal  properly  gave  weight  in
    reaching its determination.  In conclusion, the Tribunal has reached an
    outcome which was available to it on the facts and has done so  by  way
    of a proper structured and detailed analysis of the  relevant  evidence
    and has supported its decision with  cogent  reasons.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed.

DECISION

 6. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

