

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00308/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 4 November 2014                            |On 18 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 Acheampong
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs S. Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 3  October  1985.
       He appeals against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hemingway and Mr G.H. Getlevog promulgated on 4 June 2014  dismissing
       his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 11 February
       2014 to make a deportation order against him.  The appellant did  not
       attend the hearing.  It is noteworthy that in  paragraph  14  of  its
       determination, the panel stated that, had there been  a  good  reason
       for  the  appellant's  non-attendance,  the  panel  would  not   have
       proceeded in the absence of the appellant.


    2. Although the appellant is a national of Ghana,  he  has  a  right  to
       reside in Italy where he lived for some years with  his  family.  His
       mother is an Italian national.  The  appellant  came  to  the  United
       Kingdom in July 2007, aged 21. He was granted  a  residence  card  as
       confirmation of a right of residence as a family member  of  his  EEA
       national mother. Subsequently, he was granted a  permanent  right  of
       residence on 22 May 2013.


    3. On 16 May 2013, just six days before the grant of a  permanent  right
       of residence, the appellant was convicted on two counts of possessing
       Class A controlled drugs, namely cocaine and heroin, with  intent  to
       supply and possession of cannabis for which he  was  sentenced  on  6
       June 2013 at  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court  to  a  total  of  18  months
       imprisonment.


    4. Following the respondent's decision, the appellant  appealed  to  the
       Tribunal and a notice of hearing was sent out to him at an address at
       19 Brisdale Court.  In fact, he lives at  9  Brisdale  Court  and  an
       envelope sent out on 4 June 2014 to 19 Brisdale Court was returned to
       the Tribunal marked with an indication that  the  appellant  did  not
       live there. It is clear from the recital of  the  facts  provided  by
       Designated Judge Appleyard in granting permission that there has been
       an error in serving the appellant.  This would normally  entitle  him
       to have the determination set  aside  without  more.  However,  where
       there is not even an arguable  case  that  this  would  result  in  a
       different outcome, it is open to the Tribunal to refuse to set  aside
       the determination as to do so would serve no purpose.


    5. This approach, however, should be used sparingly given the  Draconian
       effect of  a  decision  with  a  very  significant  impact  upon  the
       appellant who has not had an opportunity to argue his case before the
       Tribunal.  Although  the  offences  were  serious  ones,  they   were
       committed at a time  when  the  appellant  was  of  no  fixed  abode.
       Subsequent reports suggest that the risk of reconviction is  low  and
       that he has been assessed as posing a low risk of harm to members  of
       the public. He told me that he is now living with his mother and  his
       domestic  circumstances  have   significantly   changed.   In   these
       circumstances there are issues which require a full examination which
       can only be achieved by re-making the decision.


    6. There has been a procedural irregularity amounting to an error  on  a
       point of law.  I set aside the panel's determination.  I  direct  the
       appeal  is  to  be  re-determined  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   in
       accordance with paragraph 7.2(a) the Practice Statement of the Senior
       President dated 25 September 2012.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            13 November 2014
