
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00197/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ANDREI BONCU
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. H. Ti, solicitor, Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The Respondent, who was born on  8  February  1986,  is  a  citizen  of
    Romania. He first arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2012  for  a
    short visit. He then returned to the United Kingdom in August  2013  to
    stay with a cousin.

 2. On 17 November 2014 he attended Lloyds Bank in order to withdraw  money
    from a bank account he had opened in the name of Simon Denk, said to be
    a German national. He was searched and found to be in possession of two
    false documents. On 22 December 2014 he was convicted of one  count  of
    possessing  or  controlling  identity  documents  and  two  counts   of
    dishonestly making false representations and  sentenced  to  12  months
    imprisonment.

 3. On 26 March 2015 the Respondent informed him of her intention to deport
    him from the United Kingdom and on 6 April  2015  representations  were
    submitted on his behalf. On 5 May 2015 the Respondent made  a  decision
    to deport him and he appealed against this decision on 18 May 2015.

 4. His  claim  was  also  certified  under  regulation  24AA  of  the  EEA
    Regulations. As a consequence, he was deported to  Romania  on  8  June
    2015 and his appeal proceeded in his absence. First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Walker dismissed his appeal on 5 July 2015 and the  Appellant  appealed
    against his decision on 8 July 2015. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 12 August 2015.

Error of Law Hearing

 5. Under regulation 19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations") an EEA national may be removed
    if the Respondent has decided that his  removal  is  justified  on  the
    grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health   in
    accordance with regulation 21.

 6. Regulation 21(5)(b) of the EEA regulations states that  a  decision  to
    deport  an  EEA  national  on  public  policy  grounds  must  be  based
    exclusively on  the  personal  conduct  of  that  person.  However,  in
    paragraph 30(4) - (7) of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker
    relied on the fact that the OASys Assessment on the Appellant mentioned
    that a Barclays pin machine and a TV licence in  the  name  of  another
    person had been found in the car he had been using on 17 November  2014
    and that the car did not belong to him. It also said that  Lloyds  Bank
    subsequently stated that it had another five bank accounts in different
    German  names,  which  had  been  opened  with  ID  cards  bearing  the
    Appellant's photograph.  The  Appellant  was  never  charged  with  any
    offences connected with these items or factors and there was no further
    evidence to indicate that he had committed further offences.

 7. In addition, their existence did not cause the expert OASys assessor to
    conclude that there was any more than a low risk of the  Appellant  re-
    offending. In particular, she said that there was only a 9% risk of him
    re-offending within a year and a 16% chance of him re-offending  within
    two years.  Furthermore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker did  not  ask
    the Appellant's cousin or his solicitor, who were present at the appeal
    hearing, whether the Appellant  could  give  any  explanation  for  the
    suspicions he had about the Appellant's additional criminality. (If  he
    had done so  the  Appellant  would  have  been  able  to  provide  some
    additional evidence about his  suspicions,  as  shown  by  the  witness
    statement submitted on his behalf at the error of law hearing.)

 8. I do not rely on the fact that the criminal judge's sentencing  remarks
    did not refer to these additional incidents as they would not have been
    part of the prosecution's case and the OASys assessment would have  yet
    to be written.  The Home Office Presenting  Officer  also  argued  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker was  entitled  to  take  into  account
    "evidence" before him  in  the  form  of  the  contents  of  the  OASys
    assessment. However, as I noted above, regulation 21(5)(b) of  the  EEA
    Regulations states that a decision must be  based  exclusively  on  the
    Appellant's personal conduct and there had been no  evidential  finding
    about the incidents which the Respondent was relying upon.

 9. Regulation 21(5)( c) also states that the Appellant's personal  conduct
    must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. In  the  current
    case his risk of re-offending had been found  to  be  low  and  in  his
    witness statement the Appellant had said he was ashamed of his  actions
    and felt that he had let his family down and brought shame on them  and
    had learnt his lesson. Both Iulian Varlan and Norbert Peter  also  said
    that they believed that the Appellant genuinely regretted  his  actions
    and would not  offend  again  and  risk  going  to  prison.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker gave little weight to Norbert Peter's evidence as
    he did not attend in person but it is not that case  that  he  gave  no
    weight to it. There was also no evidence of any risk of re-offending in
    the Appellant's behaviour since the offences in question.  Instead,  he
    had returned to live with his parents and had obtained a job offer from
    his cousin in London.  Therefore, there was  insufficient  evidence  to
    find that he presented a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to society.

10. In  addition,  regulation  21(5(e)  states  that  a  person's  previous
    criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves  justify  his   or   her
    deportation. This provision applies to all convictions however serious.
    Therefore, even if  the  Appellant's  conduct  met  the  threshold  for
    serious criminal activity as asserted by the Judge in paragraph 30 (13)
    of his decision, he still had to consider the other  factors  contained
    in regulation 21(5).  These factors restrict the situations in which an
    EEA national can be lawfully deported, as correctly  submitted  by  the
    Appellant's solicitor in his oral submissions. This was  not  addressed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker in his decision.

11. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walker  did  undertake  a  proportionality
    assessment in paragraph 30(10 as required by  regulation  21(5)(a)  but
    when doing so he did not refer to the totality of the evidence  or  all
    of the factors listed in regulation 21(6) of the EEA Regulations.

12. For all of these reasons I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker's
    decision did include material errors of law.

Decision

13. I allow the Appellant's appeal and set aside First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Walker's decision.

14. I remit the Appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker.


Date: 15 January 2016


    Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

