
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00784/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 September 2014                            |On 12 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    a  s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Ouattara, Cohesion Legal Services Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, AS, was born on 2 January 1979  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Eritrea.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondent  as  the  appellant
    and the appellant as the  respondent  (as  they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had appealed against the decision of  the  respondent  to
    refuse to revoke a deportation order which had been signed against  the
    appellant  on  3  February  2010.   The  First-tier  Tribunal,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 27 June  2014,  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    Article 3 ECHR and asylum grounds but allowed  it  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, the Secretary of State asserts
    that the Tribunal failed to follow the guidance of MF (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192 by failing to identify any exceptional  circumstances  in
    the appellant's case which would justify a determination of the  appeal
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds outside the Immigration Rules.  Secondly, the
    Secretary of State asserts that the  Tribunal  failed  to  give  proper
    weight  to  the  public  interest  concerned   with   the   appellant's
    deportation.  Instead, the Tribunal  found  [71]  that  there  was  "no
    compelling evidence that the public interest would  be  served  by  the
    appellant's removal [from the United Kingdom]".  The Tribunal had found
    that it would not be in the best interests of the appellant's child for
    the appellant to be deported and that the "problems" which the Tribunal
    considered "could" be caused in respect of the child's welfare were not
    certain or the finding was not supported by adequate evidence.

 4. As noted above, the deportation order against the  appellant  had  been
    signed as long ago as 2010.  The appellant  had  been  convicted  on  1
    September 2008 of seeking/obtaining leave by  deception  and  had  been
    sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.   The  sentencing  judge  had
    concluded that the appellant had, notwithstanding his offence, remained
    of "good character".

 5. At [44], the Tribunal directed itself to consider MF noting  that  they
    should  "consider  the  position  outside  the  Immigration  Rules   to
    determine  whether  there  are  circumstances  which  are  sufficiently
    compelling (and therefore exceptional) to outweigh the public  interest
    in removal".  The Tribunal went on to set out extensive quotations from
    Article 8 jurisprudence.  At [68], the Tribunal concluded that;

         There would be no immediate impact [on the appellant's child - aged
         about 2 months old at the  date  of  the  hearing]  caused  by  the
         appellant relocating to Eritrea.  However in the longer  term,  the
         child's interest would best be  served  by  the  presence  of  both
         parents.  The absence of the  appellant  could  cause  problems  in
         respect of the child's welfare development and wellbeing.  In these
         circumstances we find that there are material  issues  which  would
         adversely affect the child if the appellant were to relocate.

 6. I consider that statement by the Tribunal to be  entirely  speculative.
    As the Tribunal recorded, the child is at present a very young  infant.
    The observation that  a  child  is  best  raised  by  both  parents  is
    axiomatic; it is difficult to see how such  a  consideration  might  be
    regarded as exceptional when the child is so young that the  impact  of
    the removal of its  father  cannot  possibly  be  assessed.   Likewise,
    whilst "the absence of the appellant could cause problems in respect of
    the child's welfare" it might, on the other  hand,  cause  no  problems
    whatsoever; it is impossible to reach any sensible  conclusion  when  a
    child is as yet still so  young.   The  Secretary  of  State  does  not
    challenge the Tribunal's observation that it would  not  be  reasonable
    for the entire family to relocate to Eritrea (the  appellant's  partner
    is a refugee).  The Tribunal has taken no  consideration  of  the  fact
    that, if the appellant were  removed  to  Eritrea,  the  partner  would
    remain in the United Kingdom and be able to care for the child.  In  my
    opinion, the Tribunal has given weight to matters  rendered  irrelevant
    in the analysis by virtue of being entirely speculative.

 7. That error has been compounded by the lack of weight  accorded  by  the
    Tribunal to the public interest concerned with the appellant's removal.
     At [71], the Tribunal observed that there was "no compelling  evidence
    that the public interest will be served by the appellant's removal".  I
    do not consider that to be a proper  assessment  of  the  role  of  the
    public interest in an Article 8 ECHR analysis of  this  kind.   In  the
    absence of "compelling evidence" to show that the public interest  will
    be served by foreign criminals' removal is not  a  test  recognised  by
    law.  Whilst I am aware of the generally quite favourable  comments  of
    the sentencing judge (see above), the Tribunal should weigh the  public
    interest properly against any possible interference to  the  Article  8
    rights of the appellant and his family.  To dismiss the public interest
    as a factor because there was "no compelling evidence" to indicate that
    it would be served by the appellant's deportation was not  appropriate.
    This further error on the part of the Tribunal has, in the light of its
    inappropriate assessment of the best interests of the child, led me  to
    conclude that the determination should be set aside.

 8. I have proceeded to remake the decision.  As I  have  noted  above,  it
    would, in an ideal world, be desirable for the appellant's child to  be
    brought up by both of its parents.  Set  against  that  observation,  I
    cannot ignore the fact that this very young child's primary carer  (its
    mother) remain in the  United Kingdom to care for it.  The  appellant's
    crime was, as  the  sentencing  judge  acknowledged,  serious  and  his
    deportation  would  serve  the  public  interest  by   preventing   his
    reoffending within this jurisdiction discouraging similar offending  by
    others.  It is no fault of the appellant that his child is  at  present
    so young but the fact remains that the child  is  probably  at  an  age
    where it is best able to cope with separation from its  father.   These
    considerations have led me to conclude that there is  nothing  whatever
    in the appellant's circumstances which could be properly  described  as
    exceptional.  The operation of the Immigration  Rules  (paragraphs  398
    and 399) contemplate the deportation of  individuals  in  circumstances
    where family members will remain in the  United  Kingdom  to  care  for
    children of the family.   That  is  exactly  what  will  occur  in  the
    appellant's  case.   The  sentencing  judge's  acknowledgment  of   the
    appellant's good character and the nature of the appellant's  offending
    do not, in my opinion, render this an exceptional case falling  outside
    the operation of the Immigration Rules.  In the circumstances,  I  find
    that the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to revoke the deportation order should be dismissed.

DECISION

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    27  June  2014  is  set  aside.   I  have  remade  the  decision.   The
    appellant's appeal against the refusal of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    revoke the deportation order dated 3  February  2010  is  dismissed  on
    asylum grounds, under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds
    (Articles 3 and 8).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 19 November 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
