
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00515/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 16th September 2013                        |on 3rd October 2013          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                           MAJED MOHAMED AL-JA'ADY
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Hussain - Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Ali instructed by Ahmed & Williams Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of a
        panel of the First-tier Tribunal composed of  Judge  Forrester  and
        Mrs Endersby (hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel')  who  in  the
        determination  promulgated  on  the  11th  July  2013  allowed  the
        Respondent's appeal by reference to  Article  8  ECHR  against  the
        decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.



Background


     2. The Respondent, a national of Yemen, was born on 6th June 1986.  He
        entered the United Kingdom on 16th February 2001 and claimed asylum
        four days later. His claim was refused on 5th June 2001 but  as  it
        was accepted he was an unaccompanied minor he was granted ELR until
        5th June 2005.  On 2nd June 2005 he made an 'in  time'  application
        for ILR which was only dealt with by the Secretary of State at  the
        same time as the decision to deport in 2013.


     3. In March 2003 the Respondent was arrested for being  in  possession
        of Class A drugs and on 1st December 2003 at Sheffield Crown  Court
        was convicted on two counts of (1) possessing  Class  A  controlled
        drugs with intent to supply - Heroin and  (2)  possessing  Class  A
        controlled drugs with intent to supply -  Cocaine.  On 5th  January
        2004 he was sentenced to 46 months detention in  a  young  offender
        institution.  On 2nd  November  2007  a  liability  to  deportation
        letter was sent which he completed and returned  on  22nd  November
        2007.  A similar letter was sent on 25th  January  2013  which  the
        Respondent  also  responded   to   by   returning   the   completed
        questionnaire with further representations on 20th February 2013.


     4. On 25th April 2013 a decision to make a deportation order was  made
        and served upon the Respondent without reference to his  claim  for
        asylum although a subsequent letter dated 1st July 2013 contained a
        rejection  of  the  claim  for   asylum   made   in   the   further
        representations of February 2013.


     5. Having considered the evidence and submissions the  Panel  set  out
        their findings from paragraph 13 of the determination. Key findings
        made by the Panel include that since attaining the age of 18 and on
        release from custody the Respondent  has  show  himself  to  be  an
        exemplary citizen who has learnt his lesson and the  error  of  his
        ways [20], that the delay to which he has been subjected  is  gross
        and inordinate [21], that he did not constitute any threat  to  the
        public or was not  likely  to  commit  further  crimes  and  having
        considered the guidance in  Maslov  the  public  interest  did  not
        demand his expulsion [22], the Respondent has for  the  last  eight
        years demonstrated an ability to put behind him the consequences of
        a crime committed when a vulnerable juvenile [23], he has over  the
        past four years had a  close  and  settled  relationship  with  the
        person to whom he is now married and whom wish to re-marry again in
        the UK. Removal of the Respondent will mean separating this unit is
        it was not possible for his partner to relocate to Yemen [24],  and
        that the Respondent has no prospect of finding family or support in
        Yemen as the Red Cross have been unable to locate any member of his
        family and he has spent more than half of his life,  including  all
        his formative and adult years, away from that country.  His  skills
        and contacts at a private and family level have  been  obtained  in
        the UK as the evidence testifies [25].



The Grounds



     6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on three grounds
        which can be summarised as follows:

              i.  The Panel failed to have regard to the  Immigration  Rules
in making                  its Article 8 assessment.

              ii. The Panel reached a  conclusion  without  giving  adequate
                       consideration to the public interest  in  removal  in
the proportionality                 assessment and so misdirected itself  in
law.   The  grounds   allege   the                   Respondent's   personal
circumstances were less compelling than                   those found in  SS
(Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and that  if  the                   Panel  had
considered   the   public   interest   it   may   well   have   reached    a
different conclusion.


Discussion



     7.  Having  considered  the  evidence  and  submissions  made  by  the
        advocate's I announced in court that it  is  my  decision  that  no
        material error had been proved in relation to the findings  of  the
        Panel which must therefore stand. I now give my reasons.


     8. The chronology shows the Respondent was convicted on  1st  December
        2003 in relation to offences committed as a minor. He was  in  fact
        still under 18 at the date he  was  sentenced.  Notwithstanding  it
        being alleged that the Respondent's conduct and criminality is such
        that the interests of society require his removal from  the  United
        Kingdom it was not until 25th February  2013  that  a  decision  to
        deport him from the United Kingdom was made  by  the  Secretary  of
        State.  I find the reference in paragraph 3 of the determination to
        a deportation order being made is an error but  not  one  that  has
        been shown to be material. No order was made as there is  no  right
        of appeal against a signed deportation order in circumstances where
        it is not an automatic deportation case.  The decision under appeal
        is the decision to make the deportation order which gives  rise  to
        an in country right of appeal.


     9. The significance of the chronology is that it was eight years  from
        the date the Respondent was sentenced and seven  years  ten  months
        from the date that he was released back into the community that the
        Secretary of State finally made the decision which, the  chronology
        also indicates, was only made when the threat  of  judicial  review
        proceedings was invoked by the solicitors advising  the  respondent
        in October 2012.  Further details of the  events  are  set  out  in
        paragraph 21 of the determination.


    10. In Yousuf (Somalia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 394 the Court of  Appeal
        said that the amount of time the Home Office allowed to pass before
        serving a deportation order did not create any kind  of  legitimate
        expectation that the claimant would not be  deported,  but  it  did
        mean that the Home Office, and,  in  turn,  the  Tribunal,  had  to
        consider a period in which, unlike most deportees who had offended,
        the claimant had been able to show himself capable of living a  law
        abiding life.


    11. No explanation was given for the Secretary of State's  failure  and
        the Panel did not find the delay created a  legitimate  expectation
        but clearly placed weight upon the uncontested evidence that during
        the period of delay the Respondent had  shown  himself  capable  of
        leading a law abiding life.


    12. The ground alleging the Panel failed to  consider  the  Immigration
        Rules has no merit as in paragraph 17 the determination  the  Panel
        state "We accept that an application of the  Immigration  Rules  to
        the facts of the Appellant's case leads to the decision that he  be
        deported". This is clearly a finding  that  he  could  not  succeed
        under any aspect of the Rules including those relating to  the  way
        in which the Secretary  of  State  believes  Article  8  should  be
        assessed.


    13. The Panel correctly identified that it was  necessary  to  consider
        the case by reference  to  Article  8  ECHR  and  referred  to  the
        relevant case law in paragraph 18 of the determination.


    14. This is a case in which the Respondent is lawfully resident in  the
        United Kingdom. The chronology shows that he was granted  leave  to
        remain on 5th June 2005 and thereafter made an in-time  application
        for indefinite leave to remain.  His leave was  therefore  extended
        by virtue of section 3C of the 1971  Act  which  remains  the  case
        until a final determination of this appeal. Although this is not an
        appeal against a decision made under UK  Borders  act  2007  in  RG
        (Automatic deport - Section 33(2)(a) exception) Nepal  [2010]  UKUT
        273 (IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) when considering the automatic
        deportation provision in s. 32(5) UK  Borders  Act  2007,  and  the
        exemption at s.33(2)(a) relating  to  the  claimant's  private  and
        family life (Article  8  ECHR),  the  Tribunal  must  give  careful
        consideration to the factors set out at paragraphs 70-73 of  Maslov
        v Austria [2009] INLR 47 ECHR; and (ii) particular care is required
        in relation to the consideration of the Article 8  ECHR  impact  on
        those who were lawfully resident in the UK at  the  time  when  the
        offence was committed.


    15. In MW (Democratic Republic of Congo) v Secretary of State  for  the
        Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1240  that  Appellant  had  various
        convictions as a juvenile, including stealing a motor  vehicle.  In
        adult life he had been fined for possessing an offensive weapon and
        had been convicted of driving whilst disqualified on  4  occasions.
        His sentences  included  28  days  youth  custody  and  then,  most
        recently, 16 weeks imprisonment suspended for two years. The  Court
        of Appeal held that Maslov v Austria  clearly  provided  that  very
        serious reasons were required  to  justify  the  deportation  of  a
        settled migrant who had lawfully spent all, or the major  part,  of
        his childhood and youth in the host country. Whether the  reference
        to  very  serious  reasons   was  described  as  a  rule,  test  or
        threshold, or as an inevitable consequence of the criteria in  Uner
        v Netherlands (2006)  ECHR  46410/99,  Maslov  pulled  the  threads
        together and in so doing made it clear that  very  serious  reasons
        are required to justify expulsion in such a case. In the absence of
        very serious reasons the deportation of a settled migrant will  not
        be proportionate under Article 8.  Although the Claimant's offences
        of driving whilst disqualified were frequent, it was  difficult  to
        see how they could sensibly be described as very serious reasons.


    16. The fact the  Respondent  has  been  convicted  on  two  counts  of
        possessing Class A drugs does not automatically  mean  that  Maslov
        can be distinguished as demonstrated by the decision in Khan  v  UK
        (application no. 47486/06) ECtHR  (Fourth  Section)  in  which  the
        Appellant entered the UK in 1978  aged  three.  All  his  immediate
        family were in the  UK.   He  was  granted  ILR.   He  had  various
        convictions and in 2003 was sentenced to seven  years  imprisonment
        for the importation of heroin.  It was accepted that removal  would
        interfere with his private life and his family life with a  partner
        and daughter.  However, having regard to the length of time he  had
        been in the UK, his young age on arrival, the  lack  of  continuing
        ties to Pakistan, the strength of ties here and the  fact  that  he
        had not re-offended, removal was disproportionate.


    17. The Panel refer to the public interest by reference to the case  of
        Masih [2012] UKUT  00046  and  to  the  submissions  made  by  both
        advocates included  a  reference  to  Maslov  made  on  behalf  the
        Respondent.  Whilst paragraph 19 of the determination, in which the
        Panel set out at length quotes from the case of JO, adds little  to
        the decision it does show that the Panel were aware of the European
        jurisprudence. The key principle arising from Maslov is  that  very
        serious reasons were required  to  justify  the  deportation  of  a
        settled migrant who had lawfully spent all, or the major  part,  of
        his childhood and youth in the host country.  Having  analysed  the
        evidence the  Panel  found  that  as  a  result  of  the  fact  the
        Respondent had demonstrated himself to be an exemplary citizen  who
        posed no ongoing threat to the public or who was likely  to  commit
        further crimes in the future, no such reasons had been proved.  The
        Secretary of State has failed to show this is a conclusion  finding
        outside the range those the Panel  was  entitled  to  make  on  the
        evidence  and  the  grounds  are,  in  effect,  no  more   than   a
        disagreement with the findings made.


    18. In relation to the reference to SS (Nigeria), this  is  a  decision
        relating to the weight to be given to an automatic deportation made
        pursuant to UK Borders Act in which the United  Kingdom  Parliament
        has set out the  circumstances  in  which  an  individual  must  be
        removed from the United Kingdom,  but  this  is  not  an  automatic
        deportation appeal.  The fact there may be difference  between  the
        circumstances of this Respondent and those of the appellant  in  SS
        has not been shown to be material.   The Panel considered the facts
        relating to this case and arrived at  a  decision  based  upon  the
        evidence and legal submissions made to them.


    19. There is reference in the determination to the refusal of an asylum
        claim made in further submissions dated  February  2013  which  the
        Respondent is said only to have become aware of  the  time  at  the
        hearing when a letter dated 1st July 2013 was served upon him.  The
        Respondent's grounds  of  appeal  include  an  appeal  against  the
        refusal of asylum, according to  the  summary  of  his  grounds  of
        appeal in paragraph 4 of  the  determination,  although  the  Panel
        allowed the appeal by reference to  Article  8  ECHR  only  without
        making any specific finding upon  the  asylum  claim.  It  was  not
        argued before me that this is a material error of law requiring the
        determination to be set aside, on the basis  the  Panel  failed  to
        determine a matter they were required to do by law, and it is clear
        from reading the evidence relied upon,  skeleton  arguments  filed,
        and submissions made on the Respondent's  behalf  that  the  asylum
        claim was not pursued before the Panel.  The Respondent's  case  as
        pleaded and presented relied solely upon Article 8 ECHR.  The Panel
        proceeded to determine the matter by reference  to  the  ground  on
        which the decision was challenged although it is arguable that  for
        the sake of completeness they should have specifically recorded the
        Respondent's position as it unfolded at the hearing  and  dismissed
        the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and under Articles 2
        and 3 ECHR.  The fact they were aware of  the  claim  and  did  not
        allow the appeal on this basis allows me to infer that  the  appeal
        on these grounds was rejected. The asylum claim has no merit  based
        on the facts and had I been remaking  the  decision  I  would  have
        dismissed it.


    20. I also note  in  the  refusal  letter  specific  reference  to  the
        application  for  leave  to  remain  submitted  on  5th  June  2005
        following completion of four  years  exceptional  leave  to  enter.
        This was refused by the Secretary of State as it was considered the
        public interest required  the  Respondent's  deportation  from  the
        United Kingdom.  Following the  rejection  by  the  Panel  of  this
        argument the ILR decision will require further  consideration  and,
        on the facts and in the absence of  any  other  reason,  should  be
        granted. That is no doubt a matter the Respondent will take up with
        the Secretary of State when considering the nature and duration  of
        the leave to which is now lawfully entitled.


Decision

    21. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008)  as  there  was  no
   request for anonymity and the         need for such an order has not been
   established on the facts.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1st October 2013


