

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)                            Appeal  Number:
DA/00300/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Court of Justice           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd July 2017                              |On 5th July 2017              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr MUSTAFA RAZA
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  M.  Cogan,  instructed  on  behalf   of   Dawn
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turquet) promulgated on the 19th  May
    2017 in which the Tribunal allowed the appeal of Mr  Raza  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to make a deportation order  against
    him under the provisions of  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (hereinafter  referred  to   as   "the   2006
    Regulations").

 2. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant before the Tribunal, I
    will for ease of reference refer to her as the Respondent  as  she  was
    the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will  refer  to
    Mr Raza as the Appellant as he was the Appellant before the  First-tier
    Tribunal. No application was made before the First-tier Tribunal or the
    Upper Tribunal concerning any grounds for an anonymity order.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. He entered the UK on a business
    Visa issued on 13 July 2006 valid for six months. He later applied  for
    a residence card on the basis of his marriage  to  a  Spanish  national
    which was refused. He reapplied on 2 March 2013 and was issued  with  a
    residence card on 4  October  2013  valid  until  1  October  2018.  He
    subsequently pleaded guilty to offences  of  obtaining  or  seeking  to
    obtain leave to enter or remain in the UK by deception  and  possession
    of false ID documents by  deception  and  was  sentenced  to  8  months
    imprisonment  on  each  charge  with  giving  a  total  of  16   months
    imprisonment. The facts were that when he was issued  with  a  business
    Visa it had been obtained fraudulently because in  the  application  he
    stated that he would be returning to Pakistan at the end  of  the  Visa
    because he had a wife there when in fact he  was  unmarried.  He  later
    obtained a false passport which he used to obtain employment.

 4. As a consequence of that sentence of imprisonment,  the  Appellant  was
    notified of his liability to be deported and  on  21st  June  2016  the
    Secretary of State made a decision to deport him,  having  first  taken
    into consideration the provisions of the Immigration (European Economic
    Area)  Regulations  2006   under  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of   the   2006
    Regulations on account  of  his  conviction  on  6  November  2015  for
    possessing false identity document with intent and obtaining  to  enter
    the UK by deception which he was sentenced to 16 months imprisonment.

 5. The relevant decision taken by the respondent  made  reference  to  his
    conviction in 2015 and that the Secretary of State had  considered  the
    offence for which he had been convicted and his conduct, in  accordance
    with Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations.  The decision set out  that
    the Secretary of State was satisfied that  he  would  pose  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently threat to the interests of public policy if he
    were to be allowed to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  his
    deportation was justified under Regulation 21.  The decision went on to
    state that the Secretary of State had decided under Regulation 19(3)(b)
    that he should  be  removed  and  an  order  made  in  accordance  with
    Regulation  24(3)  requiring  him  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    prohibiting him from re-entering while the order is in force.

 6. The reasons  for  that  decision  are  set  out  in  a  letter  of  the
    Respondent.

 7.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Turquet) on the 2nd May 2017.  In a decision promulgated  on  19th  May
    the judge allowed the appeal under the 2006  Regulations  having  found
    that  the  appellant  did  not  represent  a  "genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society." It is common ground that the appellant was a family member
    of an EEA national but that he had not resided in accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a period of  5  years  and  thus  had  not  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence ( see paragraphs  16-19  of  the  decision
    letter and paragraph 9 of the determination).

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on  the  12th  June  2017  by  Designated  Judge
    Woodcraft.

 9. There is only one ground advanced on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    in the written grounds relied upon by Mr Clarke. That  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 9. In those written grounds, it is asserted  that  the  judge
    made an error of law at paragraph 30 when considering  the  appellant's
    convictions and that offences do not need to be of a similar nature for
    an offender to meet the lower threshold nor do  they  need  to  involve
    violence. The grounds go on to state that the appellant  had  committed
    serious offences but that the judge at paragraph 30 "totally  fails  to
    appreciate that he was working illegally". The  appellant's  conviction
    is described further at paragraphs 7 and 8 and at  paragraph  9  it  is
    submitted that the judge has "failed to give due consideration to these
    issues and this amounts to an error of law."

10. In his submissions  Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    identify what the fundamental interests of society were by reference to
    his serious offending and that the judge had failed  to  give  adequate
    weight to that in the decision reached. He further submitted  that  the
    judge did not properly consider risk of harm  and  that  the  probation
    report had not undertaken a full risk analysis and therefore the  judge
    could not have relied upon it. Thus he submitted that there were errors
    of law in the decision which required it to be set aside.

11. Mr Cogan on behalf of the appellant submitted that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal should  be  upheld  and  that  the  judge  properly
    considered the issue under  Regulation  21  (5)  (c)  and  whether  the
    personal conduct of the appellant demonstrated a genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the public to justify  his  deportation.
    He submitted that it related to a future threat and it was open to  the
    judge to place reliance  upon  the  probation  report.  Whilst  it  was
    submitted there was no assessment of risk, Mr Cogan submitted that  the
    OASY's report did consider the issue of risk but did so in the light of
    the nature of offending that he had been convicted of. The  judge  also
    took into account the unchallenged evidence relating to the  work  that
    he had undertaken in  prison. Thus he submitted that the judge properly
    applied the law and that the decision was open to the judge to make  on
    the evidence.

12. I have considered the respective submissions of each of  the  advocates
    in the light of the determination of the judge and the evidence  before
    her. Having done so, I do not find that the judge erred in law  in  the
    decision reached and I shall set  out  my  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion.

13. The judge set out the relevant  law  at  paragraphs  26  -  28  of  the
    determination and in particular by reference to regulation 21 (5) which
    required the decision to be based "exclusively on the  conduct  of  the
    person concerned" and that the persons "previous convictions do not  in
    themselves justify the decision." The judge had to consider whether the
    appellant presented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    to the public to justify deportation on grounds of public policy.

14. Earlier in the determination the judge had set out the circumstances of
    the appellant's conviction at [12] relating to the business Visa  which
    he had obtained and that he had not returned to his country  of  origin
    but had later obtained a false passport in order to obtain  employment.
    At [11] the judge set out in full the judges sentencing remarks.  Those
    paragraphs made reference to the extent of  the  appellant's  dishonest
    conduct and that those types of offences  which  concerned  immigration
    control were not victimless and that it defrauded the taxpayer and that
    illegal working had a serious impact on communities. At paragraph  [15]
    the judge referred to the appellant's offences as being  "serious"  and
    that it was the respondent's case that all the evidence indicated  that
    he had a propensity to reoffend and  that  he  represented  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the public.

15. The judge also set out the appellant's evidence at  [23)  that  he  had
    taken employment which he knew was wrong but that he was now a "changed
    man" and that he would not risk reoffending and that he was living with
    his family. The report from prison was positive and that "he could  not
    stress enough that he repents this crime" (see 23). The family had been
    hugely affected ( see [24]). The judge also  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant's spouse at [25].

16. Having set out the legal framework, the judge went on to consider  this
    question of whether the appellant's personal conduct could be  said  to
    be a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  fundamental
    interests of society. The judge considered the offences  themselves  at
    [30]. This is the paragraph which Secretary of State seeks to challenge
    as one in which Mr Clarke submits, the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    weight to the appellant's serious offending. The  determination  should
    be read as a whole and in  particular  in  the  light  of  the  judge's
    consideration of the sentencing remarks which were set out in full  and
    to which she had regard and also the circumstances of the offence which
    was set out at paragraph 11 and 12 of the determination.  At  paragraph
    30, the judge again made reference to his convictions  of  using  false
    representations to gain  entry  by  deception  and  by  using  a  false
    passport to gain employment. The judge observed that the appellant  had
    accepted responsibility for his criminality  by  his  plea  of  guilty.
    Whilst the judge also observed that the appellant's commission  of  the
    offence was such that the appellant was not seeking to injure or  steal
    from  a  person,  that  should  not  be  read  in  isolation  from  the
    determination as a whole. At paragraph 33, the  judge  found  that  the
    crimes were serious as indicated by the sentence to which she  had  had
    regard earlier in the determination.

17. Whilst the judge stated at paragraphs 30 and 33 that the offences  were
    in a different category of offending of crime to that  of  robbery  and
    violence, the judge was not stating that the offences  themselves  were
    not serious but was simply making an observation as  to  the  different
    categories of offending. The findings at paragraph 30 were also open to
    the judge to make in the light of the issues set out  in  the  decision
    letter. Whilst the respondent made reference to a  caution  for  actual
    bodily harm, the Secretary of State had failed to provide  any  details
    of that offence either in the decision letter or at any time thereafter
    and thus it was open the judge to reach the conclusion that contrary to
    the respondent's assertion  made  in  the  decision  letter,  that  the
    caution did not indicate that he posed a risk of harm.  Furthermore  it
    was open to the judge to find that the  evidence  did  not  reflect  an
    escalation of offending as asserted in the refusal letter and cited the
    contents of the probation report at paragraph 30, "there have  been  no
    further offences of a violent nature  committed  and  therefore  in  my
    assessment of full risk of harm  analysis  is  not  assessed  as  being
    required." The judge's finding was made in the context of the  decision
    letter at paragraph 28 in which it was asserted that the nature of  the
    offending showed that he had a potential to act violently. However  the
    judge was entitled to find on the evidence  that  it  was  eight  years
    since the caution , that it had not been considered serious  enough  to
    result in a charge and that there had been no indication  that  he  was
    violent or had been involved in violence since that time.

18. Whilst Mr Clarke submits that the OASY's report  was  insufficient  for
    the judge to reach a conclusion on the risk of offending, the judge was
    required to consider the evidence as a whole. The respondent's decision
    letter stated that "all the available evidence indicates that you  have
    a propensity to reoffend". No evidence was identified in  the  decision
    letter to  support  that  submission  save  for  a  recitation  of  the
    circumstances of the offences themselves. In  those  circumstances,  it
    was open to the judge to  consider  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    offending, but also his conduct, his history and the probation reports.
    In that report, he had been assessed as posing a low  risk  of  causing
    harm and a low risk of reoffending. The judge  took  into  account  the
    strength and stability of his relationship  with  a  supportive  family
    noting that he had heard evidence from the appellant's spouse  and  the
    two daughters had attended. The  judge  also  had  evidence  concerning
    genuine remorse. The judge was also entitled to weigh  in  the  balance
    the probation service record of his good behaviour in prison and at the
    time that he had spent  constructively  obtaining  qualifications  (see
    paragraph [31]), which were relevant to employment and thus to minimise
    risk further. He had been compliant with his licence which had  expired
    at the time of the hearing.

19. Against that evidential background, it is not arguable that the  First-
    tier Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate  weight  to  the  appellant's
    offending or the seriousness of that offending or  failed  to  consider
    the respondent's case. The judge gave adequate and sustainable  reasons
    for placing weight on the probation  report  in  conjunction  with  the
    other evidence that the judge identified, to find  that  the  appellant
    did not pose the requisite level of risk.

20. As set out in the decision of SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA  Civ  1245
    at paragraph [25],  it  required  an  evaluation  to  be  made  of  the
    likelihood  that  a  person  concerned  would  offend  again  and   the
    consequences if he did so.  In addition, the need for  the  conduct  of
    the person concerned to represent a "sufficiently  serious"  threat  to
    one of the fundamental interests of society required the decision maker
    to balance the risk of future harm against the need to give  effect  to
    the right of free movement.

21. The judge had expressly referred to Regulation 21(5)(c) and it is plain
    that this was in  the  judge's  mind  in  those  paragraphs  where  she
    considered the issue of risk of reoffending.  Thus the judge did  carry
    out an evaluative exercise of the evidence in this regard.   As  stated
    in the decision  of  Straszewski,  in  any  given  case  an  evaluative
    exercise of this kind may admit  of  more  than  one  answer.   If  so,
    provided all the appropriate factors have been taken into account,  the
    decision cannot be impugned unless it is perverse or irrational,  in  a
    sense of falling outside the range of permissible  decisions.   It  has
    not been advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State that the decision
    of the judge or his findings of fact were either irrational or perverse
    and in light of  the  foregoing,  the  judge  properly  considered  the
    appropriate factors and made findings of fact  based  on  the  evidence
    before her.

22.  Even if it may be said it was a generous decision, it is not one  that
    fell outside the range of permissible decisions and was a decision open
    to her on the evidence presented before the Tribunal.

23.  Therefore the grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State are
    not made out and do not demonstrate any error of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of  law
and the decision stands.



No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date: 4/7/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
