

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2014                           |On 12 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           DANIEL-CRISTIAN ZLATCU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge McLachlan and Mr J H Eames)  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision to make a deportation order  against  him  by
    virtue  of  reg  26  of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations  2006  (SI  2006/1003  as  amended)  and  s.5(1)   of   the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Romania who was born on 24 December  1989
    and is, therefore, 24 years of age.

 4. It is not entirely clear when the appellant came to the UK.  He told an
    Immigration Officer in October 2013 that he had been in  the  UK  since
    2008.  However, in the course of his appeal he gave  evidence  that  he
    had come to the UK to work in September/October 2009.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal accepted that he had been in the UK since the "latter part  of
    2009" on the basis that he had been cautioned for  theft  (shoplifting)
    on 31 December 2009.

 5. The appellant claimed that he had worked in the UK having  obtained  an
    A2 Registration Certificate on 20 January 2010. The First-tier Tribunal
    noted that the appellant had been "wholly opaque" as  to  what  he  had
    done in the UK after his arrival.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    accept that the appellant had been in the UK exercising  Treaty  rights
    since his arrival and therefore concluded that he had no established  a
    permanent right of residence in the UK.

 6. The appellant has a substantial criminal record.  Between  27  February
    2010 and 23 January 2014 he was convicted on eight  separate  occasions
    of a total of fourteen offences including  going  equipped  for  theft,
    theft (shoplifting), breach of a conditional  discharge,  making  false
    representations to make gain  for  self  or  another  causing  loss  to
    another/exposing others to risk, common assault, failing  to  surrender
    to  bail  and  possessing   a   class   B   controlled   drug,   namely
    cannabis/cannabis resin.  His most recent conviction was on 23  January
    2014 when he was  convicted  of  theft  and  sentenced  to  six  weeks'
    imprisonment.

 7. On 24 February 2014, the Secretary of State made a decision to  make  a
    deportation order against  the  appellant  under  reg  26  of  the  EEA
    Regulations on the basis of "public policy, public security and  public
    health grounds".

The appeal

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and that  appeal  was
    allowed under the EEA Regulations.  The First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
    that the appellant's criminal conduct did  not  represent  a  "genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society"  and  further  that  his  deportation
    would not be proportionate under EU law.

 9. On 11 August 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Lever)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    basis of that grant of permission was that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    arguably erred  in  law  in  concluding  that  the  appellant  did  not
    represent a "genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat".  In
    particular  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning  was   flawed   that
    appellant's risk of reoffending would be  reduced  as  a  result  of  a
    future threat  of  deportation  if  he  committed  a  further  criminal
    offence.  In para 5 of his reasons Judge Lever said this:

         "it is arguable that the panel failed to provide  adequate  reasons
         or evidence to reach the conclusions that they did in the light  of
         the body of evidence that seemed  to  point  to  the  contrary  and
         failed to give sufficient weight to the interests of  society.   It
         could be argued as the respondent  does  that  the  conclusion  was
         speculative and based on  hope  rather  than  evidence  and  proper
         inference."

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Hearing

11. The appellant was not legally  represented  at  the  hearing.   At  the
    outset, I explained to the appellant the purpose of the hearing and the
    procedure to be followed including the two potential  stages  of  first
    identifying an error of law  and,  if  one  were  identified,  secondly
    remaking the decision.  I also provided the appellant with  a  copy  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination  in  order  to  assist  him  in
    following the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  by
    Mr Richards.  The appellant indicated that he was  able  satisfactorily
    to read English.

12. After some initial comments by the appellant, I heard submissions  from
    Mr Richards both on the issue of error  of  law  and  on  remaking  the
    decision.  Following that, I gave the appellant an opportunity to  make
    any submissions or comments to me which he did very briefly.

The Submissions

13. Mr Richards relied upon the grounds upon which permission to appeal had
    been  granted.   Principally,   he  submitted   that   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision could not stand as its finding that  the  appellant
    did not represent a "genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society"  and  that  his
    deportation would be proportionate were inadequately reasoned  and,  in
    respect of the former, contradicted the  Tribunal's  findings  in  para
    30(a)-(e) in respect of the appellant being a persistent criminal,  who
    had shown no marked contrition and who had committed a further  offence
    despite having been notified in October 2013 that he was liable  to  be
    removed.   Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    reasoning in para 33 was so contrary to  those  findings  that  it  was
    irrational and could not stand.

Discussion

     1. Error of Law

14. The respondent's decision was taken  under  reg  19(3)(b)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations which is in the following terms:

         "Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5) a person who has  been  admitted
         to, or acquired a right of residence in, the United  Kingdom  under
         these Regulations may be removed from the United Kingdom if -  ....

         (b)  he would otherwise be entitled to reside in the UK under these
             Regulations but the Secretary of State has  decided  that  his
             removal is justified on the grounds of public  policy,  public
             security of public health in accordance with regulation 21."

15. As I have already indicated, the decision to deport the  appellant  was
    made on the grounds of "public policy" and consequently is governed  by
    reg 21 which, so far as relevant, provides as follows:

         "21(1)   In this regulation a  'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

               (2)     A  relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  to  serve
             economic ends.

              ....

               (5)     Where a relevant decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
             public policy or public security  it  shall,  in  addition  to
             complying with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be
             taken in accordance with the following principles

               a)  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

               b) the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

               c)  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned   must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

               d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
                  relate to considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
                  justify the decision;

               e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

               (6)     Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of
             public policy or public security in relation to a  person  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin ...."

16. The First-tier Tribunal found (at para 24) that the appellant  was  not
    entitled to the benefit of the heightened criteria for  deportation  in
    reg 21(3)  requiring  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security" because he had not established a permanent right of residence
    as a result of residence in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years in accordance with the EEA Regulations.   That is a finding  that
    is not challenged.  Consequently, the First-tier Tribunal proceeded  to
    consider whether the appellant's deportation as an EEA  national  could
    be justified on  the  "public  policy"  criterion.   At  para  26,  the
    Tribunal directed itself (correctly) as to the two issues it needed  to
    address, namely (1)  whether  the  appellant's  conduct  satisfied  the
    "public policy" criterion; and (2) if it did, whether the  decision  to
    deport him was proportionate in all the circumstances.

17. As regards the  "public  policy"  criterion,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (correctly) noted that it was the future  risk  to  society  which  was
    central to the "public policy" issue  (see  paras  27  and  28  of  the
    determination).

18. At para 30(a)-(e), the First-tier Tribunal set out a number of findings
    in relation to the appellant's offending as follows:

         "30. We considered the evidence in terms of  whether  or  not  this
             Appellant is likely to re-offend.  We do not have the  benefit
             of any reports, such as NOMS assessment or probation report to
             assist in the assessment of future  risk.   In  terms  of  his
             potential reoffending we note:-

             (a)  He is a persistent criminal  -  mainly  of  theft-related
                  offences - although he has been convicted also  of  common
                  assault and possessing Class B -  cannabis/cannabis  resin
                  drugs.  He has 8 convictions  for  14  offences  committed
                  between 27/02/2010 and 23/01/2014.  Additionally,  he  was
                  cautioned in December 2009 for  theft-shoplifting  and  in
                  June 2013 for possessing Class B drugs.

             (b)  He has been punished in  a  range  of  ways  -  cautions,
                  conditional discharge, community service,  custody.   None
                  has deterred  him  from  offending  again.   His  criminal
                  activities, albeit petty,  started  within  weeks  of  his
                  arrival in  the  UK  and  continued  thereafter.   He  was
                  notified in October 2013 of the Respondent's intention  to
                  remove him.  He appealed, but this did not prompt  him  to
                  reform because again, within weeks, he  was  convicted  of
                  shoplifting.

             (c)  Although, in writing to the Respondent (C1,  Respondent's
                  bundle), the Appellant stated "I am sorry  for  everything
                  bad what I did excuse me" (sic) and  he  told  us  at  the
                  hearing that he would not steal in the future,  he  showed
                  no marked contrition for his conduct or understanding  for
                  the effect of his behaviour on  victims  or  concerns  for
                  them or for broader society.  That  his  attitude  to  the
                  rule of law is somewhat cavalier is  further  demonstrated
                  by his past failure to surrender to  bail  and  breach  of
                  conditional discharge.

             (d)  He appeared to  justify  his  crimes  by  saying  he  had
                  committed them when he was short of money.  On  occasions,
                  this had happened because  he  had  lost  sums  of  money,
                  gambling.  He claimed that he  had  worked  intermittently
                  but he provided no evidence of settled work since he  came
                  to the UK.  He stated that he  had  obtained  certificates
                  but did not produce them.  He said he had paid tax but had
                  no documents to show that, having thrown  them  away.   He
                  claimed to have no friends in the UK although he did refer
                  to selling goods that he had shoplifted to  someone  known
                  to him.  He spoke of an Indian for whom he had  worked  in
                  2011 and speculated that he might give him (the Appellant)
                  a job in the future.   It  seems  that  neither  work  nor
                  community links have checked his offending.

             (e)  The  offences  he  has  committed  individually  are  not
                  particularly  serious  but  together,  they  do  depict  a
                  pattern of continuing criminality, carried out  throughout
                  the relatively short period of time he has been in the UK.
                   His behaviour is compounded by his apparent attitude that
                  he can operate in that way with impunity when he is  short
                  of money.  Theft, even of a minor nature impacts adversely
                  upon the security and stability of society  generally,  as
                  well  as  individual  victims  or   third   parties   like
                  shopkeepers or shop workers.  It  can  generate  fear  and
                  alarm while depriving others of property  valued  by  them
                  and rightly their own.   The  Appellant  has  pursued  his
                  activities with a blatant  disregard  for  the  cumulative
                  effect of his offending upon the community.  He  has  been
                  involved also with drug possession and used violence, both
                  of which undermine the fabric of society."

19. Having done so, at para 32 the First-tier  Tribunal  asked  itself  the
    question whether the appellant  represented  a  "genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society" so as to justify his deportation on the grounds of  "public
    policy".

20. At para 33, the First-tier Tribunal addressed that issue as follows:

         "33. Notwithstanding the Appellant's behaviour and the concerns  we
             have noted and expressed, we have concluded that the threat of
             re-offending conduct is not sufficiently  serious  to  justify
             his removal.  He is a petty criminal, mostly of an opportunist
             nature, and his crimes are towards the lower end of the scale.
              There is some  evidence  that  he  has  been  persuaded  into
             certain instances of crime by others.  He  has  been  punished
             with progressively more serious penalties and  now  has  spent
             time in prison.  He can be  under  no  illusion  that  further
             offending will lead to  increasingly  unpleasant  consequences
             for him.  The Appellant should be aware of how  close  he  has
             come to deportation and cannot deceive himself that if he does
             commit crimes again, he will face once more  the  prospect  of
             deportation.  That thought  should  reduce  the  risk  of  his
             continued involvement in criminal behaviour and prompt him  to
             turn his energies to rehabilitation."

21. Then, finally at para 36, the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded,  having
    considered all the evidence in the round, that the appellant's  conduct
    did not represent a "genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".

22. Mr Richards submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning in  para
    33 could not stand in the light of  its  findings  in  para  30(a)-(e).
    First,  he  submitted  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   had   wrongly
    characterised the appellant as a "petty criminal" in para 33 given  its
    findings that he was a persistent criminal (para 30(a))  and  that  the
    effect of his "pattern of continuing  criminality"  affected  adversely
    "the security and stability of society generally, as well as individual
    victims or third  parties  like  shopkeepers  or  shop  workers"  (para
    30(e)).

23. Secondly, he submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion  in
    para 33 that the future risk of deportation would reduce  the  risk  of
    the appellant's future offending and lead him to "turn his energies  to
    rehabilitation" stood in  stark  contrast  to  the  Tribunal's  earlier
    findings that he showed  "no  marked  contrition  for  his  conduct  or
    understanding for the effect of his behaviour on  victims  or  concerns
    for them or for broader society" (see para 30(c)) and that, having been
    notified of an intention to remove him in October 2013,  the  appellant
    had within weeks committed and been convicted of a further  offence  of
    shoplifting (see para 30(b)).  Mr Richards submitted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's finding in para 33 was pure speculation  not  based  on
    any evidence in the appellant's favour and, in the light of the  First-
    tier Tribunal's earlier findings, was contradicted  by  those  findings
    and therefore irrational.

24. Further, Mr Richards submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's  view  in
    para 35 that:   "If he focuses on future undertakings of like kind  and
    avoids contact with those  who  would  invite  him  to  participate  in
    inappropriate activities such as gambling  and  low  level  crime,  the
    future risk he presents, we believe, is low" was also pure speculation.



25. I accept Mr Richards' submissions.  The First-tier Tribunal made  clear
    adverse findings in paras  30(a)-(e)  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    criminal  behaviour  and  future  risk.   The  appellant  was   rightly
    categorised as a "persistent criminal".  He had been convicted on eight
    occasions of fourteen offences between 27 February 2010 and 23  January
    2014.   Those  offences  were,  as  the  First-tier   Tribunal   noted,
    "individually ... not particularly serious" but "depicted a pattern  of
    continuing criminality" over a relatively  short  period.   I  entirely
    agree with the First-tier Tribunal's view expressed in para 30(e)  that
    this  persistent  offending,  albeit  individually   not   particularly
    serious, adversely impacts upon the security and stability  of  society
    generally as well as individual victims and shopkeepers who suffer loss
    as a result of the offending.  In addition to the dishonesty  offences,
    the appellant had also been  convicted  of  possession  of  a  class  B
    controlled drug and,  albeit  at  a  low  level,  a  violence  offence.
    Further, the appellant had shown a blatant disregard for  the  criminal
    justice system, not only in his repeated offending, but in his  failure
    to surrender to bail and being in breach  of  a  conditional  discharge
    order.  The First-tier Tribunal made a clear finding that the appellant
    was not deterred from future offending even when he had been subject to
    an earlier decision to remove him in  October  2013,  having  committed
    within weeks a further offence of shoplifting (para 30(b)).  The First-
    tier Tribunal also noted that the appellant's offences  were  committed
    when he was short of money, for example when he had lost sums of  money
    gambling.  The Tribunal noted that "neither work  nor  community  links
    had checked his offending".

26. In the light of those findings, it was in my judgment wholly irrational
    for the First-tier Tribunal to  describe  the  appellant  as  a  "petty
    criminal" and to conclude that there was a prospect  of  deterring  him
    from committing further offences now that  he  faced  the  prospect  of
    deportation.  In my judgment, those inferential  findings  were  flatly
    contradicted by the First-tier  Tribunal's  earlier  findings  in  para
    30(a)-(e).  In relation to his risk of future offending,  it  was  pure
    speculation that he would avoid situations which caused  him  to  be  a
    persistent criminal and "turn his energies  to  rehabilitation"  having
    faced the risk of deportation.

27. In my judgment, those findings and the finding based upon  it  that  he
    did not represent a "genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society"  were  legally
    flawed and cannot stand.

28. Turning to the issue of proportionality, the First-tier Tribunal  dealt
    with this in para 35 as follows:

         "35. We believe that the Appellant's motive originally in coming to
             the UK was to work, and thus exercise Treaty rights.   He  did
             take steps once in the UK to obtain a qualification within the
             construction industry and now  professes  himself  anxious  to
             pursue such a career.  Although there is some uncertainty over
             whether the Appellant has been in the  UK  continuously  since
             2009, we are satisfied that  he  has  resided  here  for  some
             years.  In the past, he has carried out work from time to time
             on building projects and thus  established  himself  within  a
             commercial community. If he focuses on future undertakings  of
             like kind and avoids contact with those who would  invite  him
             to participate in inappropriate activities  such  as  gambling
             and low level crime, the future risk he presents, we  believe,
             is low."

29. Having done so, at para 36 the First-tier Tribunal concluded  that  the
    respondent's  decision  did  not   comply   with   the   principle   of
    proportionality.

30. Mr Richards submitted that that finding was wholly unreasoned.

31. There is, in my judgment, no satisfactory answer  to  that  submission.
    The First-tier Tribunal's reasoning in para 35 is wholly inadequate  to
    sustain its finding that deportation would not be  proportionate.   The
    issue of proportionality required the First-tier Tribunal  to  look  at
    the appellant's offending and future risk and balance  against  it  all
    the individual circumstances, including the impact upon  the  appellant
    of his deportation.  The First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  do  so.   In
    particular, it failed to take into account the matters which it had set
    out at para 11 of the determination,  namely  that  the  appellant  was
    single and had no children, he  was  in  good  health  and  he  had  no
    relatives or apparently close friends in the UK and his  parents  lived
    in Romania.  Before me, the appellant confirmed that he had  no  family
    or anybody in the UK and that his parents were in Romania.

32. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's finding that the Secretary
    of  State's  decision  did   not   comply   with   the   principle   of
    proportionality was also legally flawed and cannot stand.

    2. Remaking the Decision

     The EEA decision

33. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards invited me  to  remake
    the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.  He submitted that  the
    appellant did represent a "genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society"  and,
    given his lack of connection with the  UK,  his  deportation  would  be
    proportionate.

34. It is unnecessary to repeat the First-tier Tribunal's findings in  para
    30(a)-(e)  which  I  have  set  out  above.   Those  findings  are  not
    challenged and stand.  The appellant is a persistent criminal  who  has
    been convicted of fourteen offences on eight separate occasions.  Those
    offences include theft, possessing class B drugs,  common  assault.   I
    agree  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  finding  in  para  30(e)   that
    individually these offences are not "particularly  serious".   However,
    taken  cumulatively,  they   represent   a   "pattern   of   continuing
    criminality".  The appellant showed no contrition for  his  conduct  or
    understanding of the effect of his  behaviour  on  victims  or  broader
    society.  He continued to offend despite being subject  to  an  earlier
    decision to remove him in October 2013.

35. There is no pre-sentence report or NOMS assessment.  I am in  no  doubt
    that the appellant  continues  to  present  a  future  risk  of  repeat
    offending of the sort committed in the past.   Whilst  each  individual
    offence may not be "particularly serious"  his  future  offending  will
    further  add  to  his  "pattern  of  continuing   criminality"   as   a
    "persistent" offender.  There is no evidence to suggest  that  he  will
    change his ways.  His offending appears to be linked, as the First-tier
    Tribunal noted, to when he lacks money because,  for  example,  he  has
    lost money gambling.  There is no evidence before me to suggest that he
    will in the future avoid a lifestyle which would reduce the risk of his
    offending because of his need for money.  To the  extent  that  he  has
    worked in the past that did not obviate the need for him to  steal  and
    further offend.

36. Given the appellant's persistent offending and future risk, even though
    the offences  are  not  in  themselves  "particularly  serious",  I  am
    satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the appellant represents a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of society".

37. Further, I am satisfied that his deportation  would  be  proportionate.
    He is 24 years of age and has only been in the UK since, on the  First-
    tier Tribunal's findings, sometime late in 2009.   His  evidence  about
    his work was vague and, although he claimed that he had paid taxes,  he
    had thrown away all the paperwork (see para 25 of  the  determination).
    On the basis of this evidence, it is difficult  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant has established that he has worked, as  he  claimed,  in  the
    past in the UK.  In any event, it is likely, in my view,  that  in  the
    future he will either be unable or unwilling to  work  and  presents  a
    risk of reoffending.  The  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which is not challenged, is that the appellant is  single  and  has  no
    children.  He has no relatives or apparently close friends in  the  UK.
    His parents live in Romania.  He is in good health  and  there  was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of any significant private life
    enjoyed by the appellant in the UK.  The appellant has not  established
    anything other than the very weakest social  and  cultural  integration
    into the UK but has strong family links with his own country, Romania.

38. To the extent that rehabilitation is relevant to this appeal, and I was
    not addressed directly on that issue by Mr Richards, it  is  reasonable
    to suppose that there is a greater chance  of  rehabilitation  for  the
    appellant in Romania where his family are based rather than in  the  UK
    where he has no family or support network.

39. Taking into account all the circumstances,  including  the  appellant's
    age, that he has lived in the UK since  late  2009  and  his  continued
    links with Romania which are absent with the UK, I  am  satisfied  that
    the  appellant's  deportation  based  upon  public  policy  grounds  is
    proportionate in all the circumstances.

40. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant's  deportation  is
    in accordance with the requirements of EU law.

    Article 8

41. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  consider  whether  the  appellant's
    deportation breached Art 8 of the ECHR because of the  favourable  view
    it took under the EEA Regulations.

42. To the extent that Art 8 continues to be relied upon, the appellant has
    only established a weak claim to have private life in the UK.   He  has
    no relatives and there was no evidence of any close friendships  or  of
    any integration into the community and society in the UK.

43. In remaking the decision in respect of  Art  8  of  the  ECHR  the  new
    deportation provisions introduced by the Immigration Act 2014  in  Part
    5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 apply as do  the
    new deportation rules in paras 398-339A of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    effect from 10 July 2014 (HC 432, amending HC 395)  (see  YM(Uganda)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292).

44. The general public interest considerations  are  in  s.117B  and  those
    particular  to  deportations  are  in  s.117C.   In  this  appeal,  the
    principal considerations are in s.117C.

45. The appellant is a "foreign criminal" within s.117D(2) as he is  not  a
    British citizen, he has been convicted of an offence in the UK and is a
    "persistent offender".  For the purposes of Art 8, his  deportation  is
    "in the public interest" (s.117C(1)).  By virtue of  s.117C(4),  having
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four years, the
    public interest requires the appellant's deportation unless Exception 1
    or 2 in s.117C(4) and (5) respectively  applies  (s.117C(3)).   Neither
    exception applies to the appellant.

46. As regards Exception 1  the  appellant  cannot  establish  any  of  the
    cumulative requirements of s.117C(4),  namely  that  (a)  he  has  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life (he has only been here
    since late 2009 when he was 20 years old: he is now 24 years old);  (b)
    he is socially and culturally integrated in the  UK  (see  my  findings
    above); and (c) there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Romania (his family is based there and he has only  been
    in the UK 4 years, there was also some evidence  he  had  travelled  to
    Romania in 2011).

47. As regards Exception 2, he does not meet the requirements of  s.117C(5)
    because he does not have a "genuine and subsisting  relationship"  with
    either a "qualifying partner" or "qualifying child" in the UK.

48. The new 2014 Rules reflect those statutory requirements and, in a  case
    such as the appellant's where he has not been convicted of  an  offence
    with  a  sentence  of  at  least  one  year's  imprisonment  but  is  a
    "persistent offender" and  where  paras  399  and  399A  do  not  apply
    (reflecting the requirements in Exceptions 1 and  2  in  s.117C(4)  and
    (5)), only where there are  "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in paragraphs  399  and  399A"  will  the  public
    interest in deportation be outweighed.

49. Whether based upon the new statutory provisions  or  otherwise,  in  my
    judgment,  any  interference  with  the  appellant's  private  life  is
    justified under  Art  8.2  on  the  basis  of  the  legitimate  aim  of
    preventing disorder or crime.  The appellant's deportation would, in my
    view, be proportionate.  The public interest is not outweighed  by  his
    personal circumstances.  I adopt my findings in  relation  to  the  EEA
    Regulations in respect of the appellant's offending  and  his  personal
    circumstances both in the UK and in Romania where his family are based.
     There are no "compelling", let alone "very compelling",  circumstances
    which outweigh the public interest.  In my judgment,  the  interference
    with his private life, given his lack of integration in the UK and  the
    existence of his  family  in  Romania,  is  outweighed  by  the  public
    interest reflected in his past offending and future risk of offending.

50. For these reasons, the appellant has failed to establish  a  breach  of
    Art 8 of the ECHR if he is deported to Romania.

Decision

51. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations involved the making of  an
    error of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

52. To that extent, therefore, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal is allowed.

53. I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal under  the  EEA
    Regulations and also under Art 8 of the ECHR.

54. No anonymity direction is made.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             5 November 2014

