


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00323/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 14 October 2013                          |On: 16th October 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                lance lumley
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Mallick, instructed by Fountain Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Lumley's appeal  against
the decision to deport him from the United  Kingdom.  For  the  purposes  of
this decision, we shall refer to the Secretary of State  as  the  respondent
and Mr Lumley as the appellant, reflecting their positions as they  were  in
the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 30 May 1989. He  entered  the
United Kingdom lawfully on 30 June 2000  with  a  visitor  visa,  which  was
subsequently extended, and on 10 October 2001 was granted  indefinite  leave
to remain as the child of a settled parent, his mother. He was convicted  of
several offences, as follows.

On 29 July  2004  he  was  convicted  at  Warley  Juvenile  Court  of  using
disorderly behaviour or threatening/  abusive/  insulting  words  likely  to
cause harassment, alarm or distress, for which  he  was  ordered  to  pay  a
fine; on 27 July 2006 he was  convicted  at  Birmingham  Juvenile  Court  of
possessing controlled drug - Class C, for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  12
months conditional discharge;  on  11  January  2008  he  was  convicted  at
Manchester City Crown Court of possessing a  handgun  -  prohibited  weapon,
for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months  in  a  Young   Offenders
Institution, suspended for two years; on 17 December 2009 he  was  convicted
at Birmingham Crown Court of committing an act/ series of acts  with  intent
to pervert the course of justice, for which he was sentenced to four  months
in a Young Offenders Institution; on 3 March 2011 a  warrant  for  custodial
sentence was made against him, for committal to  prison  for  eleven  weeks,
for failure to comply with a requirement specified  in  a  notice  from  the
Secretary of Sate, failure to attend supervision, failure  to  reside  where
directed and failure to provide written proof  of  absences;  on  17  August
2011 he was convicted at Coventry District Magistrates Court of  failure  to
surrender to custody - the sentence  was  absolute  discharge;   and  on  29
March 2012 he was convicted at Birmingham Magistrates  Court  of  destroying
or damaging property and using threatening and abusive words/  behaviour  or
disorderly behaviour to cause harassment/ alarm/ distress, for which he  was
ordered to pay a fine and given one day's detention.

On 18 May 2012 the appellant was convicted at Coventry Magistrates Court  of
burglary and theft of a dwelling and failure to  surrender  to  custody  and
was sentenced to twenty months imprisonment; and  on  31  May  2012  he  was
convicted at Birmingham  Magistrates  Court  of  robbery  and  possessing  a
controlled drug of Class B  Cannabis/  Cannabis  resin,  for  which  he  was
sentenced to thirty months imprisonment.

As a result of those convictions the appellant was considered for  automatic
deportation under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  on  20  June
2012 he was served with a notice of liability for deportation. He  responded
to that notice, claiming that his deportation would be a breach  his  rights
under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  on  the  grounds  that  his  entire  family,
including his daughter, was in the United Kingdom. A deportation  order  was
nevertheless signed on 28 January 2013  and  a  decision  subsequently  made
that section 32(5) applied.

The  respondent,  in  making  that  decision,  gave  consideration  to   the
immigration rules with respect to Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  concluding  that
the appellant fell within paragraph 398(b), applicable to  offences  leading
to a sentence of imprisonment of less than four years but  at  least  twelve
months. The respondent did not accept that paragraph 399(a) applied  to  the
appellant since it was not accepted that he  was  in  a  genuine  subsisting
relationship with his daughter, although it was  accepted  that  she  was  a
British citizen and that she could not be expected to  return  with  him  to
Jamaica. Neither was it accepted that paragraph 339(b) applied, although  it
was accepted that he was in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
British citizen (not the mother of his daughter),  or  that  paragraph  399A
applied.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  were   exceptional
circumstances such that the appellant's right to family and/or private  life
outweighed the public interest in  his  deportation,  bearing  in  mind  his
propensity to re-offend,  his  failure  to  settle  into  a  law-abiding  or
productive life here, his eight  convictions  for  eleven  offences  between
2004 and 2012, his flagrant  disregard  for  United  Kingdom  laws  and  the
strong public interest in removing foreign criminals  convicted  of  serious
offences. It was  accordingly  concluded  that  his  deportation  would  not
breach Article 8.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 1 August 2013, before a panel consisting of First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cooper and Mr R Bremmer JP. The panel heard  from  the  appellant  and
his aunt, noting that his daughter's mother had not appeared  as  a  witness
and that there was an absence of documentary evidence  of  the  relationship
between the appellant and  his  daughter.  They  noted  that  the  appellant
claimed to no longer be in a relationship with his  partner.  They  recorded
his evidence, that he had had contact with his daughter by  telephone  twice
or three times a week, but that she had not visited him  in  prison  because
her mother was in prison herself - she had gone into prison  last  year  and
was released in April 2013, during which time his daughter was  living  with
her mother. His daughter had walking and  talking  difficulties.  Before  he
went to prison he had seen her three or four times a  week  and  would  take
her to the park and help her to walk. He  and  his  daughter's  mother  were
still friends and there was therefore no problem with contact. He had  lived
with his daughter and her mother for the first two and a  half  years  after
her birth before they split up. He  had  last  worked  two  or  three  years
before going to prison, as a car mechanic.  He  had  undertaken  educational
and vocational courses in prison, including learning English.

The panel accepted that the appellant had  not  returned  to  Jamaica  since
coming here at the age of eleven years, that all his immediate  family  were
settled in the United Kingdom and that he  had  spent  nearly  half  of  his
life, his formative years, in the United Kingdom. They noted that there  was
no OASys or other such report to demonstrate that he had changed  his  ways,
although they took note of the letters of support that had  been  submitted.
They found that the only real basis upon  which  the  appellant  could  show
that  there  would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8  arose  from  his  claimed
relationship with his daughter. They  were  "exasperated"  by  the  lack  of
evidence of that relationship, in particular the  absence  of  any  evidence
from her mother, but they were "just about persuaded", from the  appellant's
evidence and that  of  his  aunt,  that  he  had  a  regular  and  committed
relationship with his daughter and they considered his regular  presence  in
her life was potentially important and  that  his  deportation  would  sever
that relationship. The panel found that the appellant  could  not  meet  the
immigration rules but considered  that,  "applying  conventional  Article  8
principles", his deportation would  be  disproportionate.  They  accordingly
allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds, but commented  that  the  appellant
succeeded "by the skin of his teeth".

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds  that  the  Tribunal  had  reached  its  conclusion  without  giving
adequate  consideration  to  the  public  interest  in   removal,   in   the
proportionality assessment, relying on the  principles  in  SS  (Nigeria)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ  550;  and  that
the Tribunal had failed to give adequate reasons for  its  finding  that  it
would be in the best interests  of  the  appellant's  daughter  for  him  to
remain in the United Kingdom.

Permission to appeal was granted on 13 September 2013.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 The appeal came before me  on  14  October  2013.  The  appellant  was  not
present, as his transfer from prison had been delayed and  he  was  expected
to arrive in the afternoon. Both parties were content to  proceed  with  the
error of law issue in his absence.

Error of Law

 Mr Deller relied upon the grounds of appeal. He accepted  the  fact-finding
of the Tribunal but submitted that it had  erred  by  failing  to  make  any
reference to the public interest in the proportionality assessment.

Ms Mallick commenced, in her submissions, by relying on the reference  in  R
(Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
982  to the "anxiety of an appellate court not to  overturn  a  judgment  at
first instance unless it  really  cannot  understand  the  original  judge's
thought processes when he/she was  making  material  findings"  and  to  the
comment that " the practice of bringing appeals because the  adjudicator  or
immigration judge has not made reasoned findings on  matters  of  peripheral
importance must now come  to  an  end."  It  was  her  submission  that  the
Tribunal's thought process could be readily ascertained from  a  reading  of
the detailed summary of the appellant's criminal history,  the  reasons  for
refusal, the grounds of appeal  and  the  oral  evidence  and  that  it  was
entitled to  decide  to  accept  what  it  had  heard  with  regard  to  the
appellant's relationship and commitment towards his child. The Tribunal  had
conducted a balancing exercise and was entitled  to  conclude  that  it  was
disproportionate to interfere with that family life.

In  response,  Mr  Deller  accepted  that  the  Tribunal  had  undertaken  a
balancing exercise, but submitted that it had used the wrong test as it  had
failed to consider material matters on  the  public  side,  such  as  public
order and deterrence. Mr Deller had no complaints about  the  findings  made
in the appellant's favour, but submitted that the error of law  lay  in  the
failure to undertake a proper balance against the public interest.

  I advised the parties that, in my view, the Tribunal had made an error  of
law in its  decision.  Although  reference  had  been  made  to  the  public
interest in the  removal  of  foreign  criminals  at  paragraph  27  of  the
determination, that was simply as part of  the  Tribunal's  summary  of  the
respondent's reasons for deportation. Nowhere in  the  Tribunal's  findings,
at paragraphs 71 to 79, was there  any  indication  that  consideration  had
actually been given to the weight to be attached  to  the  public  interest,
including a consideration of the deterrent effect  of  deportation  and  the
nature of the  appellant's  offences.  There  was  no  indication  in  those
findings that the  Tribunal  had  taken  on  board  the  significant  weight
attributed by  the  higher  courts,  in  the  recent  spate  of  authorities
including  SS  (Nigeria),  to  the  State's  policy  of  deporting   foreign
criminals as reflected in primary legislation in the UK  Borders  Act  2007.
The proportionality assessment was accordingly  not  a  completely  balanced
one and needed to be re-made.

Re-making the Decision

It was agreed by the parties that the  decision  could  be  re-made  on  the
basis of  submissions  addressing  proportionality,  but  also  taking  into
account  evidence  from  the  appellant's  daughter's  mother  who  was   in
attendance. Ms Mallick did not wish to  adduce  further  evidence  from  the
appellant's aunt Caffion Collar, who was present at  the  hearing,  or  from
the appellant, whose presence, she confirmed, was not required.

I therefore heard from the appellant's daughter's mother,  Charelle  Rankin,
who confirmed that she had been in a relationship with  the  appellant  from
2004 until the end of 2007. Their daughter was born on 2  January  2007  and
at that time the appellant was living with her.  After  they  split  up,  he
would come and take their daughter on occasions and she would come with  her
to see him at his aunt's house  where  he  was  living.  There  was  no  set
arrangement but they would visit about three times a  week.  He  would  take
their daughter to the park and they had a close relationship. Since  he  had
gone to prison he had maintained the relationship  through  telephone  calls
and their daughter would draw pictures for him and send  them  to  him.  Her
daughter found the lack of physical  contact  distressing,  particularly  as
her two siblings would see their father, and  she  would  keep  telling  her
that he was working in London.  She  was  badly  affected  by  the  lack  of
contact and would cry and ask why he was still at work. Ms Rankin said  that
her daughter had cerebral palsy which affected her speech and  walking.  She
was very intelligent but had a  different  way  of  understanding.  She  was
suspected as also suffering from autism  and  OCD  but  that  had  not  been
diagnosed and was still being investigated. When asked why she had  come  to
court, Ms Rankin said that she wanted her daughter to have a father  in  her
life. The appellant was not a bad person and he had changed and  was  trying
to do something good in his life. She did not think that  he  would  end  up
back in the same situation but knew that he really  wanted  to  try  and  do
something about his circumstances.

When cross-examined, Ms Rankin named her daughter's primary school and  said
that she had a carer with her there at all times.  She  was  in  her  second
year at school. When asked if the school had raised any concerns  about  the
effect on her of not having  a  father  around,  she  said  that  they  just
concentrated on her medical condition. However the  absence  of  her  father
was having a detrimental effect  on  her,  particularly  when  she  saw  her
siblings with their father. When re-examined by Ms Mallick, Ms  Rankin  said
that her daughter was diagnosed with cerebral palsy  when  she  was  a  year
old. It was very frightening as she was not doing the things  that  she  was
supposed to be doing and they tried to find a programme  she  could  go  on.
She was more upset about the fact that that was her first baby,  whilst  the
appellant was more concerned about dealing with the situation.

Mr Deller, in his submissions, accepted that the criticisms  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal in its findings about the best interests of the child had  now
been addressed by the evidence from the child's mother,  which  he  accepted
as credible. He submitted that the child's best interests was not,  however,
a trump card and could be outweighed. He  referred  to  the  change  in  the
Secretary of State's policy with respect to Article 8 in deportation  cases,
as reflected in the introduction of automatic deportation in  the  2007  Act
and the 2012 Immigration Rules which set out the executive's view  of  where
the public interest lay, and the need for  exceptional  circumstances  where
the  requirements  of  the  rules  were  not  met.  He   referred   to   the
interpretation by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State
for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192,   of   the   expression
"exceptional circumstances" as meaning something  so  compelling  as  to  be
disproportionate and submitted that such circumstances did not exist in  the
appellant's case, when considering the factors not in his favour.

Ms Mallick relied in her submissions on the cases of  Maslov  v.  Austria  -
1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546,  Masih  (deportation  -  public  interest  -  basic
principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 and ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4. She submitted that  the  majority  of
the appellant's offences had been committed  as  a  juvenile  and  the  same
weight could not be  given  to  those  convictions.  His  background  was  a
relevant consideration in that he was the child of an alcoholic  mother  who
would have had no parental control and was left to offend.  With  regard  to
the offences in May 2012 it was relevant to note that  the  wing  member  of
the panel in the First-tier Tribunal was  a  magistrate  and  thus  familiar
with the work of the Magistrates Court, and was content  to  find  that  the
interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights was disproportionate,  so
demonstrating that he did  not  consider  the  offences  so  serious  as  to
warrant deportation. With regard to  the  conviction  on  31  May  2012  for
possession of  cannabis,  that  should  be  considered  in  the  context  of
cannabis being commonly used in the Jamaican community and  in  the  context
of the appellant's background. These were  mitigating  circumstances.  Prior
to the convictions in May 2012 the appellant had  never  been  incarcerated.
He was a changed person because of his incarceration. Ms  Rankin's  evidence
that the appellant was a changed person should be accepted as true  and  was
relevant to the question of the risk of re-offending. The  offences  in  May
2012 were not so serious as to lead to  removal.  The  appellant  had  spent
over half his life in the United Kingdom,  including  his  formative  years,
and had built up relationships here. He had acquired  carpentry  skills  and
had a job offer as a kitchen porter. Most importantly he had a  child  here,
for whom he had been very supportive in the face of her  medical  condition.
There was a close bond  between  them.  There  was  a  solidity  of  social,
cultural and family ties, as in the case of Maslov, and the  best  interests
of the child  carried  a  lot  of  weight  in  this  case.  Deportation  was
therefore disproportionate.

Consideration and findings

The appellant relies upon his family and private life pursuant to Article  8
of the ECHR as giving rise to an exception from automatic deportation  under
section 33 of the 2007 Act.

The facts in this case are not in issue: the appellant came  to  the  United
Kingdom at the age of eleven and has now lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for
fourteen years; his residence here has been lawful,  with  indefinite  leave
to remain granted in 2001 on the basis of his status as  a  dependant  child
of a settled parent; other than his father, his close  family  members  live
in the United Kingdom; he has a British daughter now aged  six  who  suffers
from cerebral palsy with possible, but as yet undiagnosed, autism  and  OCD;
he lived with his daughter and her mother until his  relationship  with  her
mother ended; and he has remained friends with  his  daughter's  mother,  Ms
Rankin, since the relationship  ended  and  has  maintained  a  regular  and
committed  relationship  with  his  daughter,  although  contact  has   been
maintained  only  by  telephone  since  his  incarceration.  The  First-tier
Tribunal's finding, that it was in his daughter's  best  interests  for  him
not to be removed, is no longer  the  subject  of  challenge  and  has  been
accepted by Mr Deller.

What is in issue in this  case,  however,  is  where  the  balance  lies  in
assessing proportionality. The appellant relies on the principles in  Maslov
in claiming that his exclusion from the United Kingdom cannot be  justified.
It is indeed the case that he has spent the majority of his  life  including
his formative years here, having arrived as a boy of  eleven  years  of  age
and that all his close family members live here.  It  is  claimed  that  his
father is no longer in Jamaica and that in any event  they  had  no  ongoing
relationship. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any specific findings  in
that regard, but  its  comments  at  paragraph  72  suggested  that  it  was
accepted that that  was  the  case,  although  reference  was  made  in  the
evidence of his aunt to the presence of other  extended  family  members  in
Jamaica. I proceed on the basis that any remaining ties  the  appellant  has
to Jamaica are weak, although not non-existent, considering  that  he  spent
eleven years there. It is also accepted that the appellant  has  established
a family life in the United Kingdom with his daughter.

The respondent's case, however, is that the public  interest  considerations
outweigh the appellant's own interests and, in  that  respect,  reliance  is
placed upon the appellant's  inability  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules and his criminal history, including his propensity to  re-
offend, his failure to settle into a productive or law-abiding life and  the
deterrent effect of deportation, as well as the current case-law.

Turning, to the  appellant's  criminal  history,  it  is  apparent  that  he
commenced offending only four years after arriving in  the  United  Kingdom,
at the age of fifteen. The majority of his earlier offences were  not  of  a
particularly serious nature, so as to lead  to  any  significant  period  of
imprisonment, although they included a conviction for the  possession  of  a
handgun, for which he received a twelve month  sentence  suspended  for  two
years. Whilst the earlier offences were  committed  as  a  juvenile,  it  is
relevant to note that the appellant has  continued  to  offend  well  beyond
reaching his majority and was last convicted of an offence  at  the  age  of
23, only  one  and  a  half  years  ago,  for  which  he  currently  remains
incarcerated. Contrary to the circumstances in Maslov,  therefore,  this  is
not a matter solely of juvenile delinquency. It is also  of  relevance  that
since the appellant reached his majority, his  offences  have  escalated  in
their level of seriousness, culminating in his convictions in May  2012  for
burglary and theft and for robbery and possession of drugs, albeit  Class  B
drugs. Whilst this does not diminish the fact that very serious reasons  are
still required for expulsion, it is nevertheless a  material  factor  to  be
considered when assessing proportionality and plainly reduces the weight  to
be attached to his ties to the United Kingdom.

Of relevance, too, is the appellant's inability to take  responsibility  for
his actions, as clearly reflected in  the  remarks  made  by  the  Judge  in
sentencing him to 20 months imprisonment for the earlier convictions in  May
2012, whereby it was noted that he had "chosen... to have  a  trial  in  the
teeth of overwhelming evidence but the jury have seen through the  lies  you
have  told  them...".  The  same  applies  to  the  appellant's  denial   of
culpability in his explanation to the First-tier Tribunal,  as  recorded  at
paragraph 57 of its determination,  of  the  circumstances  leading  to  his
conviction for robbery. The appellant's criminal history, as set out in  the
deportation  decision,  also  demonstrates  his  continual   disregard   for
authority or the law, failing on several occasions, to surrender to  custody
or to attend supervisions or to comply with requirements imposed  upon  him,
prior to the most recent convictions.

As the Tribunal found at paragraph 74 of its determination, other  than  two
letters of support from his wing officer and English tutor, there is  little
in the way of evidence to suggest that the appellant has  changed  his  ways
as a result of his prison sentence. There is no OASys or other  such  report
giving an indication of  his  risk  of  re-offending.  It  was  Ms  Rankin's
evidence that he had changed and that  he  really  wanted  to  do  something
about his circumstances and  had  been  offered  employment  and  would  not
offend again. However, I place little, if any, weight,  upon  her  assertion
in that respect, well-meaning  though  it  may  be,  in  the  light  of  his
history. The offer of employment remains no more than an  offer  which  must
be considered in the context of his overall  behaviour.  Whilst  it  is  the
case that the appellant's current  period  of  incarceration  is  the  first
significant period of imprisonment, I do  not  consider  that  the  evidence
before me suggests that  that  would  act  as  any  deterrence  against  re-
offending. In that respect I find it of particular significance to  consider
that he continued offending, and indeed offending in  a  more  serious  way,
even after being issued with a warning letter in  March  2011  of  potential
deportation, following the respondent's decision not to pursue  such  action
at that time. Thus, despite the threat of being removed from the country  in
which he had lived since  the  age  of  eleven,  and  of  being  effectively
permanently separated from his daughter and his  other  family  members,  he
made no attempt at that time to settle into a productive life here. That,  I
find, is a significant indicator of the likelihood of him being able  to  do
so after completing his current custodial sentence.

Turning to the appellant's relationship with his daughter, I proceed on  the
basis that it has been accepted that it is in her best interests for him  to
remain in the United  Kingdom.  Whilst  that  is  a  primary  consideration,
however, it  is  not  the  only  consideration.  It  is  accepted  that  the
appellant's daughter suffers from cerebral  palsy  and  has  other,  as  yet
undiagnosed, conditions. There is no medical evidence to show  the  severity
of her conditions and the extent of her requirement for additional  care  at
home, although I note Ms Rankin's evidence that she has a carer  at  school.
Nevertheless I accept that her condition is  an  additional  factor  in  the
consideration of weight to be  attached  to  the  appellant's  interests  in
remaining in this country. I accept that it will be distressing for  her  if
her father leaves the country and that their separation is  already  causing
her distress, especially as her siblings are  able  to  be  with  their  own
father. However she has not lived with the appellant since she  was  a  baby
and no doubt cannot recall a time when her contact  with  him  consisted  of
anything other than visits. I pause here to add  that  the  evidence  before
the First-tier Tribunal was that she had lived with the  appellant  and  her
mother for the first two and a half years of her life, whilst  the  evidence
before me, which was not challenged, was that her parents separated  at  the
end of 2007, when she was just less than one year old. In any event,  it  is
of relevance that the appellant has continued  to  offend  since  her  birth
and, in so doing, has shown little regard for her best  interests.  That  is
particularly the case with respect to  his  total  disregard,  as  mentioned
above, of the warning issued to him in March 2011 and of the real threat  of
deportation and separation. He has,  by  his  own  actions  leading  to  his
current period of incarceration, absented himself from her life.

Returning to the question of "very serious reasons" in  Maslov,  I  consider
that they are present in the appellant's case. He is a  persistent  offender
whose offences have continued  past  his  minority  and  have  escalated  in
gravity.  The  fact  that  he  is  the  child  of  an  alcoholic,   although
unfortunate, does not detract from the fact that he has continued to  offend
into adulthood. Neither does the fact that  cannabis  is  commonly  used  in
Jamaican communities mitigate the fact  that  its  possession  is  a  crime.
There is no reliable evidence to show  that  the  appellant  has  sought  to
rehabilitate himself. On the contrary, he  has  demonstrated  disregard  for
authority and has not been deterred in his criminal activity by  his  family
considerations or by warnings of deportation.  His  own  disregard  for  his
child's best interests significantly reduces the weight to  be  attached  to
the family life existing between them  and  his  disregard  for  the  public
interest reduces the weight to be attached to the ties  he  has  established
in this country.

Current case law has established that the weight to be given to  the  public
interest in removing foreign criminals is significant. That  was  emphasised
by the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria), where Lord Justice  Laws  stated  at
paragraph 54:

    "I said at paragraph 46 that while  the  authorities  demonstrate  that
    there is no rule of exceptionality for Article  8,  they  also  clearly
    show  that  the  more  pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or
    deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is to
    prevail. The pressing nature of the public  interest  here  is  vividly
    informed by the fact  that  by  Parliament's  express  declaration  the
    public interest  is  injured  if  the  criminal's  deportation  is  not
    effected. Such a result could in my judgment only  be  justified  by  a
    very strong claim indeed."

In the very recent case of MF, the Master of the Rolls stated  at  paragraph
42:


    "in approaching the question of  whether  removal  is  a  proportionate
    interference with an individual's article  8  rights,  the  scales  are
    heavily weighted in favour of deportation and something very compelling
    (which will be  "exceptional")  is  required  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in removal. In our view, it is no coincidence that the  phrase
    "exceptional circumstances" is used in the new rules in the context  of
    weighing the competing factors for and against deportation  of  foreign
    criminals."


He went on, at paragraph 43 to state:

    "The general rule in the present context is that,  in  the  case  of  a
    foreign prisoner to  whom  paras  399  and  399A  do  not  apply,  very
    compelling reasons will be required to outweigh the public interest  in
    deportation.   These   compelling   reasons   are   the    "exceptional
    circumstances".


It is the appellant's case that he has demonstrated very compelling  reasons
that  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his  deportation,  by  reason  in
particular of his daughter's best interests and the fact that he  has  spent
the majority of his life, including  his  formative  years,  in  the  United
Kingdom. However, in the light of what I have said above, I  do  not  accept
that those reasons, albeit weighty, are sufficiently compelling to  outweigh
the public interest in the prevention of disorder and crime.

In the circumstances I find that the appellant's  deportation  is  justified
in the public interest and would not amount to a breach of Article 8 of  the
ECHR. Any interference caused to his family and private life in  the  United
Kingdom, and to that of his daughter, as a result  of  his  deportation,  is
proportionate. The appellant has failed to establish that  he  falls  within
the exceptions set out at section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  therefore  set
aside. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.










                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
