

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00449/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 07 January 2014                            |On 14 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                                     and
                          Upper Tribunal Judge King


                                   Between

                  The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Phillip Babatunde Faponnle

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

Respondent:   Phillipe Bonavero (of Counsel) instructed by Trott and Gentry
LLP
Appellant:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary
    of State") whereby it was determined, on  1st  August  2012,  that  the
    Respondent be deported from the United Kingdom under section 32 of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.  The Respondent's ensuing  appeal  to  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was allowed.   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

THE FACTS

 2. The material facts are uncontentious.  For the purposes of  this  error
    of law determination, it is unnecessary  to  rehearse  in  extenso  the
    Respondent's history.   It is sufficient to record that he is  aged  36
    years; he has been present in the United Kingdom since August 1990; his
    presence here has been unlawful during much of the ensuing period;  and
    he has made unsuccessful applications for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    and naturalisation.  The Respondent has a  not  insignificant  criminal
    record, having accumulated a series of  convictions  between  1997  and
    2010. The most serious of these is the conviction made  at  Blackfriars
    Crown Court on 14th May 2010 for two counts  of  conspiracy  to  supply
    controlled drugs, namely Class A heroin.  This gave rise to a  sentence
    of 5 years and 8 months imprisonment, imposed on  3rd  September  2010.
    The Respondent pleaded guilty to these offences on the  basis  that  he
    has a "managerial role in respect of  street  dealing"  which  involved
    directing the street supply of elicit substances.

 3. In his attempts  to  resist  deportation,  the  Respondent  has  placed
    emphasis on an asserted long term relationship with a  British  citizen
    involving the birth of a child  and  his  medical  condition.   At  the
    appeal before the FtT, the  Respondent's  representative  withdrew  the
    application for asylum and  conceded  that  the  Respondent  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules.  The  sole  ground  on  which  the
    appeal succeeded was Article 8 ECHR.

 4. At the hearing before this Tribunal, two issues  of  law  crystallised.
    In order to determine these issues, it is necessary to outline  briefly
    the key events postdating the FtT determination, which was  promulgated
    on 10th July 2013:

    (a)  On 17th July 2013, the Secretary of State applied  for  permission
         to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

     (b) On 19th August 2013, this application was refused  by  a  Judge  of
the FtT.


    (c)  On 23rd August 2013, this refusal was  notified  by  HMCTS,  in  a
         formal "Notice of Decision", to both the Secretary of State and the
         Respondent's solicitors.

    (d)  On 3rd September 2013, the Secretary of State renewed  before  the
         Upper Tribunal her application for permission to appeal.  The  fact
         of this renewed application was not notified to the  Respondent  or
         his solicitors.

    (e)  On 9th September 2013, the Home Office Criminal Case Work Division
         (Liverpool) wrote to the Respondent's solicitors in  the  following
         terms:

             "In light of your client's allowed  appeal  of  10  July  2013
             against his deportation, he will be granted Limited  Leave  to
             Remain in the UK.  This leave will be issued  on  a  Biometric
             Residence Permit. I would be grateful if you could advise your
             client of the following:


             This letter is not evidence of your leave  to  remain  in  the
             United  Kingdom,  of  right  to  work  or  of  entitlement  to
             benefits.


             You are  required  to  enrol  biometric  information  (scanned
             fingerprints and photograph) in order to  obtain  a  Biometric
             Residence   Permit,   in   accordance   with   the   [relevant
             Regulations] ....


             The Biometric Residence Permit is the official document issued
             by the UK Border Agency to confirm your immigration status  in
             the United Kingdom. Please complete the  enclosed  application
             form.  Return the form and photographs within 7  working  days
             to .........   [address] ...................


             Details of how to enrol your  client's  biometric  information
             will be sent to you once we receive  your  client's  completed
             forms."

         [Emphasis added]

    (f)  On 13th September 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Warr acceded  to  the
         Secretary of State's renewed application for permission to  appeal.
         A formal "Notice of Decision" was issued to both  parties  on  this
         date.

    (g)  On 17th September 2013, the  Respondent's  solicitors  posted  the
         completed "Application for a Biometric Residence Permit" to UKBA.


    (h)  Also on 17th September 2013, the Home Office (i) instructed  SERCO
         to remove the Respondent's electronic tagging device  "due  to  him
         winning his appeal" and  (ii)  instructed  the  relevant  Reporting
         Centre "Please cancel reporting events re above  named.  He  is  no
         longer required to report as he has now won his appeal."

    (i)  On 18th September 2013, the Home Office Criminal Casework Division
         wrote at length to the Respondent's solicitors:

         "Please convey the contents of this letter  to  your  client.  This
         letter entitles the applicant to a fee free biometric enrolment  at
         the Post Office Limited .....


         Dear Mr Faponnle,


         As part of your process for granting you leave you must  have  your
         biometric information (scanned fingerprints and photographs) taken.
          This letter in itself confers no leave to enter or remain  in  the
         United Kingdom and does not constitute proof  of  your  immigration
         status ...


         Even though the Home Office has agreed to grant you leave to remain
         in the  United  Kingdom,  it  is  only  the  Biometric  Information
         Residence Permit that constitutes proof of your immigration  status
         in the United Kingdom and this permit cannot be  issued  until  you
         have enrolled your biometric information ....


         If you fail to enrol within 15 working days and do not  contact  us
         with a reason, no further action may be taken .......    It is only
         the Biometrics Residence Permit  that  constitutes  proof  of  your
         immigration status in the United Kingdom."

         [Underlining added.]

    (j)  On the same date, 18th September 2013, the Respondent's solicitors
         telephoned the Secretary of  State's  "Special  Appeals  Team".   A
         record of this communication was  made.   This  confirms  that  the
         Upper Tribunals grant of permission to appeal had been received  by
         the Respondent's solicitors.  It notes inter alia:


             "Things got as far as the Respondent having his electronic tag
             removed and the Home  Office  writing  to  the  Respondent  to
             inform him we would be granting  him  limited  leave.   It  is
             clear that an admin error cropped up  with  SAT  and  CCD  not
             communicating effectively."

         The legal representative concerned was  informed  that  the  appeal
         would be pursued.  ("SAT" denotes  "Special  Appeals  Team",  while
         "CCD" denotes "Criminal Case Work Division".)

    (k)  On 2nd October 2013, the Respondent's solicitors  forwarded  their
         appeal hearing bundle to the Secretary of State's representative.

    (l)  On 8th October  2013,  the  Respondent  and  his  solicitors  were
         informed in writing that the cancellation of  the  bail  conditions
         had occurred in error and that these  would  be  reintroduced  with
         effect from 14th October 2013.

 5. It was represented  to  this  Tribunal,  without  challenge,  that  the
    Respondent presented himself at a Post  Office,  where  his  biometrics
    were duly registered. While the precise date of this event is  unclear,
    it would  appear  to  have  post-dated  the  conversation  between  the
    parties' respective representatives on 18th September 2013.  It is also
    agreed that no Biometric Residence Permit was issued to the Respondent.



 6. In the chronology, there followed a  most  unsatisfactory  event.   The
    Secretary of State's appeal was listed for hearing before  a  panel  of
    two Upper Tribunal Judges on 20th November 2013. However, the Secretary
    of State was not ready to proceed.  An adjournment was  requested,  and
    granted, on the basis that time was needed to enable the  Secretary  of
    State to check the authenticity of the letter sent on her behalf  dated
    9th September 2013. That this  was  highly  unsatisfactory  per  se  is
    beyond plausible argument.  To this we must add the comment that it  is
    truly remarkable that the Secretary of State's representative,  against
    the background documented above, was unable to confirm the authenticity
    of  the  Secretary  of  State's  letter  of  9th  September  2013  and�
    evidently, doubted its authenticity to the extent that the hearing  had
    to  be  adjourned.   From  every  perspective,   this   was,   frankly,
    astonishing.  Furthermore, it gave rise to a  period  of  pre-eminently
    avoidable  delay  and  a  grave  waste  of  Tribunal  time  and  public
    resources. This must be deprecated in the strongest terms.

 7. Regrettably, no lesson was learned.  At the reconvened  appeal  hearing
    before this panel  on  7th  January  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative was, again, significantly ill  prepared.   A  series  of
    requests from the panel for basic, relevant information  and  documents
    could not be answered and, in  consequence,  it  was  not  possible  to
    complete the hearing.  Rather, the Tribunal had to have resort  to  the
    mechanism  of  formal  Directions.   Only  then  were   the   necessary
    information and  documentation  provided  by  the  Secretary  of  Sate,
    following  the  hearing.   The  breadth  and  depth  of  this   further
    information and documents confirmed the gravity of the earlier  failure
    on the part of the Secretary of State to discharge  her  obligation  to
    disclose all relevant information and  documents  to  the  Respondent's
    legal representatives and the Tribunal.   These failures merely  served
    to compound and aggravate the significant  errors  which  characterised
    the conduct of the Secretary of State's officials  during  the  earlier
    phase of the appeal process detailed above.  All of this  can  only  be
    described as disturbing.

 8. The adjourned hearing of 20th  November  2013  resulted  in  a  further
    letter written on behalf of the Secretary of State,  addressed  to  the
    Respondent's solicitors, dated 22nd November 2013.  This letter  begins
    with an apology for the earlier errors and  inaccuracies.   It  asserts
    that the earlier letters of 9th and 18th September 2013 were "issued in
    error  due  to  an  administrative  oversight",   by   reason   of   "a
    misinterpretation  of  information  received  from  the  Home   Offices
    Specialist Appeals Team".  It further states:

         "I apologise for the administrative errors that  have  occurred  in
         your client's case and for any inconvenience  and  misunderstanding
         that has been caused.  At present the Home Office  will  await  the
         outcome of the proceedings at [sic] the Upper Tier Tribunal  before
         making a decision on how to proceed in your client's case.  Again I
         apologise for the error ......"

    The only document of note generated on the Respondent's  behalf  during
    the October 2013/January 2014 phase is the  formal  Rule  24  Response.
    This was composed by Mr Bonavero (of Counsel)  and  served  the  useful
    function of a skeleton argument.





THE TWO ISSUES OF LAW

 9. The framework outlined above gives rise to two issues of law  which  we
    must determine.  We formulate these in the following terms:

    (i)  Whether the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
         deemed to have been abandoned.

    (ii)  Whether  to  permit  this  appeal  to  proceed  would  unlawfully
         frustrate a substantive legitimate expectation on the part  of  the
         Respondent generated by the conduct of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         agents described above.

THE FIRST ISSUE

10. Mr Bonavero's argument was based on section 104(4A) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  It is  necessary  to
    begin with section 82 of this statute, which provides:

         "Right of Appeal: general


         (1)  Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a person
             he may appeal [F1to the Tribunal]F1 .

         (2)  In this Part "immigration decision" means-

             (a)  refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,

             (b)  refusal of entry clearance,

             (c)  refusal of a certificate of entitlement under section 10
         of this Act,

             (d)  refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in
                  the United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that
                  the person has no leave to enter or remain,

             (e)  variation of a person's leave to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom if when the variation takes effect the
                  person has no leave to enter or remain,

             (f)  revocation under section 76 of this Act of indefinite
                  leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,

             (g)  a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
                  Kingdom by way of directions under [F2section 10(1)(a),
                  (b), (ba) or (c)]F2 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999
                  (c. 33) (removal of person unlawfully in United Kingdom),

             (h)  a decision that an illegal entrant is to be removed from
                  the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8
                  to 10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77)
                  (control of entry: removal),

             (i)  a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
                  Kingdom by way of directions given by virtue of paragraph
                  10A of that Schedule (family),

             [F3(ia)a decision that a person is to be removed from the
             United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraph 12(2) of
             Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77) (seamen and
             aircrews),]

             [F4F3(ib)a decision to make an order under section 2A of that
             Act (deprivation of right of abode),]

             F4(j)a decision to make a deportation order under section 5(1)
             of that Act, and

             (k)refusal to revoke a deportation order under section 5(2) of
             that Act.

             (3)F5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
             . . .

         (4)  The right of appeal under subsection (1) is subject to the
             exceptions and limitations specified in this Part."



    The subject matter of section 104 is "Pending appeal".  It's provisions
    are concerned with the lifetime of appeals brought under section 82(1).
     Within this discrete regime, section 104(4A) provides:


         "An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is  in
         the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if the  Respondent
         is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom."

    This is expressly stated to be "subject to subsections (4B) and  (4C)."
    It is common case that neither  of  these  latter  provisions  has  any
    application to the context under scrutiny.

11. We consider that the Respondent's argument on this issue must fail  for
    the  elementary  reason  that  the  "treated  as  abandoned"  mechanism
    contained in section 104(4A) is  triggered  only  where  the  following
    conditions are satisfied:

    (i)  The appeal is brought by  the  person  adversely  affected  by  an
         "immigration decision" as defined in section 82(1).

    ii) The appeal must be made to the First-Tier Tribunal.


   iii) The appeal must be brought by  such  person  while  in  the  United
        Kingdom.

    iv) The person appealing must be granted leave to enter  or  remain  in
        the United Kingdom.


    None of these conditions is satisfied in the present matrix, because:


    (i)  The Appellant is the Secretary of State and not Mr Faponnle.

      ii) The only extant appeal is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  (viz
          the present appeal) and not the FtT.


     iii) Mr Faponnle's presence in the United Kingdom  is  irrelevant,  in
          this context.

     (iv)     Mr Faponnle has not  been  granted  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

    Since all of the  conditions  listed  above  must  be  satisfied,  this
    argument is doomed to failure.

12. We elaborate on the fourth of our discrete conclusions set out above as
    follows.  The Respondent was at no time granted leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom. Rather, he was simply  notified  of  the  Secretary  of
    States intention to confer this status on him and he was advised of the
    steps which would have to be taken in order to bring  this  about.   In
    particular, he  was  informed  unambiguously  that  the  terms  of  the
    relevant letters - dated 9th and 18th September 2013 - did not  operate
    to grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom. Furthermore,  these
    letters stated unequivocally that he would acquire this status only  if
    issued with a Biometric Residence Permit.  The  terms  of  the  letters
    must also be considered in conjunction with the Immigration  (Biometric
    Registration)  Regulations  2008,  as  amended   by   the   Immigration
    (Biometric  Registration  (Amendment))  Regulations   2012.    Properly
    analysed, these regulations and the administrative outworkings  thereof
    constitute the regime presently in vogue regulating the grant of  leave
    to enter and remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  general  provisions
    contained in sections 3 and 4 of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  must  be
    considered in this wider context.  The conclusion that, as a matter  of
    law, the Appellant has at no time been granted leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom follows inexorably.

SECOND ISSUE: SUBSTANTIVE LEGITIMATE EXPECTATION

13. The doctrine of substantive  legitimate  expectations  is  now   firmly
    embedded in the public law compartment of the common law of the  United
    Kingdom.  The locus classicus continues  to  be  the  decision  of  the
    English Court of Appeal in  R  -  v  -  North  and  East  Devon  Health
    Authority,  ex  parte  Coughlan,   [2001]   QB   213.    Other   recent
    contributions to the developing jurisprudence include the  decision  of
    the Privy Council in Paponette - v - Attorney General of  Trinidad  and
    Tobago [2012] 1 AC 1 and two  notable  judgments,  in  the  same  case,
    emanating from Northern Ireland, Re Loreto Grammar School's Application
    [2011] NIQB 36 (at first instance) and [2012] NICA 1 [Court of Appeal].
     For present purposes, two discrete elements of this doctrine  fall  to
    be considered.  The first  concerns  the  nature  and  quality  of  the
    promise  or  representation  required.   The  second  relates  to   the
    interaction of substantive  legitimate  expectations  with  the  public
    interest.

14. The doctrine of substantive legitimate expectations is the response  of
    the common law to failures by public authorities to honour promises and
    assurances made to citizens.  Its central tenets are fairness and abuse
    of power.  In appropriate cases,  it  is  incumbent  on  the  Court  to
    conduct -

         "..... a detailed examination of the precise terms of  the  promise
         or representation made, the circumstances in which the promise  was
         made and the nature of the statutory or other discretion."


         (Coughlan, paragraph [56].

    In the typical case, the conduct of the public authority under scrutiny
    will normally take the form of something said verbally or  in  writing.
    The cases belonging to this field are replete with the word  "promise".
    In Coughlan, for example, the judgment speaks of "a current  policy  or
    an extant promise": paragraph [65].  In that particular case, there was
    "an express promise or representation made on a number of occasions  in
    precise terms", such  that  a  failure  to  honour  it  "...  would  be
    equivalent to a breach of contract in private law": paragraph [86].

15. Fairness to the citizen and the misuse of public power are two  of  the
    themes which course  through  the  veins  of  Coughlan  and  subsequent
    decisions.  They  are  also  reflected  in  the  following  passage  in
    Administrative Law (Wade and Forsyth, 10th Edition), page 447:

         "Good government depends upon trust between the  governed  and  the
         governor.  Unless that trust is sustained and  protected  officials
         will not be believed and the Government becomes  a  choice  between
         chaos and coercion."


    The two basic ingredients of what the law has come to  recognise  as  a
    substantive legitimate expectation are  satisfied  where  there  is  an
    unambiguous promise or assurance by a  public  official  in  which  the
    affected citizen reposes trust.  The  decided  cases  have  established
    with reasonable clarity the boundaries of the doctrine.   In  Coughlan,
    for example, the Court recognised, tacitly,  that  a  public  authority
    would not be acting unlawfully in circumstances where to adhere to  the
    relevant promise would be tantamount to "acting inconsistently with its
    statutory or other public law duties": paragraph [86].  In  an  earlier
    passage, the Court coined the test of "a sufficient overriding interest
    to justify  a  departure  from  what  has  been  previously  promised":
    paragraph [58].  In the immediately preceding paragraph,  the  standard
    formulated was that of "any overriding interest  relied  upon  for  the
    change of policy".  In R - v - Secretary of  State  for  Education,  ex
    parte Begbie [2000] 1 WLR 1115, the Court held that an election promise
    made by a shadow Minister did not bind the appointed Minister following
    a change of Government.  In a different context, in R (Bloggs 61) - v -
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] 1 WLR  2724,  it  was
    decided that the public agency concerned, the Prison Service,  was  not
    bound by a promise made by  the  police  to  a  prisoner  about  future
    conditions, as this lay outwith  their  ostensible  authority.  Further
    guidance is found in the following  passage  in  R  (Bhatt  Murphy  and
    Others) - v - The Independent Assessor and Others [2008] EWCA Civ 755:


         "[41]     .......   Public  authorities  typically,   and   central
             government par excellence, enjoy wide discretions which it  is
             their duty to exercise in the public interest ....


             This entitlement - in truth, a duty - is ordinarily  repugnant
             to any requirement to bow to another's  will,  albeit  in  the
             name of a substantive legitimate expectation.....


         [42] But the Court will (subject to the overriding public interest)
             insist on such a requirement and enforce  such  an  obligation
             where the decision maker's proposed action would otherwise  be
             so unfair as to amount to an abuse of power, by reason of  the
             way in which it has earlier conducted itself ....


         What is fair or  unfair  is  of  course  notoriously  sensitive  to
             factual nuance."


     [Emphasis added]

    Finally, turning  to  the  nature  of  the  promise  or  representation
    required to engage the  doctrine,  Laws  LJ  adverted  to  "a  specific
    undertaking, directed at a particular individual  or  group"  and  "the
    pressing and  focused  nature  of  the  kind  of  assurance  required":
    paragraphs [45] and [46].


16. Applying these principles to the matrix of the present appeal, we  make
    two principal conclusions.  The first is that the  Respondent  received
    from the Secretary of State, through a combination of the letters dated
    9th September and 18th September 2013 and the surrounding events  noted
    above,  an  unambiguous  representation,   devoid   of   any   relevant
    qualification.   The  representation,  duly  analysed,   was   twofold.
    Firstly, particularly taken in conjunction  with  the  notification  to
    both parties that the Secretary of State's application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal had been refused, on 23rd August  2013,
    the Secretary of State's representation to the Respondent,  scrutinised
    objectively, conveyed to him that the decision of the FtT was no longer
    under challenge and was, therefore, final.  The second element  of  the
    representation was that in  the  (probable)  event  of  the  Respondent
    successfully applying for a Biometric Residence  Permit,  he  would  be
    granted limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  In this  way  a
    substantive legitimate expectation was engendered in him.

17. As a matter of fact, the Secretary of State subsequently reneged on the
    representation made.  The promise, or assurance, was  withdrawn.   This
    gives rise to  an  interface  between  the  personal  interest  of  the
    Respondent and the public interest.   Our  second  main  conclusion  is
    that, in the particular matrix of this appeal, the public interest must
    prevail.  This conclusion has several elements. The first is  that  the
    representation made  was  the  product  of  pure,  genuine  error:  the
    Secretary of State's left hand did not know what the right  was  doing.
    Secondly,  the  Respondent  gained  a  sheer,  undeserved  windfall  in
    consequence. Thirdly, the representation was  withdrawn  speedily:  its
    lifespan was  confined  to  approximately  one  month.   Fourthly,  the
    representation was made in circumstances where the Secretary  of  State
    was entitled by statute to continue to challenge the  decision  of  the
    FtT. Such efforts were in fact continuing and no  relevant  time  limit
    had expired.  Moreover, the period during which the Respondent and  his
    legal representatives were unaware  of  this  continued  challenge  was
    short lived, confined to some two weeks, ending with the date on  which
    the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  to  grant  permission  to  appeal  was
    received: within some few days of the date of the Notice  of  Decision,
    13th September 2013.  Fifthly, the grant of permission to appeal to the
    Secretary of State establishes that the Secretary of State's continuing
    challenge to the decision of the FtT was not speculative or  formulaic.
    Rather, it was serious in nature and was judicially adjudged to possess
    sufficient merit to  overcome  the  relevant  threshold.   Finally,  we
    consider that the decision of the FtT  is  so  unsatisfactory  that  it
    should properly be reviewed by the Upper Tribunal. We  shall  elaborate
    this latter issue infra.

18. We are satisfied that this conclusion is not precluded by the  decision
    of the High Court  in  R  -  v  -  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, ex parte Ram [1979] 1  All  ER  687.   In  that  case,  the
    Applicant, upon arrival at Heathrow Airport, was granted leave to enter
    and  remain  indefinitely  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  the   relevant
    immigration officer, who stamped the  passport  to  this  effect.   The
    officer acted in error.   Some  17  months  later,  the  Applicant  was
    detained as an illegal immigrant.  He applied, successfully, for a writ
    of habeas corpus. The Divisional Court considered the decisive  factors
    to be that the immigration officer had  been  acting  intra  vires  his
    statutory powers and there had been no fraud or dishonesty on behalf of
    the Applicant.  It followed that there were no  reasonable  grounds  on
    which the Secretary of State could have decided that the Applicant  was
    in the United Kingdom illegally. We consider that  the  matrix  of  the
    present appeals defers from that of Ram in certain  material  respects.
    Factually, the two cases are  quite  different:  in  Ram  there  was  a
    completed act of granting leave to  enter  and  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  In contrast, in the present case, the  relevant  process  was
    merely initiated and was incomplete.  Secondly, the legal landscape has
    evolved considerably since Ram was decided: see paragraphs [11] -  [13]
    above.  In this respect, Lord Widgery CJ,  in  finding  the  case  more
    difficult than his two judicial brethren, stated,  prophetically,  that
    the law was "fast developing", while acknowledging that the issue would
    probably have to be reconsidered in some future case.

19.  To  summarise,  the  Respondent  was  the  fortuitous  and  undeserved
    beneficiary  of  a  short  lived,  genuine  administrative  error.   We
    consider that his good fortune  must  bow  to  the  significant  public
    interests identified above.  We are satisfied that to  give  effect  to
    the Secretary of State's  withdrawal of the  representation  made  will
    not be so unfair to the Respondent as  to  countenance  and  sustain  a
    misuse of public  power.   In  the  particular  circumstances  of  this
    appeal, the public interest must prevail.

THE SUBSTANTIVE APPEAL

20. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Warr referred to
    the "Practice Directions.  These are the Practice Statements issued  by
    the Senior President of Tribunals, dated 25th  September  2012.   These
    must be considered  in  conjunction  with  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and the First-Tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
    (Composition of Tribunals) Order 2008 ("the 2008 Order").  Article 2 of
    the latter provides that the SPT  determines  the  composition  of  FtT
    panels.  Article 8 provides:

         "If the decision of the Tribunal is not unanimous, the decision  of
         the majority is the decision of the  Tribunal:  and  the  presiding
         member has a casting vote if the votes are equally divided."

     Paragraph 10.2 of the SPT's Practice Statements provides:

             "Since Article 8 of the 2008 Order provides that the  decision
             of the majority is the decision of the Tribunal (and that  the
             presiding member has a casting vote), where  the  jurisdiction
             of the Tribunal is exercised  by  more  than  one  member  the
             resulting determination or other decision will not express any
             dissenting view or indicate that it is that of a majority."

21. The composition of the FtT in the present case consisted of a Judge  of
    the First-Tier Tribunal and a non-legal member.  The  written  decision
    of the panel is replete with expressions of  disagreement  between  the
    two panel members.  This  begins  in  paragraph  56  and  ends  in  the
    penultimate paragraph, 93.  In summary, the two  members  disagreed  on
    virtually all of the main issues addressed in  these  passages.   Their
    disagreement was repeated and profound.  Within  these  paragraphs  one
    finds a recitation of the individual views, opinions  and  findings  of
    the two members on a lengthy menu  of  issues.   This  section  of  the
    judgment, the crucial one, begins with the statement:

         "56. There was common ground between the lay member and  by  myself
             [sic] that the Appellant had established a private and  family
             life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  There  was  however  a  clear
             difference of opinion about a number of findings of fact."

     It ends with the following statement:

         "93. ..... Given the balancing act and the  fundamental  difference
             of opinion, I conclude that my decision as  Immigration  Judge
             prevails given my assessment and interpretation of the law."

         [Emphasis added.]

    We have highlighted the last words in  both  passages  for  the  reason
    that, properly analysed, the extensive disputes between the  two  panel
    members did not relate to conflicting assessments or interpretations of
    the law.  Rather, they concerned issues of fact and evaluative judgment
    relevant  to  the  application  of  the  governing  legal   rules   and
    principles.    This  per  se  constitutes  an  error  of  law  of  some
    magnitude.

22. We acknowledge Mr Bonavero's submission that the  FtT's  non-observance
    of paragraph 10.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements is not,
    ipso facto, tantamount to an error of law.  It is unnecessary for us to
    decide  whether,  in  some  cases,  non-compliance  with  the  Practice
    Statements might not  be  erroneous  in  law,  for  example  where  the
    misdemeanour is trivial, technical or immaterial  in  nature.   In  the
    present case, there has been a serious breach of the relevant provision
    of the Practice Statements.  The breach is  of  grave  dimensions.   It
    cannot be dismissed as peripheral or inconsequential.  It  is,  rather,
    stamped all over  the  relevant  passages  of  the  determination.   We
    consider that this wholesale breach cannot be categorised  as  anything
    other than a material error of law.

23. In addition to the freestanding errors of law identified in  paragraphs
    20 and 21 above, we consider that the decision of the FtT  is  infected
    by two further errors of law.  The first is is that, in our estimation,
    the proper course for the panel was to have the appeal considered by  a
    different, reconstituted panel.  As a matter of  good  practice,  where
    differences  of  opinion  between  panel  members  are  as  acute   and
    fundamental as those disclosed in the determination under  scrutiny  in
    this appeal, we consider that the  panel  should  proceed  no  further.
    While this will have regrettable costs  and  delay  implications,  such
    cases are likely to be very rare.

24.  In the particular context of this case, we consider that  the  panel's
    failure to stop, adjourn and reconstitute was erroneous  in  law.   The
    final malaise in  the  FtT's  determination  is  that  it  offends  the
    fundamental principle that justice must not  only  be  done,  but  must
    manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.  Citation  of  authority
    for this principle is unnecessary.  The determination of the FtT  makes
    for disturbing reading.  Its  contents  disclose  a  judicial  decision
    making process and outcome which we consider inimical to  the  rule  of
    law.  This decision cannot be permitted to stand  in  the  contemporary
    legal culture  which  places  such  emphasis  on  appearances  and  due
    process.

25. We conclude that the  determination  of  the  FtT  must  be  set  aside
    accordingly.

DECISION

26. Our decision is:

    (i)  We allow the appeal to the extent that the decision of the FtT  is
    set aside.

    (ii) Given  our  profound  concerns  about  what  transpired  at  first
         instance, we consider that the appeal should be remitted for  fresh
         consideration and determination by the FtT.   This exercise will be
         undertaken by a differently constituted FtT.

     Direction

     Following promulgation of this determination, a case management  review
    hearing in the forum of  the  differently  constituted  FtT  should  be
    convened, with a view to ensuring,  in  particular,  that  all  of  the
    evidence on which both parties seek to rely has been assembled  and  is
    presented in a coherent indexed and paginated bundle.


PRACTICE


27. Finally, we draw attention to paragraphs 6 and 7 above. In the  conduct
    and presentation of this appeal there  were,  regrettably,  significant
    failures by the Secretary of State's officials and  representatives  to
    comply with elementary requirements and standards of good practice.  We
    trust that lessons will be learned.





                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                    Dated:  13 February 2014



