
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00893/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates'     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Court                                |                                     |
|On 11 February 2015                  |On 2 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     KM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

    1. I have made an  anonymity  order  as  this  case  involves  children.
       Accordingly,  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any   information
       relating to these proceedings or any matter likely to lead members of
       the public to identify any person referred to in these proceedings is
       prohibited.

    2. This is an appeal against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Kelly who dismissed the appeal against the decision to  make  a
       deportation  order  dated  15  May  2014  following  the  appellant's
       convictions of various  offences  relating  to  a  firearm,  criminal
       property and to benefit payments.  He is a national of DRC.

    3. The challenge is in part as  to  the  adequacy  of  reasons  for  the
       judge's finding on the protection issue he was required to  consider.
       The second ground is no longer pursued as explained below. The  third
       relates to the consistency between the findings of fact on the impact
       of the appellant's deportation on  his  family  in  the  UK  and  the
       judge's conclusion reached under the  Rules  that  it  would  not  be
       unduly harsh for the family to remain behind.

    4. The trigger to the immigration decision was the appellant's  criminal
       behaviour. He was sentenced to 3  years  and  3  months  imprisonment
       following his conviction of the firearm offences at  Sheffield  Crown
       Court on 26 June 2012. He was also sentenced there on 17 May 2013  to
       21 months on a number of counts relating  to  criminal  property  and
       benefit payments following his conviction  in  Doncaster  Magistrates
       Court on 11 January 2013.

    5. The appellant arrived in the UK in 1989 and he was granted  leave  to
       remain in line with his parents in 2000. His application for  British
       Citizenship was refused in 2008 because  of  his  extensive  criminal
       history since 2001. He married an Irish National who lived in the  UK
       in 2011.   The family unit comprises two  children;  the  appellant's
       son and a step child.

    6. The marriage led the respondent to treat the appellant  as  a  family
       member of an EEA  national  and  subject  to  the  2006  Regulations.
       Accordingly there was no automatic deportation  order  under  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007. At the hearing in the FtT, Ms  Khan  conceded  that
       there was no evidence that  the  appellant's  wife  was  a  qualified
       person under regulation 6. The judge therefore  considered  the  case
       under the Immigration Rules. There is no challenge to  this  approach
       have been taken.

    7. There are two letters from the  respondent  giving  reasons  for  the
       decision to make a deportation order. The first  dated  28  May  2014
       explains why the respondent considered the appellant was an exception
       to automatic deportation as this would breach his rights as a  family
       member of an EEA national. As explained above, this was not the basis
       on which the judge considered the case and there is need to dwell  on
       why the respondent concluded that  deportation  was  justified  under
       regulation 21.

    8. Article 8 was also considered in this first letter.  Family life with
       the appellant's wife, the step-child (born 2005) and the child  (born
       2011) was accepted but it was considered that interference  would  be
       proportionate. The children's best interests were for the family unit
       to remain in the UK however these were outweighed  by  the  offending
       and the public interest.

    9. Prior to the decision to make a deportation order, on 21 January 2014
       the appellant claimed asylum (for which he was interviewed on  4  and
       10 June 2014).  This claim was refused for reasons given in a further
       letter from the respondent dated 24 July 2014.  This  letter  reveals
       that the respondent considered that the appellant was  excluded  from
       protection because of the danger he presented to  the  community  and
       concluded that section 72 (2) of  the  Nationality.  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002  applied.  The  case  was  however  considered  under
       article 3.

   10. The matter of exclusion was  not  in  issue  before  the  judge.  The
       protection claim advanced is summarised at [7] of the  determination.
       It was on the basis that if identified with a  criminal  record,  the
       appellant would be at risk of  detention.  Such  detention  has  been
       conceded by the respondent to breach Article  3  as  recorded  in  BK
       (Failed asylum seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 00098 and  reiterated  in
       the current Country Policy Bulletin relating  to  the  DRC  dated  18
       February 2014.  The appellant could not be expected to lie about  why
       he was deported. Reliance was placed on the decision of Phillips J in
       R (on the application of P) and another v SSHD[2013] EWHC 3879  which
       concerned the point at issue in these  proceedings:  whether  persons
       returned to the DRC against their  will  are  at  real  risk  of  ill
       treatment contrary to Article 3 simply by reason of their  status  as
       (a) failed asylum seekers or (b) criminal deportees.

   11. The Article 8 case is summarised at  [8]  in  the  determination.  In
       short, reliance had been placed on 24 years integrated UK  residence,
       an absence of meaningful ties to the DRC and the family life referred
       to above; it would be unreasonable  to  expect  that  this  could  be
       carried on abroad. The offending, though serious, was a thing of  the
       past.

   12. The respondent's case relied on evidence that investigations by other
       European and other countries showed no evidence  that  returnees  had
       been ill treated on return. Whilst they might be questioned they  are
       only detained for a  short  period  as  part  of  normal  immigration
       controls. These investigations had followed a reported remark by  the
       DRC ambassador to the UK in July 2012 that was a key  feature  in  P.
       This was in terms that people having committed  "terrible  crimes  in
       this country have to be suitably punished when they return to Congo".



   13. As with the appellant's case, there is a clear and correct summary of
       the respondent's position is clearly set out in the determination.

DID THE TRIBUNAL MAKE AN ERROR OF LAW?

   14. I am  grateful  to  Ms  Khan  and  Mr  Harrison  for  their  detailed
       submissions. The focus of permission granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Chambers was on the protection issue  but  none  of  the  three
       grounds advanced is excluded. I take each therefore in turn.

   15. The first relates to the adequacy of reasons on the protection claim.
       In particular it is argued that the judge was invited to find, as not
       reliable, a  letter  from  the  FCO  following  a  meeting  with  the
       Directeur Generale de Migration that was incorporated in the  country
       bulletin when compared with the evidence from the ambassador and  the
       findings in P. The judge had simply  accepted  the  contents  of  the
       bulletin  without  engaging  with  the  arguments;  he  should   have
       explained why he was accepting the evidence especially in  the  light
       of the strong view expressed by Phillips J.

   16. Miss Khan took me through the judgment of  Philips  Judge  in  P  and
       referred me also to the oral submissions that she had made to the FtT
       regarding the reliability of the FCO letter  concerning  the  meeting
       with the Directeur Generale du Immigration as follows:

       i) The letter was from an  unknown  source,  the  Directeur  did  not
          consent for his name to be disclosed and there was no reason given
          why this was the case.

      ii) The statement by the Directeur that any questions put to returnees
          were related to identity only directly conflicted with the country
          guidance case in BK.

     iii) The Directeur denied that people were ever detained at the airport
          which again conflicted with BK.

      iv) The evidence from  the  country  bulletin  also  contradicted  the
          evidence from the Directeur because  some  countries  did  confirm
          people were questioned and could  be detained at the airport.

   17. R (Iran) & Ors v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 provides relevant  guidance
       on the range of error of  law  challenges  that  were  then  made  to
       decisions of the AIT and continues to be the  basis  for  approaching
       challenges to decisions by the First-tier Tribunal. It  was  observed
       by Brooke LJ at [13]:

          "The second preliminary matter is this.  Adjudicators  were  under
          an  obligation  go  to  give  reasons  for  their  decisions  (see
          Regulation 53 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Appeals  (Procedure)
          Regulations [2003], so that a breach of that obligation may amount
          to  an  error  of  law.   However,   unjustified   complaints   by
          practitioners that  are  based  on  an  alleged  failure  to  give
          reasons, or adequate reasons, are seen far too often.  The leading
          decisions of this court on this  topic  are  now  Eagil  Trust  Co
          Limited v Piggott-Brown [1985] 3AllER  119  and  English  v  Emery
          Reimbolde & Strick Limited [2002] EWCA Civ 605, [2002] 1WLR  2409.
          We will adapt what was said in those two cases for the purposes of
          illustrating the relationship between the adjudicator and the AIT.
           In the former Griffiths LJ said at page 122:

             "[an adjudicator] should give his reasons in sufficient detail
             to show the [IAT] the principles on which he has acted and the
             reasons that have led him to his decision.  They need  not  be
             elaborate. I cannot stress too strongly that there is no  duty
             on [an adjudicator], in giving his reasons, to deal with every
             argument presented by [an advocate] in support  of  his  case.
             It is sufficient if what he says shows  the  parties  and,  if
             need be, the [IAT], the basis on which he has acted, and if it
             be that the [adjudicator] has not dealt with  some  particular
             argument but it can be seen that there are grounds upon  which
             he would have been entitled to reject  it,  [the  IAT]  should
             assume that he acted on those grounds unless the appellant can
             point to convincing reasons leading to a contrary conclusion."

          In English Lord Phillips MR said at paragraph 19:

             '[I]f the appellate process is  to  work  satisfactorily,  the
             judgment  must  enable  the  [IAT]  to  understand   why   the
             [adjudicator] reached his decision.  This does not  mean  that
             every factor which  weighed  with  the  [adjudicator]  in  his
             appraisal of the evidence has to be identified and  explained.
             But the issues the resolution  of  which  were  vital  to  the
             [adjudicator's] conclusion should be identified and the manner
             in which he resolved them explained.  It is  not  possible  to
             provide a template for this process. It  need  not  involve  a
             lengthy  judgment.   It  does  require  the  [adjudicator]  to
             identify and record those matters which were critical  to  his
             decision.  If the critical issue is one of  fact,  it  may  be
             enough to say  that  one  witness  was  preferred  to  another
             because the one manifestly had a clearer recollection  of  the
             material facts or the other gave  answers  which  demonstrated
             that his recollection could not be relied upon.'"

   18. In the case before me, the judge set  out  the  basis  on  which  the
       respondent contended the appellant would not be at risk over a number
       of paragraphs in the determination.  This included a reference to the
       country guidance decision in BK which bears this head note:

          "On return to the DRC failed asylum seekers do not per se  face  a
          real risk of persecution or serious harm or treatment contrary  to
          Article 3 ECHR.  In so finding this decision updates and reaffirms
          existing country guidance."

   19. The decision in P is dated 9 December 2013.  It was in the context of
       judicial review  proceedings  by  two  applicants.   Phillips  J  was
       concerned with the risk to a failed asylum seeker  and  the  risk  to
       criminal deportees.  As to the latter  category,  he  considered  two
       propositions were not seriously  in  dispute.   The  first  was  that
       criminal deportees to the DRC if identified as such will be  detained
       on arrival for an indeterminate period.  This was in the light of  an
       official statement by the DRC Ambassador that, "People who are  being
       deported for having committed crimes in the UK are  held  in  custody
       for a period of time to allow the Congolese justice system to clarify
       their situation".

   20. The second proposition  was  that  detention  was  likely  to  be  in
       conditions which contravened Article  3  of  the  ECHR.   Phillips  J
       reached this conclusion at [52] of his judgment:

          "52.    In the case of criminal deportees to DRC, it is clear that
             they  will  be  interrogated  on  arrival,  no  doubt   by   a
             professional, skilled and  experienced  immigration  official.
             According  to  the  French  Embassy,   those   officials   are
             specifically looking out for criminal deportees and  no  doubt
             able to probe for information and look for signs  which  would
             demonstrate that a returnee has been imprisoned in the  United
             Kingdom.  There would seem to be an obvious and  serious  risk
             that a criminal deportee such as P would not be able  to  hide
             the fact of  his  conviction  in  the  face  of  interrogation
             designed to elicit that very fact.

          53. Further, it must be assumed that immigration officials in  the
             DRC are able to conduct internet searches  in  relation  to  a
             person they are  interrogating.  There  must  be  a  real  and
             substantial risk that an offence which attracted  a  custodial
             sentence of twelve months or more  (so  as  to  give  rise  to
             automatic deportation) will have been reported in  some  form,
             even if the case did not generate substantial  publicity.   It
             would not seem to  matter  whether  the  DRC  nationality  was
             mentioned in any report if the person was named.   It is  also
             relevant to note in this context that the FFM report  recorded
             evidence from the police in Kinshasa that the DGM sends a team
             to the United Kingdom to identify  Congolese  who  are  to  be
             returned to the DRC and that 'the same team who had identified
             them abroad (including the UK) welcome them here'."

   21. The Country Policy Bulletin which was  published  shortly  after  the
       decision in P acknowledges the risks identified  in  P  but  explains
       that further information had  been  obtained  from  consultations  on
       returns with Inter-Governmental Consultations  on  migration,  asylum
       and refugees (IGC) member states and the DRC  authorities.  Reference
       is made to the IGC responses indicating  that  some  (member  states)
       return  Congolese  nationals  who  have  committed  crimes  and  that
       removals without known difficulties have been undertaken.

   22. The Bulletin also refers to a meeting between the FCO and the DGM  in
       January 2014 recorded in a letter dated 23 January 2014. It is on the
       letterhead of the British High Commission in Nairobi and refers to  a
       meeting with the Directeur Centrale de la Chancellerie at the DGM  in
       Kinshasa a few days previously. The name of the  Directeur  has  been
       deleted as is the name of the author of  the  letter  whose  post  is
       given as First Secretary Political Migration (MDO) East  and  Central
       Africa and Somalia.  Specifically, paragraph 2 of  the  letter  deals
       with a response to a question whether  returnees  are  questioned  on
       arrival.  The reply is:

          "Any questions put to returnees are related to identity  only.  No
          other  questions  are  asked,  as  DGM  are  concerned  only  with
          nationality and identity."

   23. In response to a further question relating to  the  circumstances  in
       which a returnee be detained, the answer indicates that there are  no
       recorded cases of detention upon return.  All  enquiries  seeking  to
       determine  a  national's   criminality   are   conducted   prior   to
       documentation as a Congolese national.

   24. Judge Kelly set out his conclusions on the evidence at [40]  which  I
       quote in full.

          "I begin by considering  whether  the  appellant  is  at  risk  of
          suffering inhuman or degrading treatment upon return to the DRC  I
          bear in mind that P (DRC) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin) is not a
          country guidance case and that the court's factual findings cannot
          therefore be considered as being of general application. Moreover,
          those findings were based on very different evidence to that which
          has been  placed before me.  In particular, it is clear  from  its
          judgment that the Court in P was strongly  influenced  by  remarks
          made by the DRC Ambassador to the United Kingdom.  However,  there
          is evidence before me that this particular official played no part
          in the process of returning its nationals  to  the  DRC,  and  his
          remarks have been subsequently contradicted by the  official  with
          relevant responsibility; that is to say, the  'Directeur  Generale
          de Migration' [DGM].   Furthermore,  the   DGM's  claim  that  his
          interest in criminal activity arises  only  in  respect  of  those
          returning with an outstanding arrest warrant or in the  DRC,  that
          any criminal conviction that has occurred outside the DRC is of no
          relevance to an arrest warrant  process,  and  that  there  is  no
          facilities for detaining  returning  Congolese  nationals  or  for
          monitoring them  upon  return,  is  fully  supported  by  evidence
          emanating from the other countries  (including  France)  who  have
          investigated the consequences of returning DRC citizens  convicted
          of  criminal  offences  in  their  respective  countries.  I  have
          attempted to summarise that evidence at paragraphs 10 to 14 above,
          and will not repeat it here. It  will  suffice  to  say,  at  this
          stage, that I have no real doubt that that the appellant would not
          be at risk of suffering torture or any other form  of  inhuman  or
          degrading treatment upon his return to the DRC, whether by reasons
          of his criminal convictions in the United Kingdom or  otherwise."

   25. It cannot be said the judge did not engage with  the  evidence.    He
       was clearly alive to the difference between  the  position  found  by
       Phillips J and that now asserted in the country  bulletin.  A  reader
       has a clear idea from the reasons given why the judge  preferred  the
       evidence accompanying the bulletin. His reasoning is short but  there
       is nothing  to  indicate  that  the  judge  did  not  carry  out  the
       evaluation of the evidence that he was tasked with. I do not consider
       anything material turns on the deletion of the names  in  the  letter
       from the High Commission as the posts are clearly identified.

   26. The second aspect on which Miss Khan bases her  challenge  refers  to
       the conclusion    in BK, in  particular  at  paragraph  [324].   This
       paragraph relates to the nature of the  requests/demands  for  bribes
       once a person has transferred to detention facilities  elsewhere.   I
       am unable to find in [324] support for the argument which  Miss  Khan
       states she made before the judge.

   27. Paragraph [324] is also referred to in support of the third  limb  of
       the First-tier Tribunal's submissions which contrasted  the  findings
       in BK with that of the Directeur who denied that  people  were  never
       detained at the airport.  Paragraph [324] refers  to  detention  away
       from the airport.  Here again I am unable to find  support  for  this
       strand of argument.

   28. The final point Miss Khan explains she  made to the judge referred to
       a contradiction in the  evidence  from  the  Directeur  because  some
       countries had confirmed that people  were  questioned  and  could  be
       detained at the airport.

   29. In the course of her submissions before  me  Miss  Khan  referred  to
       statement by the  judge  referring  to  support  of  the  Directeur's
       position by evidence emanating from other countries including France.
        Initially it appeared that France had not found this  was  the  case
       but closer examination of the bulletin in particular  [4.7]  includes
       reference to the French representative having stated that the embassy
       had not heard about returnees facing difficulties at the  airport  or
       being detained  after arrival.

   30. I am not satisfied that the judge erred on the basis claimed and  has
       given adequate reasons for his conclusions on the  evidence  and  the
       submissions before him. There is no perversity challenge and although
       another judge might have come to a different conclusion that does not
       indicate error in this case on the basis alleged.

   31. Accordingly I find no error on this ground as advanced.

   32. The second ground argues that the judge had erred by not allowing the
       appeal under the provisions amending the 2002 Act by Immigration  Act
       2014 in particular "the exception" in section  117C(5)  which  it  is
       argued was met on the evidence and that there was no need to consider
       whether it would be unduly harsh to  separate  the  family.  Ms  Khan
       after reflecting explained that she did not pursue this ground  which
       had been formulated early on after the new legislation and Rules.

   33. The third ground argues that the judge had erred in his assessment of
       "unduly harsh" under the Rules.  With reference to paragraph 399  and
       the finding that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant  and  his
       family to live outside the  UK,   it  is  submitted  that  the  "very
       significant degree of heartache and hardship" the judge had found the
       appellant's wife and children would suffer was sufficient to meet the
       requirements of the rule that it would be unduly harsh for the family
       to be separated. It is also argued the factor of the offending should
       not feature in the assessment of whether deportation would be  unduly
       harsh in splitting the family.  This  second  limb  was  conceded  as
       misconceived  by  Ms  Khan  and  she  accepted  that   there   is   a
       proportionality exercise in the assessment.

   34. Returning to the first limb, at [27] the judge set out  the  relevant
       provisions of the Rules and there is no need to repeat them here.  It
       is not disputed that the appellant's  offending  brought  him  within
       paragraph 398(b).  The issue for the  judge  was  to  decide  whether
       paragraph 399(b) or (c) applied. There  was  no  dispute  as  to  the
       family life at stake and accordingly it was for the judge  to  decide
       whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to go  to  the  DRC
       and/or  for  their  mother,  the   latter   because   of   compelling
       circumstances over and above those described in  paragraph  EX.2.  If
       the judge found that to be the case, the second question for  him  to
       decide was whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
       remain in the United Kingdom  without  the  appellant  or  for  their
       mother to remain here.

   35. The judge gave clear reasons why he considered there  would  be  very
       significant difficulties that would be faced by the appellant and his
       wife  continuing  their  family  life  together  outside  the  United
       Kingdom.  He concluded that it would not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
       children and their mother to remain in the United Kingdom without the
       appellant. His reasons included the observation  by  the  appellant's
       wife when asked how she had managed whilst the appellant was  serving
       lengthy periods of imprisonment: "You just have to get on with it".

   36. At [46] the judge went on to consider the impact on the family of the
       appellant's deportation in these terms:

          "None of the above means that the appellant's  wife  and  children
          would  not  nevertheless  suffer  a  very  significant  degree  of
          heartache and hardship by remaining in the United Kingdom  without
          the appellant. However the question of whether it would  be  undue
          hardship must depend to a large extent upon the seriousness of the
          appellant's history of  offending  and  likelihood  that  he  will
          repeat it.  The potential consequences of the  appellant's  recent
          offending has been very serious indeed.   One  shudders  to  think
          what use was intended for the sawn-off shotgun and ammunition that
          the  appellant  was  seeking  acquire  and  transport  to  London.
          Moreover, I have found that  he  poses  a  high  risk  of  causing
          serious harm to members of the public ... The consequences to  his
          family of the appellant's  removal  would  not  therefore,  in  my
          judgement, be unduly harsh when  balanced  against  the  level  of
          protection that it would afford to the UK public."  (The  emphasis
          was made by the judge)

   37. Whether deportation would be unduly  harsh  involves  subjective  and
       objective factors.  I find no merit in Miss Khan's argument that  the
       conclusions on the serious impact of the appellant's  deportation  on
       the family members were enough for the unduly harsh test to  be  met.
       That impact cannot be  detached  from  the  proportionality  exercise
       which involves consideration of the criminal offending.  In  my  view
       the judge gave clear and  sustainable  reasons  for  concluding  that
       deportation would not be unduly harsh through the lens of  the  rules
       as he was required to.

   38. Accordingly I find that the judge did not err in law as  claimed  and
       dismiss this appeal.



Signed        Date 27 February 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
