
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00471/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                               Alkali Bangura
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a rehearing of the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of
    the respondent dated 5 March 2014 to make  a  deportation  order  under
    Section 32(5) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The  respondent's  decision
    to deport was based on the appellant's conviction on 10 August 2012  at
    Exeter Crown Court of possessing  a  controlled  drug  with  intent  to
    supply, thereby receiving  a  three  year  custodial  sentence  with  a
    consecutive twelve  month  sentence  for  possession  of  an  offensive
    weapon, totalling four years.

2.   The appellant's appeal was allowed by a First-tier Tribunal on 16  July
    2015.  On 18 June 2015 the Upper Tribunal, consisting of Upper Tribunal
    Judges Eshun and Blum, held that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
    such that its decision could not stand.  The errors identified  by  the
    Upper Tribunal were that the First-tier Tribunal failed to refer to the
    Rules as then in place, erred in considering the case on the  basis  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules and failed to explain its conclusions.  The
    errors of law  were  set  out  in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  at
    paragraphs 13 to 15.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on 10 December 1986.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings of fact which  have
    not been challenged by the respondent.  The appellant entered the UK on
    16 December 2003 with indefinite leave to remain as a family member  of
    his mother, AC, who was  granted  asylum  on  3  April  2002.   He  was
    convicted of various public order, theft, criminal  damage  and  common
    assault offences between 2006 and  2011,  the  sentences  included  two
    short custodial terms.  On 10 August 2012 he was  convicted  at  Exeter
    Crown Court of possessing a controlled drug with intent to  supply  and
    received a three year custodial  sentence  with  a  consecutive  twelve
    month sentence for possession of an offensive weapon; making four years
    in all.

5.   The appellant was born in  Freetown  in  1986.   His  mother  left  the
    family when he was very young.  He went to live  with  his  grandmother
    and when she died he returned to live with his father.  His father died
    in 1994 and the appellant went to live with an aunt.  He became friends
    with a neighbouring teenager, AF.  AF was suspected  to  be  gay.   The
    appellant suffered abuse from his family and in 1996 AF  persuaded  him
    to run away.  He travelled to Maboka but the town was  overrun  by  the
    Revolutionary United Front (RUF).  The appellant and AF were  recruited
    as child soldiers.

6.   The appellant was made  to  take  drugs  and  to  kill  a  man.   There
    followed a significant period of time when the appellant was  with  the
    RUF and carried out significant acts of brutality, killing  and  raping
    civilians.  In 1997 he spent time as an assistant to Ibrahim Koroma  of
    the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council.  He travelled to Guinea to  try
    to find his mother and then back to Sierra Leone to rejoin the RUF.  He
    was assaulted by his family again for his relationship with AF and then
    fled to Guinea and Senegal and was eventually reunited with his  mother
    in Gambia.  His mother came to the UK to claim asylum in 2001  and  the
    appellant went back to Sierra Leone to live with an aunt.  He  came  to
    the UK in 2003.

7.   In 2005 the appellant met AE and they started a relationship.  She  was
    16 and was from an unsettled background.  She became pregnant  and  the
    couple had two children, in 2005 and 2009.  The respondent has accepted
    that there is a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  between
    the appellant and the children and that it is not  reasonable  for  the
    children to leave the  UK.   The  respondent  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant is in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  AE,  a
    citizen of Jamaica, who was granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    UK.

8.   The FtT considered the report by Peter Horrocks, an independent  social
    worker, dated 27 May 2014.  The report concluded that the appellant has
    been traumatised and severely emotionally damaged  by  the  horrors  he
    witnessed and took part in as a child  in  Sierra  Leone.   He  took  a
    cocktail of drugs to cocoon himself from the realities of his life  and
    this has continued into his early adulthood.  His emotional needs  were
    not  met  as  a  child.   There  has  been  domestic  violence  in  the
    relationship with AE but the couple appeared to  be  maturing  and  are
    committed to each other and the children.  They both  grew  up  without
    fathers and do not want their daughters to experience the same thing.

9.   Peter Horrocks also stated that the appellant was  a  major  figure  in
    the lives of his daughters since birth  and  was  their  primary  carer
    until he went to prison because  AE  was  at  college  and  university.
    There was a significant impact upon the  children  when  the  appellant
    went to prison.  M suffered from speech difficulties and L reverted  to
    soiling and wetting herself.   The  children  have  continued  to  have
    contact with the appellant and were excited  at  the  prospect  of  his
    return home.  If the appellant were to be  permanently  separated  from
    his children then this would in all likelihood have a major impact upon
    their wellbeing and development.  AE could suffer  a  deterioration  of
    her mental health difficulties which could undermine the functioning of
    the family unit.  The FtT accepted all these conclusions.

10.  I had a bundle of documents at the hearing before me.  They included  a
    statement from the appellant and AE.  There were also  statements  from
    his mother, AC, a sister BB, sister AuC and brother  AaC.   There  were
    letters from MeB and MaB, the appellant's niece.   There  were  letters
    relating  to  AC's  health  and  a  psychological  assessment  of   the
    appellant, L and M by Dr Ball dated 15 August 2015.   There  were  also
    school reports on M and L.

11.  The appellant and AE gave evidence briefly.  There was no challenge  to
    their evidence.

12.  The appellant relied on his witness statement.  He  confirmed  that  he
    was released on bail on 26 August 2014.  He was bailed to his  mother's
    address.  He sees  his  children  every  day,  sometimes  from  6am  on
    weekdays and from 8 to 10am at weekends, and spends the whole day  with
    them.  He picks them up from school, takes them  swimming  and  to  the
    cinema and to visit family members.  They went out  together  yesterday
    because it was M's 8th birthday.  His plan is to live together with his
    family and get a job.  AE is pregnant with their third child who is due
    on 2 November.

13.  The appellant said that when he  was  on  remand  and  in  prison,  his
    mother helped when she could.  His sister went once in a while to  help
    AE and the girls.  If he were to be deported  his  family  would  still
    continue to support them but that support would be limited because  his
    sister has three children, his younger brother is mentally ill and  his
    other sister and mother are not well.

14.  He said that AE has family in  the  UK.   Her  two  sisters  came  from
    Jamaica in June 2012 to live in the UK.  AE does not get  on  with  her
    sisters and her mother.  She has very limited contact with  her  family
    members.  It was very difficult for her when he was in prison.

15.  The appellant said he made a mistake, got punished for it and AE  stood
    by him.  His absence has affected the children.

16.  AE said in evidence  that  she  was  expecting  their  third  child  in
    November.  She is a support worker at a care agency.  She works sixteen
    hours a week.  She said that the children will be devastated should the
    appellant be deported from the UK.  They were very angry, emotional and
    depressed when he was in prison and would revert to this  state  should
    the appellant be deported.

17.  She said that when the appellant was in prison she got  a  little  help
    from his family but not emotionally.  The behaviour of their  daughters
    got out of control.  M did not want to talk and L wanted  their  father
    all the time.  M started school when the appellant was in prison.   She
    had no help in taking her to school and fetching her from school.   She
    had to take L with her each time.

18.  She said that once in a while she sees her  siblings  and  her  mother.
    16 July was the first time she had seen her  mother  in  a  year.   Her
    mother did not even know that the appellant was in prison.   She  heard
    it from someone else.

Submissions

19.  Mr Mackenzie submitted that  the  correct  approach  following  Bossade
    (ss.117A-D-interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415  (IAC)  is  to
    consider the substantive requirements  of  the  Rules  first  and  then
    address the legislation as part of the assessment of  Article  8  under
    the heading of "very compelling circumstances" in paragraph 398 of  the
    Rules.  Both stages are carried out within the  Rules,  the  difference
    being that the assessment of "very  compelling  circumstances"  is  not
    limited to the effect on the  children  and  partner,  but  involves  a
    holistic assessment  of  the  facts,  viewing  the  balancing  exercise
    through the lens of the Rules, and taking account  of  the  significant
    public interest in the deportation of serious offenders.

20.  Mr Mackenzie relied on the meaning of "unduly harsh" as  was  explained
    in MK Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC) at paragraph 46,  where  the
    President said:

         "'Unduly harsh' does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses  a  considerably
         more  elevated  threshold.   'Harsh'  in  this   context,   denotes
         something severe, or bleak.  It is the antithesis  of  pleasant  or
         comfortable.  Furthermore, the  addition  of  the  adverb  'unduly'
         raises an already elevated standard still higher."

21.  Mr Mackenzie also relied on MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh")  USA  [2015]
    UKUT 435 (IAC) where the Tribunal rejected the submission of  the  SSHD
    that "unduly harsh" implied a need to factor in  the  public  interest,
    and held that neither MK Sierra Leone nor BM and  Others  (returnees  -
    criminal and non-criminal) (CG) [2015] UKUT 293 (IAC) was authority for
    the proposition that it did.  At paragraph 72 the Tribunal said that:

         "'unduly' requires that the impact upon the individual concerned be
         'inordinately' harsh.  By that we mean that  the  impact  would  be
         'unusually large' or 'excessive'.  We do not intend that  to  be  a
         definition but rather a 'gloss' to assist decision makers  applying
         para 399, indeed, s.117C(5).  [The assessment] is necessarily fact-
         sensitive but is focused upon the impact on the individual (whether
         child or partner) concerned."

22.  Mr Wilding informed me that the respondent has appealed head note 1  of
    MAB to the Court of Appeal on a point of law.  Head note  1  states  as
    follows:

         "The phrase 'unduly harsh' in para 399 of the Rules (and  s.117C(5)
         of the 2002 Act) does not import a balancing exercise requiring the
         public interest to be weighed  against  the  circumstances  of  the
         individual (whether child or partner of the deportee).   The  focus
         is solely upon an evaluation of the consequences  and  impact  upon
         the individual concerned."

23.  Mr Wilding submitted that because the Court of Appeal have  said  since
    SS (Nigeria) in respect of the sliding scale, that unduly harsh has  to
    engage with some sort of public interest, that is  why  the  respondent
    disagrees with head note 1 in MAB.  In any  event  he  relied  on  head
    notes 2 and 3 which arise from the Tribunal's findings at paragraph 72.



Findings

24.  The appellant is claiming that his deportation  would  be  contrary  to
    his human rights under Article 8 of the ECHR following  his  conviction
    of an offence for which he was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
    three years.   Consequently  I  find  that  paragraph  398(b)  applies.
    Paragraph 398 states:

         'The Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A'

    Paragraph 399 states:

         "399.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the seven years immediately preceding the  date
                      of the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported; or

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  citizen  or
                  settled in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                      and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported"

25.  The respondent has accepted that the appellant was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with M and L, who are under the age of 18.  The
    respondent also considered that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  M
    and L to leave the United Kingdom.

26.  The respondent has also accepted that the appellant  is  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with AE,  who  is  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

27.  The issue therefore that I have to decide under the  Immigration  Rules
    is whether it would be unduly harsh for the children and AE  to  remain
    in the UK without the appellant.

28.  I also have to consider the appellant's appeal  under  Section  117  of
    the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   Although  this
    section  involves  the  consideration  of  the  public  interest   when
    assessing the appellant's appeal under Article 8, I bear in  mind  that
    the Upper Tribunal in MAB has ruled that "the phrase 'unduly harsh'  in
    paragraph 399 of the Rules and (and s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not
    import a balancing exercise requiring the public interest to be weighed
    against the circumstances of the individual (whether child  or  partner
    of the deportee).  The focus  is  solely  upon  an  evaluation  of  the
    consequences and impact upon the individual concerned."

29.  Section 117C identifies additional considerations  in  cases  involving
    foreign criminals.  It states:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has not  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the  public
             interest  requires  his  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
             Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

30.  Again, under this Section the issue that I have to  decide  is  whether
    the effect of the appellant's deportation on AE and M and  L  would  be
    unduly harsh.  I find that the "unduly harsh" test is the same in  both
    the Immigration Rules and section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act.

31.  I rely on the definition of the phrase "unduly harsh" in MAB.

32.  I find that the strength in the appellant's case  stems  in  part  from
    his own background and the strength of his  relationship  with  AE  and
    their two daughters M and L.  It is therefore appropriate to recite the
    conclusions and recommendations made by Peter Horrocks, the independent
    social worker, whose report was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal.

         "5.1 Mr Bangura is a man who  has  been  traumatised  and  severely
             emotionally damaged by the horrors he  witnessed  and  took  a
             cocktail  of  drugs  in  order  to  cocoon  himself  from  the
             realities of his  life  and  this  continued  into  his  early
             adulthood and resulted in his current prison sentence.   As  a
             child Mr Bangura only had very short periods of  time  in  his
             early childhood years, when he had  any  form  of  stable  and
             loving family home  environment.   The  reality  is  that  his
             emotional needs were not met as a child, which is  fundamental
             in  order  to  develop   any   enduring   and   stable   adult
             relationship.  However in [AE] he found a woman,  who  saw  in
             him special qualities and fell in love with him, she  remained
             committed to him even when his actions undermined their family
             life together and the well-being of their children.

         5.2  Against the odds Mr Bangura discovered something in life which
             he could value and which made  life  worthwhile  living.   The
             couple's relationship was not always  optimal  and  there  has
             been domestic violence.  [AE] had not enjoyed an optimal  life
             as a child and has an equally difficult relationship with  her
             own mother, just like Mr Bangura.  Both Mr  Bangura  and  [AE]
             grew up without  their  fathers,  which  has  united  them  in
             wanting their own daughters not to have to experience the same
             deprivation.  Both [AE] and Mr Bangura appear to  be  maturing
             and recognise that if they wish to achieve the  best  outcomes
             for themselves and their children, then there is a long way to
             go and things have to change.  As a couple they are  committed
             to each other and their children.

         5.3  Mr Bangura has been  a  major  figure  in  the  lives  of  his
             daughters since birth and he played the role of their  primary
             carer until he was sent to prison, whilst their mother was  at
             college and university.  There was  a  significant  impact  of
             both M and L as a result of their separation from their father
             when  he  was  sent  to  prison.   M  suffered   from   speech
             difficulties and L reverted to soiling  and  wetting  herself.
             The children have continued to have regular contact with their
             father since he has been in prison and are excited  about  the
             thought that he will soon return  home.   If  Mr  Bangura  was
             deported and permanently separated  from  his  children,  this
             would in all likelihood have a major  impact  on  their  well-
             being and  development.   In  addition  [AE]  could  suffer  a
             deterioration of her mental health difficulties,  which  could
             undermine the functioning  of  the  family  unit.   A  further
             concern would be in respect of Mr Bangura and  the  impact  on
             him of the loss of the only things in his  life  worth  living
             for, he could attempt to self-harm or return to using drugs."

33.  Mr Horrocks  also  said  in  his  report  that  the  knowledge  of  the
    permanent absence of  their  father  from  their  lives  would  have  a
    traumatic effect on both M and L and would in all likelihood lead to  a
    recurrence of the difficulties they experienced when their  father  was
    first sent to prison.  His view echoes the evidence of AE.  She was  of
    the view that the absence of the appellant would lead to the  emotional
    distress suffered by the children when their father was in prison.   Mr
    Horrocks went on to say that the combination of the dual effect of  the
    appellant's absence and the impact of this  on  their  mother's  mental
    health difficulties could have a long-term destabilising effect on  all
    aspects   of   the   girls'   development,    in    particular    their
    emotional/behavioural and educational development extending longer term
    into their adolescence and adult lives.

34.  In the light of this report I accept  Mr  Mackenzie's  submission  that
    causing serious developmental difficulties and mental illness to  three
    young British children and their mother, would be plainly unduly harsh,
    in the sense of being very severe, or excessive.

35.  Mr Mackenzie also relied on a report  by  Dr  David  Ball,  a  clinical
    psychologist, dated 15 August 2015.  His assessment of the impact on  M
    and L caused by the appellant being in prison  until  August  2014  was
    that the children were too young and immature to fully  understand  the
    situation.  L experienced incontinence and M had  speech  and  language
    difficulties.  M has made considerable improvement in this  area  since
    her father's release and for L it is an issue that  is  still  ongoing.
    They were confused, distracted and emotionally distraught  during  this
    period.

36.  Dr Ball went on to say that children as young as M and  L  were  unable
    at the time to intellectually articulate their emotional  discord.   As
    the development of M's speech issues coincide with her father's absence
    and the improvement of this condition with his return, it  is  safe  to
    conclude that there may be a high risk  of  this  condition,  or  other
    similar developmental or behavioural cluster of problems  occurring  if
    the appellant is deported.

37.  Dr  Ball  added  that  the  appellant  is  a  man  who  is  functioning
    exceptionally well under extreme conditions.  His sole  perspective  is
    the  safety  and  nurturance  of  his  family  above  himself.   He  is
    insightful about his past errors and committed to a new lifestyle which
    is family-focused.  He  said  that  the  children  are  happy,  stable,
    psychologically  nurtured  and  emotionally  well-balanced,   who   are
    integrating and progressing in all significant areas  of  their  lives.
    If their father is removed from the country it is with a high degree of
    certainly and clinical acumen that he concludes that all,  maybe  more,
    significant aspects of their lives will be negatively affected.  It can
    be  accurately  predicted  that  these  girls  may  experience   severe
    emotional discord; they may develop behavioural problems as a result of
    unresolved anger, such as oppositional defiance or a  conduct  disorder
    in later years.  Symptoms of grief and loss may develop as exhibited by
    loss of sleep,  loss  of  concentration  and  an  impaired  ability  to
    function in school, thus affecting their educational development.  They
    may also experience traits and features associated with trauma, such as
    diminished interest  in  normal  functioning,  nightmares,  flashbacks,
    withdrawing, irrational fears, depressive symptoms or anxiety.

38.  I note from AE's evidence that she did not  receive  emotional  support
    from the appellant's family or  from  her  family.   I  find  that  the
    emotional support which she lacked could not in  any  event  have  been
    provided by any of the family members.  That emotional support can only
    come from the appellant.  The children suffered badly and I  find  that
    they would continue to suffer badly were the appellant to be  deported.
    I find that the conclusions of Dr. Ball and Mr. Horrocks reach the high
    threshold of "unduly harsh" as defined in MAB.

39.  I conclude on the evidence that it would be unduly harsh on AE and  the
    two children M and L for the appellant to be deported.   The  appellant
    therefore satisfies the Immigration Rules and Section  117C(5)  of  the
    2002 Act.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
