
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00123/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 July 2016                               |On 01 August 2016             |
|Delivered orally                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            daniel constantinescu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Hirst, Counsel instructed by the AIRE Centre

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant (hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of State) against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Onoufriou
    who sitting at Hatton Cross on 25 May 2016 allowed the  appeal  of  the
    Respondent (hereinafter called the Claimant) a citizen of Romania  born
    on 23 December 1977 against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 3 March 2016 to make a deportation order  by  virtue  of  Section
    5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

2.   The immigration history of the Claimant as set out by the Secretary  of
    State in her ICD 3237 was that it was unknown as to when  the  Claimant
    had entered the UK but as a European national, he benefited  from  free
    movement and would not be subject to immigration control.  The Claimant
    claimed to have remained in the UK for five years.

3.      On 2 February 2016, the Claimant was served with  an  ICD  4932  EEA
    stage 1 decision by the Metropolitan Police  upon  his  arrest.   On  3
    March 2016 a deportation decision and a deportation order  were  served
    upon the Claimant and on the same date he  lodged  an  appeal.   On  22
    April 2016 the deportation order served on the Claimant on 3 March 2016
    was revoked  as  the  signed  deportation  order  predated  the  deport
    decision.  On 27 April 2016 a new deportation order was served  on  the
    Claimant.  On the same date the Claimant's representatives sent to  the
    Secretary of State a Pre Action Protocol letter to which a response was
    made on 20 May 2016.

4.   In her refusal letter, the Secretary of State noted  that  on  19  June
    2009 at the Criminal Court of  Paris  Division  16,  the  Claimant  was
    convicted  of  aggravated  procuring:  plurality  of  perpetrators   or
    accomplices and aggravated procurement: multiple victims, for which  he
    was sentenced to three years' imprisonment  and  banned  from  entering
    French territory for five years and he was also fined 20,000 Euros.  In
    that latter regard, the First-tier Tribunal Judge recorded the  closing
    submissions of  the  Claimant's  Counsel  that  whilst  the  Presenting
    Officer had  insinuated  that  the  Claimant  was  connected  to  human
    trafficking and modern slavery, there was nothing in the evidence  that
    he was involved in coercion with under-aged persons that might  justify
    such a claim.  The evidence was that the Claimant was running a website
    for  an  escort  agency.   Further  the  Respondent  relied   upon   an
    untranslated set of French documents and the burden  was  upon  her  to
    translate them if she intended to place reliance upon them.

5.   On 11 September 2015, the Claimant was cautioned by the  West  Midlands
    Police for taking a motor vehicle without consent.  In that  regard  it
    was the Claimant's oral evidence before the Judge, that he was a  self-
    employed taxi driver and had started working in this capacity in the UK
    in July 2012.  He  had  travelled  to  Switzerland  in  February  2015,
    leaving at the UK airport upon departure, a taxi  that  he  had  rented
    from Westfield Radio Cars that he then abandoned.

6.   In her refusal letter, the Secretary of State did not accept  that  the
    Claimant had been resident in the United Kingdom in accordance with the
    EEA 2006 Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years.   It  was
    pointed out that on 2 February 2016 the  Claimant  was  served  with  a
    letter of request to provide evidence that he had been  exercising  his
    treaty rights and evidence of his residence.  In response, the Claimant
    claimed to have lived in the UK for five years working as a taxi driver
    in Wolverhampton for 3.8 years and  that  he  had  recently  worked  in
    London as a  waiter.   The  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
    evidence that the Claimant had provided in support  that  he  had  been
    exercising treaty rights between 4 December 2015 and 5 February 2016  a
    period of three months, was thus limited.  He had failed to demonstrate
    that he had acquired a permanent  right  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

7.     In consequence, consideration was given as to whether the  Claimant's
    deportation was justified on the grounds of  public  policy  or  public
    security under Regulation 19(3) (b) and 21 of the 2006 Regulations.  In
    that regard the Secretary of State concluded inter alia, that  although
    the details of the Claimant's offences in France were not known, it was
    that he had used exploitation for illegal means and it was  clear  that
    the Claimant had the potential that might in the  future  lead  him  to
    commit further offences of this nature.  This of  course  was  a  point
    made again by Mr Duffy before me today.

8.   There was no  evidence  provided  to  suggest  that  the  Claimant  had
    addressed the issues that caused him to behave in  this  manner  whilst
    knowing that these activities were illegal  and  so  the  Secretary  of
    State considered that the Claimant posed a significant and unacceptable
    risk of harm to women and to the public in the United Kingdom.

9.   Notably, the Secretary of State accepted that she had seen no  evidence
    that the Claimant had repeated this very serious offence  as  reflected
    in the sentence that had been imposed upon him, but it  was  considered
    that insufficient time had passed to establish  that  the  Claimant  no
    longer presented a risk of doing so.  Further,  it  was  concluded  the
    Claimant's subsequent caution in the United Kingdom for taking a  motor
    vehicle without consent showed that he presented a risk of reoffending.



10.  In considering the principle of proportionality in terms of  Regulation
    21(5) (a) and 21(6), it was noted inter alia by the Secretary of State,
    that the Claimant was 38 years old, in good health, he  had  spent  his
    youth and formative years in Romania and France, and  he  had  provided
    insufficient evidence to have been continuously resident here.   Whilst
    the Claimant had stated that his wife and child were residing in the UK
    he had provided no evidence of this claim.  The  Claimant  had  however
    provided some evidence of his employment  with  a  recruitment  agency.
    There was no evidence of the Claimant's social or cultural  integration
    into the community of the UK and no evidence or reason apparent  as  to
    why the Claimant, notwithstanding the length of time he claimed to have
    spent in the UK, could not reintegrate into life on return to  Romania.



11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge following his detailed  consideration  of
    the evidence in  its  totality  including  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Claimant, concluded  for  the  reasons  set  out  comprehensively  over
    paragraphs 30 and 31  of  his  decision,  that  the  Claimant  was  not
    entitled to a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 and that
    he thus came within the scope  of  Regulation  21(1)  namely  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision could be taken on the grounds  of  public
    policy, public security or public health.

12.  The Judge proceeded to take account of  the  provisions  of  paragraphs
    21(5) and (6) against the backdrop of the facts as found  and  thus  at
    paragraph 33 he noted that the  Claimant  had  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom some time in 2011  and  that  it  appeared  "that  he  had  not
    committed any further offences in the sex industry  since  his  release
    from French prison".  That of course was a matter that today; Ms  Hirst
    particularly drew to my attention in her submissions.

13. In that regard the Judge further observed that the Secretary  of  State
    had failed to provide  a  probation  or  OASys  Report  to  assess  the
    likelihood of the Claimant reoffending.  Mr Duffy tells me that in  the
    particular circumstances of this case, it was not  possible  to  obtain
    such reports and therefore for the Judge to say that the  Secretary  of
    State had failed  to  produce  the  reports  was,  in  his  submission,
    somewhat harsh.  Nonetheless the fact remained that there was  no  such
    evidence before the Judge to further  assist  him  in  determining  the
    weight to be attached to the commission of the Appellant's offence  and
    conviction in France.

14. What he did do, was to take account of the  judgment  in  A,  B  and  C
    [2013] EWHC 1272 (Admin) in particular at paragraph 58, that  the  onus
    was upon the Secretary of State to show there  was  a  risk  of  future
    offending.  In terms of the absence of reports the  Judge  referred  to
    the following passage from the judgement that such reports:

         ".. would have been critically important documents since (it  would
         have) taken up-to-date (the) risk assessment of the  likelihood  of
         (such) behaviour in th (is) offence [theft] (in the)  specific  way
         that he had adopted in 2008. That behaviour was the only  behaviour
         that the defendant had identified as contributing to  the  risk  to
         the fundamental interests  of  the  UK  on  which  the  deportation
         decision was based."


15.  The Judge continued that as in A, B and C the Claimant in  the  present
    case "only had one previous criminal conviction being the conviction in
    France for which the defendant now wished him to be deported".

 16.  He went on to say:

         "As Regulation 21(5) (e) points out, a person's  previous  criminal
    convictions do not in themselves justify the  decision".   Mr  Williams
    [who appeared for the Secretary of State before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge] suggested that there was an element  of  human  trafficking  and
    slavery in the (Claimant's) crime and there  is  no  evidence  to  that
    effect.  The (Secretary of State) has failed to  translate  the  French
    documents which may or may not have shed light on this  issue.   As  to
    the personal conduct of the (Claimant) it would appear that apart  from
    one comparatively minor incident of taking a  vehicle  without  consent
    for which he was cautioned, he has conducted  himself  responsibly  and
    worked and paid taxes".


17.  Ms Hirst in her submissions submits that contrary to the  assertion  of
    Mr Duffy, such reference demonstrates that the Judge  was  taking  into
    account the factor concerning the  Claimant's  previous  conviction  in
    France as well as that in the United Kingdom for which he had  received
    a caution.


18.  The Judge continued at  paragraph  34  of  his  decision  to  say  that
    mindful of Regulation 21(6) the main consideration was  the  fact  that
    the Claimant had a daughter resident in the UK although she was  not  a
    British citizen.  It was not  clear  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
    proposed to deport her mother in which  case  the  Claimant's  daughter
    would clearly continue to remain with her mother and the Claimant would
    have easy access to her.  The Judge continued that as of  the  date  of
    the hearing before him he thus had to assume that  the  child's  mother
    would remain in the UK exercising her treaty rights and  so  would  the
    Claimant's daughter.  This led to a consideration of the best interests
    of the Claimant's daughter under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  The Judge recognised that though this was  a
    significant factor to be taken into account, it could be outweighed  by
    the public interest.


19.  In the present case there had been no assessment of the child  and  the
    effect that the Claimant's deportation might have upon her, but it  was
    however clear that the Claimant had lived apart from her for  at  least
    six months in 2015 and only visited her every two weeks  prior  to  his
    detention.  The Judge thus concluded at paragraph 34 as follows


         "There would no doubt be some emotional effect on his daughter  but
         if I considered (the Claimant) was a risk to the public because  of
         his likelihood to commit further offences in the future in the  sex
         industry I would not  consider  that  the  child's  best  interests
         outweighed the public interest".

20. I pause there, because again, this was  a  matter  to  which  Ms  Hirst
    referred to me as further evidence showing that the Judge  was  clearly
    taking into account the Claimant's past conduct in France  as  well  as
    that in the United Kingdom.

21. The Judge continued

         "However I find that  (the  Secretary  of  State)  has  simply  not
         satisfied the burden upon her as set out in A, B  and  C  and  also
         Regulation 21(5) and (6) that (the Claimant) is a  future  risk  to
         the United Kingdom public so I consider  it  appropriate  to  allow
         this appeal."


22.  The grant of permission to the Judge's decision by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kelly dated 20 June 2016 was limited to the following.

         "It is arguable that the Tribunal failed to consider  the  personal
         conduct of (the Claimant) in the round  and  that  the  absence  of
         evidence by way of professional risk assessment [such as  an  OASys
         Report or similar] did not excuse  the  Tribunal  from  undertaking
         that assessment by reference to the evidence that was available  to
         it."

23.  As the Secretary of State's grounds pointed out, Regulation  21(5)  (c)
    required the personal conduct of the person concerned to be assessed in
    the round and it was contended in the present case the Judge had failed



         "to adequately assess the more recent offending in the  UK  in  the
         context of the (Claimant's)  serious  criminality  in  Romania  and
         France and failed to properly consider 'personal  conduct'  in  the
         round.  With respect this is a material  error  of  approach  under
         21(5) (c)".


24.  The grounds continued by pointing out that A, B and C  was  a  judgment
    of the High Court granting permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review
    where it was noted at paragraph 28 that

         "The basis of the defendant's various decisions to deport A  or  in
         relation to her  potential  deportation  were  her  conviction  and
         subsequent sentence on four counts involving very serious  offences
         related to her attempt to facilitate the admission into the  UK  of
         two Ghanaian minors who are unrelated to  her  using  false  German
         identification documents".


25.  The Judge's statement in the present case at  paragraph  33,  that  the
    first issue he needed to consider was the principle of proportionality,
    arguably indicated the material misapplication of A, B  and  C  to  the
    facts of the appeal where it  had  or  might  have  been  impermissibly
    placed on a mistaken parallelism of facts amounting to misdirection.

26.  Thus the appeal came before me on 25 July 2016 when my first  task  was
    to decide  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

27.  Immediately prior to  the  hearing,  I  received  from  the  Claimant's
    representatives their Rule  24  response  that  in  summary  submitted:
    firstly that the Secretary of State had failed to identify any error of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning and that ground 2 upon which
    this  appeal  has  been  limited,  represented  little  more  than  the
    Secretary of State's disagreement with the Tribunal's  conclusion.   It
    was further maintained there was no error  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
    approach; the Tribunal had directed  itself  properly.   Reference  was
    made in that regard to paragraph 32 of the Judge's decision to which  I
    have earlier referred and by reference to Regulation 21 and Article  27
    of the Directive  that  required  that  the  personal  conduct  of  the
    individual  concerned  had  to  represent  "a  genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat" to a fundamental interest of society.

28.  It was maintained that the burden was on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    demonstrate that the Claimant's conduct represented such a  threat  and
    as the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  noted  at  paragraph  33  of  his
    decision (see above), the Secretary of State had failed to produce  any
    evidence of current risk.

29.  It was maintained that the Tribunal had  taken  proper  regard  to  the
    Claimant's previous and current offending, but that the Judge had noted
    that the Claimant had otherwise conducted himself  responsibly,  worked
    and paid taxes (paragraph 33) and that in particular that the  Tribunal
    did not consider that the Claimant currently posed a  risk  of  further
    similar trafficking offences [34].

 30.  Finally, that  the  Tribunal  had  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to discharge  the  burden  upon  her,  of
    showing that the Claimant's conduct taken as a whole met the  necessary
    criteria requiring a justification to deport the Claimant and that this
    was a conclusion that was properly  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge on  the  facts  and  there  had  been  no  suggestion  that  such
    conclusion made was in any sense perverse.

Assessment

31.  I have concluded that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    fails to disclose a material error  of  law.   At  the  outset  of  the
    hearing before me I had drawn the parties' attention inter alia, to the
    decision in Dumliauskas and others [2015] EWCA Civ 145  that  concerned
    the circumstances under which the Secretary of State could exercise her
    powers under Regulation 21 to expel nationals of member states  on  the
    grounds of public policy or public security.  It was held  inter  alia,
    that  the  Secretary  of  State's  submission  that  the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation were irrelevant unless  the  offender  had  a  permanent
    right of residence was incorrect.  Once proportionality was engaged the
    facts that were to  be  taken  into  account  did  not  vary  with  the
    qualifications  of  the  individual  concerned.   The  whole  point  of
    deportation was  to  remove  from  the  United  Kingdom  someone  whose
    offending rendered him a risk to the public.  The  Citizens'  Directive
    recognised the more serious the risk of  reoffending  the  greater  the
    right to interfere with the right of residence.  Conversely,  if  there
    was no real risk of reoffending then the power to deport did not arise.
     Thus the first question to be considered in any EEA  deport  case  was
    whether there was such risk and only  if  that  was  established  would
    other considerations logically arise.  Such in my view. was clearly the
    approach of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in the present case not least
    at paragraphs 32, 33 and 34 of his decision - see above.

32.  I also referred the parties  to  Abdul  (Section  55  -  Article  24(3)
    childhood) [2016] UKUT 00106 (IAC) where it was held inter  alia,  that
    there  was  no  hierarchy  of  weight  or  importance  in  the  various
    considerations recited in Regulation 21(6) of the EEA Regulations.  The
    weight to be attributed to each factor would vary according to the fact-
    sensitive  context  of  the  individual  case.   Indeed  the   guidance
    continued inter alia, to point out the  need  for  the  decision  maker
    and/or the First-tier Tribunal concerned with Section 55  of  the  2009
    Act, to scrutinise the degree of engagement with all material  evidence
    and to make clear findings  as  to  what  the  best  interests  of  any
    affected child were.

33.   Although this was not strictly speaking, the subject of  challenge  by
    the Secretary of State in the present case, it is as well for the  sake
    of completeness and to demonstrate the care that was taken by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in reaching his conclusions, that this  was  again,
    precisely the approach that he took at paragraph 34 of his decision  in
    considering the situation as it related to the Claimant's daughter  and
    the impact upon her of the Claimant's  removal.   A  person's  previous
    convictions cannot in themselves justify a decision to remove him.  The
    decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal  conduct  of  the
    person concerned.

34. In the context of the present case, the fact that the Judge  considered
    that the Claimant's caution in the United Kingdom  did  not  in  itself
    justify the decision to remove him, did not mean that the fact  of  the
    Claimant's previous conviction in France was irrelevant.

35. However this is not a situation analogous to Section 32 of the 2002 Act
    whereby the fact of the conviction  can  permit  justification  of  the
    removal.  The question before the Judge in the present  case  was  thus
    whether in all the circumstances of the case, including the  fact  that
    the Claimant had committed a serious offence in France, meant  that  he
    represented a current threat to  public  policy  and  public  security.
    Again that is the approach that I find, the Judge in the  present  case
    clearly undertook.

36. I also referred the parties to the  decision  in  Vasconcelos  (risk  -
    rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378 (IAC)  where  it  was  held  that  in
    assessing whether an EEA  national  represented  a  current  threat  to
    public policy by reason of the  risk  of  resumption  of  opportunistic
    offending, the Tribunal should consider any statistical  assessment  of
    reoffending provided by NOMS, but it was not bound by such data if  the
    overall  assessment  of  the  evidence  supported  the  conclusion   of
    continued risk.

37. In the present case, the Judge observed that the Secretary of State had
    failed to produce relevant papers  that  might  have  assisted  him  in
    assessing the likelihood of the claimant  reoffending.   Whether  there
    was a failure on the part of the Secretary of State or  not,  the  fact
    remained that no such reports were before the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    for the purpose of making that assessment.  The Judge also  noted  that
    the Secretary of State  failed  to  arrange  to  translate  the  French
    documents that in his words "may or may not have  shed  light"  on  the
    nature of the offences for which the claimant  had  been  convicted  in
    France.

38. I find upon a reading of his decision as  a  whole,  that  the  Judge's
    overall and careful assessment of the evidence that was at the date  of
    hearing before  him,  and  the  conclusions  that  he,  in  consequence
    reached, were both open to him  and  supported  by  that  evidence  and
    therefore sustainable in law.

39.  In  cases  where  the  central  issue  is  whether  the  offender  has
    sufficiently been rehabilitated to diminish the risk to the public from
    his behaviour, the experience  of  Immigration  Judges  has  been  that
    hearing and seeing the offender give live evidence as  in  the  present
    case, is an important part of the fact-finding process  and  as  to  an
    assessment  of  the  sincerity  of  evidence.  See  for  example,   the
    observations of this Tribunal as to the benefits of  having  heard  the
    offender in Masih (Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC) at paragraph 18.

40. Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 902.  I find that it cannot be said that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings were irrational and/or Wednesbury unreasonable such as
    to amount to perversity.  It cannot be said they were inadequate.  This
    is not a case where the First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning was  such
    that the Tribunal were unable to understand the thought processes  that
    the Judge employed in reaching his decision.

41. I therefore find the Judge properly identified and recorded the matters
    that he considered to be critical  to  his  decision  on  the  material
    issues raised before him in this appeal.

42. Ms Hirst invited me to make an  Order  to  reimburse  her  client,  the
    Claimant, for his travel expenses in  attending  today's  hearing,  but
    indicated no adequate reason to depart from  the  general  practice  of
    this Tribunal, which is not to make such an Order.

   Decision

43. The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.

Signed
[pic]                                   Date 29 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
