

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00859/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                             LORD JUSTICE BURNS
                   SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                      &

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                            RESHAPAN VALLIKANTHAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Param-Jorthy, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co.

For the Respondent: Ms M Tanner, HOPO


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This is the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      tribunal Judge Del Fabbro and Mr J H Eames made following a hearing at
      Taylor House on the 25 January 2013, dismissing the appellant's appeal
      against the decision of the respondent made  on  17  October  2012  to
      refuse to grant him asylum in the UK and on 19 October 2012 to make  a
      Deportation Order against him.


   2. The appellant challenged the decision on the grounds  that  the  judge
      had erred in his assessment of credibility generally and in particular
      in relation to his treatment of the medical  evidence.  Permission  to
      appeal was granted on the  basis  that  the  judge  had  not  properly
      engaged with the  medical  evidence  and  that  his  treatment  of  Dr
      Goldwyn's opinion that the appellant bore scars which were  diagnostic
      of a beating was flawed.

   3. Although the initial response of the Secretary of State was to  defend
      this determination, before us Ms  Tanner  sensibly  and  realistically
      acknowledged that the  judge  did  not  give  sufficient  reasons  for
      placing no weight upon  the  Doctor's  opinion  that  the  scars  were
      corroborative of the appellant's  account,  and  did  not  resist  the
      appellant's case that this matter would have to be reheard.

   4. The judge erred  in  law  in  not  considering  the  medical  evidence
      holistically in the context of  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  and  his
      decision is set aside.

   5. This appeal will be heard at Taylor House on the next  available  date
      after the promulgation of the forthcoming Country Guidance  case,  due
      imminently, so that the decision can be remade by a judge  other  than
      Judge  Del  Fabbro  under  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement dated 25 September 2012 because of the nature and extent  of
      the judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the decision
      in the appeal to be remade.




Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
