

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00868/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 January 2016                       |On 21 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                MARLON SAMUEL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N. Mallick, Counsel instructed by R Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

Background

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order under section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll ("the judge") allowed the appeal in a
    decision promulgated on 03 September 2015.

3.    The respondent seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
           concluding that deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  on  the
           appellant's partner.

      (ii)  The judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  her  credibility
           findings. In particular, she failed to explain why she preferred
           the  appellant's  evidence  over  the  information  provided  in
           evidence from social services, which suggested that they were no
           longer in a relationship.

      (iii)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make  adequate  findings
           relating to what weight should be placed on the public interest.
           The judge failed to explain why the appellant could  not  return
           to Jamaica and provide his partner with emotional  support  from
           there. The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  have  regard  to  the
           public interest  factors  outlined  in  section  117A-D  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").

Decision and reasons

4.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an
    error on a point of law.

5.     The  judge  set  out  the  details  of   the   appellant's   numerous
    convictions. Albeit that most of the individual  offences  are  at  the
    lower end  of  the  scale  and  did  not  attract  lengthy  periods  of
    imprisonment, the judge made clear that she considered the appellant to
    be a "prolific and persistent offender" [8]. She began  her  assessment
    by considering the previous decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    March 2009. This was consistent with the guidance in Devaseelan v  SSHD
    [2002] UKIAT 00702. The judge set out the findings made  by  the  first
    tribunal in some detail [11]. On that occasion the First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed the appeal against deportation as a result of the compassionate
    circumstances surrounding the appellant's family life in the UK.

6.    The judge went on to set out the details of the most recent notice  of
    intention to deport. She took into account the appellant's  "profoundly
    troubling offending history" and  the  fact  that  earlier  threats  of
    deportation did not seem to have halted  his  offending.  She  observed
    that the appellant accrued a  number  of  convictions  since  the  last
    deportation action and "clearly has a complete disregard for  the  law"
    [20].  The  judge  went  through  the  evidence  with  care  and  noted
    developments relating to the appellant's  family  situation,  including
    the fact that he had been convicted for assaulting  his  own  children,
    who had now been taken into care [21-29]. She went through the evidence
    from social services in detail and concluded that the best interests of
    the children would not be served by the appellant remaining in the  UK.
    He did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  exception  to  deportation
    contained in paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules  because  he  no
    longer had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  the  children
    [29].

7.    It seems quite clear that  the  judge  had  little  sympathy  for  the
    appellant, whose behaviour showed a continuing disregard  for  the  law
    and resulted in his children being taken into care.  If  the  appellant
    were the only  person  effected  by  the  deportation  decision  it  is
    difficult to see how he would be able to resist deportation  given  the
    large number of convictions. However, the outcome of the appeal  hinged
    on the compassionate circumstances surrounding the appellant's wife who
    suffers from severe disabilities as a result of a  massive  brain  stem
    stroke, which occurred when she was visiting Jamaica in  1998.  She  is
    tetraplegic and as a result has a high level of care requirements.

8.    The relationship between the appellant and  his  wife  has  also  been
    difficult at times. The judge took into account a  report  from  social
    services dated January 2015, which indicated that the appellant and his
    wife were no longer in a relationship. For this reason social  services
    concluded that he was not a reliable second carer [31].  The judge  had
    the benefit of hearing evidence from the appellant and his wife. At the
    date of the hearing in August 2015 it was clear that she  continued  to
    support the appellant. Her evidence was  that  they  were  still  in  a
    relationship. In the circumstances it was open to the judge to conclude
    that the appellant continued to provide his  wife  with  a  substantial
    amount of physical and emotional care and support "albeit not regularly
    or consistently" [32]. I find that the respondent's  second  ground  of
    appeal amounts to little more than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    factual findings, which were open to her to make on the evidence.

9.    The judge took into account the previous First-tier Tribunal  decision
    as well as up to date evidence  relating  to  the  care  needs  of  the
    appellant's wife. She concluded:

           "35. In spite of its ups and  downs,  I  am  satisfied,  to  the
           required  standard,  that  the  relationship  is   genuine   and
           subsisting. As required by paragraph  399(b)  that  relationship
           was formed at a time  when  the  appellant  was  in  the  United
           Kingdom lawfully. There is no question of the  appellant's  wife
           being able to accompany the appellant to Jamaica. I  attach  the
           greatest weight to the public interest in deportation.  However,
           in the light of all the medical evidence, I am satisfied that it
           would be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to remain in  the
           United Kingdom without the appellant."

10.   The judge's conclusions must be read  in  the  context  of  the  whole
    decision, in which she analysed  and  made  findings  on  the  relevant
    evidence. Having set out the history of his wife's devastating  stroke,
    and outlined the extent of her condition as well as the high  level  of
    her care needs, it was not  necessary  for  the  judge  to  explain  in
    further detail why she would not be able to accompany him  to  Jamaica.
    The fact that it would be "unduly harsh" on her to do  so  was  obvious
    from the evidence the judge had  already  set  out.  In  light  of  her
    finding that the  appellant  continued  to  provide  his  wife  with  a
    sufficient level of physical and emotional support it was open  to  the
    judge to conclude that it would also  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  her  to
    remain in the UK without the appellant if he  were  deported.  Had  his
    wife's condition been less severe  the  judge  might  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion, but  given  the  very  serious  and  debilitating
    nature of her condition I find that there is no error  of  law  in  the
    judge's findings relating to 'undue harshness'. The wife's condition is
    sufficiently severe to engage even the high threshold envisaged by  the
    Upper Tribunal in MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435.



11.   I find that it is not arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    failing  to  make   specific   reference   to   the   public   interest
    considerations contained in sections  117A-D  of  the  NIAA  2002.  The
    exception to deportation contained in paragraph 399(b)  is  in  essence
    the same test contained in section  117C(5)  i.e.  whether  deportation
    would be "unduly harsh" on a family member.

12.   In KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh)  Nigeria  [2015]  UKUT  00543  the
    Upper Tribunal took a different view to the tribunal in MAB  (USA).  It
    suggested that the question of whether a  decision  is  "unduly  harsh"
    should be answered with reference to the seriousness of the appellant's
    offending behaviour. I prefer the reasoning in MAB (USA).  The  partial
    proportionality exercise suggested by the Tribunal in KMO (Nigeria)  is
    no proportionality  exercise  at  all  for  the  purpose  of  a  proper
    proportionality  assessment  under  Article  8.  The  public   interest
    considerations  are  nevertheless  reflected  in  the  high   threshold
    required to satisfy the "unduly harsh" test.  Section  117A(3)  defines
    the  "public  interest  question"  as  the  question  of   whether   an
    interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life is justified under Article 8(2) of the European Convention i.e. at
    the stage when a balancing exercise is  required  for  the  purpose  of
    assessing  whether  a  deportation  decision  is   proportionate.   The
    'exceptions' to deportation contained in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the
    immigration rules and section 117C(4)-(5) are  just  that,  exceptions.
    Nothing in the wording suggests a full balancing exercise in which  all
    the circumstances should be taken into account. The only  part  of  the
    rules that indicates a balance between the  individual's  circumstances
    and the public interest is paragraph 398.

13.   For these reasons I conclude that it was not necessary for  the  judge
    to take into account each and every factor contained in sections 117B-C
    of the NIAA 2002 in circumstances where she had not yet reached a point
    in her assessment where she had to consider whether  interference  with
    the appellant's rights was justified under Article 8(2). She gave  more
    than adequate and sustainable reasons for concluding that the appellant
    met the exception to deportation contained in paragraph 399(b)  of  the
    immigration rules, which is echoed in section 117C(5). As such, it  was
    not necessary for her to go on to  consider  whether  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances that might outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation under paragraph 398. In any event, she  did  quite  clearly
    "attach the greatest weight to  the  public  interest  in  deportation"
    [35].

14.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  against
    deportation in March 2009. At the time the tribunal took  into  account
    his relationship  with  his  children  as  well  as  the  compassionate
    circumstances surrounding his wife's significant care needs. Since then
    he has accrued a number of convictions, some of which involved assaults
    on his own children, which led directly to them being taken into  care.
    As a result of  his  own  actions  the  appellant  no  longer  has  any
    meaningful contact with  his  children.  On  this  occasion  the  judge
    considered that his relationship with his wife was  still  sufficiently
    supportive to render deportation "unduly harsh" given the extent of her
    disabilities. Nevertheless, she expressed some doubt about the level of
    commitment that the appellant has shown to his wife at times. No  doubt
    it is a  difficult  situation.  However,  if  he  continues  to  commit
    offences, especially if he receives a  custodial  sentence  that  would
    preclude him from being able to care for his wife, it will be  open  to
    the  respondent  to  consider  deportation  action   in   future.   The
    appellant's  position  in  the  UK  is  very  much  dependent  on   the
    relationship he has with his wife. If that relationship was to  change,
    and he continued to commit offences, it  is  highly  unlikely  that  he
    would be able to resist deportation in future.

15.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The decision shall stand.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 14 March 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








