
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00877/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th September 2016               |On 27th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ALI REZA AKHLAGHI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
     The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  21st  March  1968.  His
    appeal, against the Respondent's decision to make a  deportation  order
    under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007, was allowed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE in a decision promulgated on 12th July 2016.



2.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department applied  for  permission
    to appeal on the basis that the judge had made a material error of  law
    in failing to set out very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Further, the judge's finding that the Appellant's wife and child  would
    face very compelling circumstances was largely due to the family  being
    split up by the  Appellant's  deportation.  The  judge  had  failed  to
    properly apply Lee v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 348 and PF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  251  at  paragraph  43  which  states,  in
    particular:

         "I fully recognise that if the judge's factual findings  are  well-
         founded there will be a real and damaging impact on his partner and
         the children; but that is a common consequence of  the  deportation
         of a person who has children in  this  country.   Deportation  will
         normally be appropriate in cases such as the  present  even  though
         the children will be affected and the interests of the children are
         a primary consideration."

3.   The Secretary of State further relied on LC  (China)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1310 at paragraph 24 which states, inter alia:

         "The starting point for any such assessment is the recognition that
         the public interest in deporting foreign criminals is so great that
         only in exceptional circumstances will it be  outweighed  by  other
         factors including the effect of deportation on any children....  By
         contrast  however,  where  the  person  to  be  deported  has  been
         sentenced to a term  of  four  years'  imprisonment  or  more,  the
         provisions of paragraph 399 do not apply and accordingly the weight
         to be attached to the public interest in deportation  remains  very
         great despite the factors  to  which  that  paragraph  refers.   It
         follows that neither the fact that the Appellant's  children  enjoy
         British nationality nor the fact that they may  be  separated  from
         their father for a long  time  will  be  sufficient  to  constitute
         exceptional circumstances of  a  kind  which  outweigh  the  public
         interest in his deportation.  The Appellant's children will not  be
         forced to leave the UK since if she chooses to do so  their  mother
         is free to remain with them in this country."

4.   The grounds argue that the judge further erred in  law  in  considering
    Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules  which  was  contrary  to  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  The judge failed to take into  account
    Section 117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  The threshold applied by the judge was too  low  and  the  judge
    failed to attach significant weight to the public interest  given  that
    the Appellant received a nine  year  sentence.   The  judge  failed  to
    follow the guidance in McLarty (Deportation - proportionality  balance)
    [2014] UKUT 315 (IAC) which states:

         "There can be little doubt that, in enacting  the  UK  Borders  Act
         2007, Parliament  views  the  object  of  deporting  those  with  a
         criminal record as a very strong policy, which is constant  in  all
         cases (SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550).  The weight to  be
         attached  to  that  object  will,  however,  include   a   variable
         component, which reflects the criminality in  issue.  Nevertheless,
         Parliament has tilted the scales strongly in favour of  deportation
         and for them to return to the level and then swing in favour  of  a
         criminal opposing deportation there  must  be  compelling  reasons,
         which must be exceptional."

5.   The second ground of challenge is  that  the  judge  made  findings  in
    respect of 'very compelling circumstances' which were not supported  by
    the evidence, namely that some  or  all  of  the  children  would  face
    significant emotional harm that would  have  a  detrimental  effect  on
    their education and welfare.   It  was  submitted  that  there  was  no
    independent evidence and therefore it was not open to the judge to make
    such a finding which was speculative and based on no more than a belief
    that this was in fact the case.

6.   At subparagraph 36(2) of the decision, the judge stated that  there  is
    every indication that the Appellant's wife would break under the strain
    and it may well trigger depression or some other form of mental illness
    that would directly cause detriment to her  ability  to  care  for  her
    children. Again there was no independent evidence  to  support  such  a
    finding that the Appellant's  wife  suffered,  or  would  suffer,  with
    depression or mental  illness.   The  judge  was  speculating  in  that
    respect.

7.   In conclusion, the judge was speculating with regard  to  his  findings
    at paragraph 36(1), (2) and (3). His finding at paragraph 37, that  the
    Appellant would face 'very compelling  circumstances'  because  of  the
    repressive regime in Iran, was irrational. It was based on the  judge's
    own belief as to the circumstances the Appellant would face  on  return
    and not supported by actual risk claimed by the Appellant.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  on
    1st August 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge failed
    to give proper weight to the public interest and failed  to  apply  the
    Rules correctly.  Further the judge failed to have  regard  to  Section
    117B and indulged in undue speculation with regard to the effect on the
    children. He further erred  in  referring  to  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge failed to take note  that  the  Appellant
    did not claim a risk on return.



Submissions

9.   Mr Clarke submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  identify  'very
    compelling  circumstances'  over  and  above  those  mentioned  in  the
    Immigration Rules. The matters referred  to  at  paragraph  36  of  the
    judge's decision were subsumed  by  the  Rules.  The  judge  failed  to
    identify circumstances outside the Rules.  Further,  those  conclusions
    were based on speculation.  There was no expert evidence to support the
    findings made at paragraph 36. The judge was not an  expert  on  mental
    health and there was no evidence independent of that of the Appellant's
    wife. The judge was speculating outside his own expertise and there was
    no independent evidence to show emotional detriment to the children  or
    indeed mental health issues in relation to the Appellant's wife.

10.  The judge's conclusion at paragraph  36(3),  that  there  would  be  no
    dramatic effect on society at large, was against the clear weight  that
    should be attached to the public interest in accordance with case  law.
    The facts as found in this case  were  always  present  in  deportation
    cases.  The re-introduction of the Appellant  to  his  family  was  not
    something that was over and above what is set out  in  the  Immigration
    Rules and did not amount to very compelling  reasons,  it  was  just  a
    question of fact. The Appellant's deportation  would  have  devastating
    effects on the family which was a normal  consequence  of  deportation.
    In this case there were no care requirements  or  caring  difficulties.
    The judge appeared to be suggesting that the threshold is at a level of
    suffering rather than a threshold over and above what is unduly harsh.

11.  Mr Clarke submitted that  the  judge  wrongly  took  into  account  the
    situation in Iran, as very compelling circumstances  at  paragraph  50,
    and speculated that the Appellant would be at risk  of  persecution  on
    return and may be arrested and questioned. It was wholly  inappropriate
    for the judge to make such findings without hearing submissions by  the
    Appellant and without making reference to background material to enable
    him to come to those conclusions. It was not a compelling  circumstance
    that the Appellant had been in the UK since the age of 10  and  was  in
    effect a home-grown criminal. The public interest required  deportation
    and his length of residence in the UK was a factor  to  be  taken  into
    account, but it could not outweigh the fact that he had received a nine
    year sentence of imprisonment.

12.  Mr Akhlaghi  represented  himself  and  submitted  that  since  he  had
    returned home in June 2015 he had been working.  He had lived in the UK
    since 1978 when he came at the age  of  10.   He  committed  his  first
    offence when he was 30 years old.  He would be 38 next January.  He had
    never been back to Iran, never been on a holiday and had  no  knowledge
    of Iranian culture. All his family were British, his mother, father and
    sister.  He did not get a passport because he was  lazy  and  then  was
    unable to get one after his first criminal conviction. He  regrets  his
    nine year sentence and the fact that he lied to his wife.  He  was  not
    able to work on a Fridays because he had to sign at the Home Office and
    this was causing difficulties with his job.   He  was  not  seeking  to
    remain in the UK because he had married a British citizen, but  because
    he had never been to Iran. He did not read or write Farsi, although  he
    could speak it with his mother.  His wife and children could not  speak
    Farsi.

13.  In response, Mr Clarke submitted that, although the Appellant had  been
    here lawfully for half of his life, this was only one of the  criterion
    to be assessed.  It carried more weight than long residence in  itself,
    but the fact of the matter was that the judge had come to a  conclusion
    for which there was no evidential basis and some of the factors  relied
    on by the judge formed part of the Immigration Rules. Even if the judge
    had identified factors  over  and  above  what  was  contained  in  the
    Immigration Rules there was no evidential basis on which he could  come
    to the conclusions which he did. For example,  he  could  not  conclude
    that the Appellant was persecuted when it was not argued before him and
    there was no evidence before the judge to support such a finding.



Discussion and Conclusions

14.  The judge set out his findings of fact  at  paragraph  28  onwards.  He
    found that the Appellant has been rehabilitated and that,  although  he
    did not have the benefit of a NOMS  Report  or  OASys  Report,  he  had
    assessed the Appellant's risk of reoffending  as  low  because  he  was
    satisfied, on the evidence before  him,  that  the  Appellant  had  his
    gambling addiction  under  control.  The  judge  also  found  that  the
    evidence of the Appellant's wife was compelling and she was  a  witness
    of truth. The fact that she had stated that she would  leave  him  with
    all the children was a factor which meant he was unlikely  to  reoffend
    in the future. The judge therefore concluded  that  the  Appellant  had
    successfully rehabilitated himself on an objective basis.

15.  The judge acknowledged the extremely serious nature of the offences  of
    which the Appellant had been convicted and that Parliament  had  placed
    an extremely high bar that the  Appellant  had  to  satisfy  to  resist
    deportation. The judge found that the Appellant had left Iran with  his
    father who was a general in the Iranian army at the time following  the
    revolution and that the Appellant had no experience whatsoever of  life
    in Iran. Although  the  judge  noted  that  there  may  be  a  risk  of
    persecution should the Appellant be removed to Iran, he stated that  he
    placed this to one side save that he acknowledged  that  the  Appellant
    may have  difficulty  returning  safely  to  Iran  and  re-establishing
    himself there given his family history and background.  The judge found
    that it would be difficult to provide for his family  who  are  British
    citizens and his wife who is of Turkish ethnic origin, which  may  well
    affect their ability to visit him in the foreseeable future.

16.  Accordingly, I am not persuaded by  the  Respondent's  submission  that
    the judge took into account irrelevant factors and made findings  which
    he was not able to make. The judge clearly observed that there would be
    difficulties to the Appellant re-establishing himself on return, but he
    did not  conclude  that  the  Appellant  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution if removed to Iran. I find that the judge's conclusions  at
    paragraph 30 were open to him on the evidence and the factors  referred
    to were factors which he should take into account in assessing  whether
    there  were  'very  compelling  circumstances'  over  and  above  those
    referred to in the Immigration Rules.

17.  The judge also found that the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  wife  was
    extremely strong and her description of the effect on the children  was
    compelling. The judge did not have an expert report and had to make  an
    assessment of the likely impact on the children's  emotional  wellbeing
    on the basis of the evidence which was before him.  He gave reasons for
    why he attached significant weight to the evidence of  the  Appellant's
    wife and found that there would be severe emotional  problems  for  the
    four children concerned.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    deportation would have  a  devastating  impact  on  the  children  and,
    although it was  not  an  overriding  factor,  it  was  of  significant
    importance.

18.   The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  have  a
    devastating effect on the children  and  his  wife  such  that  it  was
    unlikely that the family would stay together if he  was  deported.  The
    Appellant came to the UK when he was 11 years old, he had no  knowledge
    of Iran and could not read or write Farsi. The judge found that it  was
    rather unfortunate that he had not obtained  British  citizenship  like
    his mother,  father  and  siblings.  The  Appellant  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in August 1992. The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant would face significant hardship and difficulty on  return  to
    Iran and that the Appellant's spouse would face  real  hostility  given
    her Turkish ethnic origin.

19.  It is clear from paragraph 34 that the judge  was  well  aware  of  the
    weight to be attached to the public interest. I find that  the  judge's
    reasons given at paragraphs 36(1),  (2)  and  (3)  were  sufficient  to
    support his findings that there were very compelling reasons  over  and
    above the normal ones that apply in paragraphs  399  and  399A.   Those
    findings were open to the judge on the evidence.  He  was  entitled  to
    place weight on the evidence of the Appellant's  wife  and  the  effect
    that she  considered  his  deportation  would  have  on  the  emotional
    wellbeing of her own children.  The judge was aware  that  he  did  not
    have expert evidence  and  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  social
    services or other independent authorities. His conclusion that, for the
    reasons  given  at  paragraph   36,   there   were   'very   compelling
    circumstances' which would override the strong public  interest  was  a
    conclusion that was reasonably open to the judge on the evidence before
    him.

20.  In assessing 'very compelling circumstances', the  judge  concluded  at
    paragraph 38:

         "The strength of this family has been maintained by the Appellant's
         spouse and to a large extent by  each  child.  The  fact  that  the
         Appellant  has  been  re-introduced  to  them  for  a  year  is   a
         significant factor. It may be argued that it would have been better
         if he had not seen his family at all and had  simply  been  removed
         directly to Iran.  If that had occurred it may have been that  that
         would be far harsher for him, but the family may have  just  simply
         continued coping in the way that they have done. I find that the re-
         introduction of the Appellant to their lives as from June last year
         has given them hope and expectation that family life has and  ought
         to continue. This is an unfortunate consequence which  is  not  the
         fault of the Respondent, but it is just a description of  what  has
         happened. I find therefore that his removal for a second time would
         have  a  devastating  effect  on  all  four  children   and   would
         effectively break the Appellant's spouse's ability to cope  as  she
         herself has admitted.

         The fact that they have managed to do so during  his  incarceration
         does not mean that they could survive that a  second  time.   I  am
         left in no doubt that there is a very strong emotional bond of love
         and affection between the Appellant and his family that is clear to
         me.  In the circumstances therefore I find that the impact  on  the
         children's education and  the  spouse's  mental  health  is  almost
         certainly in a combination to amount to 'very  compelling'  reasons
         over and above those in Exceptions 1 and 2.  It may  well  be  that
         families where an offender is known and supported in his  offending
         would not suffer too much from that  person's  deportation.  In  my
         assessment of this particular family I find that this  is  not  the
         case.

         There is also the factor probably not envisaged by the  Immigration
         Rules that deporting a foreign criminal back to  Iran  is  probably
         one of the most risky destinations anybody could  possibly  choose.
         This was particularly so in the Appellant's case given that he  was
         a child of 11 years old and had connections to the previous  regime
         with the Shah of Iran through his father.  This  also  amounted  to
         very compelling reasons over and above paragraph 399 and 399A."

21.  I find that the judge has identified 'very  compelling  circumstances.'
    The judge's further consideration under Article 8 outside the Rules did
    not amount to a material error of law. The judge properly  allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules. It follows that the appeal would be
    allowed on Article 8 grounds also.

22.  The judge acknowledged that this was a finely balanced case and he  has
    made strenuous efforts to ensure that the error made initially  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal was not repeated. He has quite clearly acknowledged
    the weight to be attached  to  the  public  interest  and  applied  the
    correct test, namely 'very compelling circumstances' over and above the
    exceptions in 1 and 2.

23.  I find that there was no error of law and the  judge  properly  applied
    Section 117 of  the  Immigration,  Nationality  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    attaching  significant  weight  to  the  public  interest.  The   judge
    concluded that the effect of Appellant's deportation on  his  wife  and
    children would be more than  unduly  harsh.  It  was  likely  that  the
    Appellant would be unable to re-establish himself in Iran and his  wife
    and children would be unable to visit.

24.  The judge's conclusion that there were 'very compelling  circumstances'
    over and  above  those  identified  in  the  Immigration  Rules  was  a
    conclusion which was open to the judge  on  the  evidence  before  him.
    Accordingly, I find that there is no error of law in his decision and I
    dismiss the Respondent's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 23rd September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
