
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
DA/00441/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 February 2018                        |On 5 March 2018                |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE NICKLIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                          MR OSEGHALE KELVIN OBIOMO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel instructed by Dotcom Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

                    [oral decision delivered at hearing]

 1. The appellant, Mr Obioma, is a citizen of Nigeria.  He is now 38  years
    old.  He claims to have first come to live in the United  Kingdom  more
    than twenty years ago but it was not until  19  January  2004  that  he
    regularised his  immigration  status  when  he  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, a residence permit of proof of his right to residence  as  the
    spouse of a French national.  On 26 January 2010, Mr Obiomo was granted
    a permanent residence card valid until 26 January 2020.

 2. Mr Obiomo has several previous convictions dating back to  22  November
    2007.  However, for the material purposes, on 27 May  2014,  Mr  Obiomo
    was convicted at Blackfriars Crown Court of rape and, on  4  July  that
    year, jailed for seven years.  On 12 May 2016, the Secretary  of  State
    notified Mr Obiomo that  she  intended  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him on grounds of public policy.  Mr Obiomo was invited to make
    submissions as to why he ought not to be deported.  On 4  August  2017,
    having considered his representations, the Secretary of  State  decided
    to  make  a  deportation  order  pursuant  to  Regulation  27  of   the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016.   So  far  as
    material the Regulations provide:

         "15. Right of Permanent Residence

             (1) The following persons acquire the right to reside  in  the
                 United Kingdom permanently -

                  (a)   an EEA  national  who  has  resided  in  the  United
                      Kingdom in accordance with these  Regulations  for  a
                      continuous period of five years;

                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not an  EEA
                      national but who has resided in  the  United  Kingdom
                      with  the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  these
                      Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

         23.  Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         (6)  Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8), an  EEA  national  who  has
             entered the United Kingdom or the  family  member  of  such  a
             national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed  if
             -

              ...

             (b)  the Secretary of State  has  decided  that  the  person's
                  removal is justified on grounds of public  policy,  public
                  security or public health in  accordance  with  regulation
                  27.

         (7)  A person must not be removed under paragraph (6) -

              ...

             (b)  if that person has leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
                  under  the  1971  Act  unless  that  person's  removal  is
                  justified on the grounds of public policy, public security
                  or public health in accordance with regulation 27.

         27.  Decisions taken on grounds of public policy,  public  security
             and public health

             (1)  In this regulation, a 'relevant decision'  means  an  EEA
                  decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                  security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                  ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                  person  with  a  right  of   permanent   residence   under
                  regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy
                  and public security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                  grounds of public security in respect of an  EEA  national
                  who -

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant
                      decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                      is in the best interests of the person concerned,  as
                      provided for in the Convention on the Rights  of  the
                      Child adopted by the General Assembly of  the  United
                      Nations on 20th November 1989(17).

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
                  United  Kingdom  include  restricting   rights   otherwise
                  conferred by these Regulations in  order  to  protect  the
                  fundamental interests of society,  and  where  a  relevant
                  decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public
                  security it must also be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
                  following principles -

                  (a)  The  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                      genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                      affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
                      imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                      even  in  the  absence   of   a   previous   criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person."

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a  person
                  ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and
                  cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
                  of this regulation are met must in particular have  regard
                  to the considerations contained in Schedule 1 and Schedule
                  1  sets  out  considerations  of  public  policy,   public
                  security and the fundamental interests of society etc."

    I do not need to quote Schedule 1 but they set out the various  matters
    that need to be considered.

 3. The Secretary of State, in her decision letter, accepted that Mr Obiomo
    was a family member of an EEA national  since  his  application  for  a
    residence card as the spouse of a French national on  19  January  2004
    and that he had been resident for a continuous period  of  five  years.
    As such, the Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  he  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence under the Regulations.  The  Secretary  of
    State determined that, as Mr Obiomo was not himself  an  EEA  national,
    she was not required to justify his deportation on  imperative  grounds
    of public security  under  27(4),  nevertheless  she  was  required  to
    demonstrate that his removal was justified on serious grounds of public
    policy and public security under Regulation 27(3).

 4. In the decision letter the Secretary of State set out the factual basis
    of her decision before concluding that his removal was justified  as  a
    matter of public policy on the grounds  of  the  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat Mr Obiomo posed to one of  the  fundamental
    interests of the UK society and that his deportation was proportionate.
     Mr Obiomo appealed that decision.  His appeal was heard by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Maxwell  on  19  December  2017  and  his  reasons  were
    promulgated on 4 January 2018.  The judge directed himself to  consider
    Regulation 27(5) in paragraph 13 of  his  decision  and  he  considered
    Regulation 27(6) and upheld the Secretary of State's decision.

 5. Mr Obiomo's application for permission  to  appeal  was  lodged  on  18
    January 2018.  His grounds included the contention that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to identify and make any findings as  to  the
    appropriate protection level required under the  Regulations.   It  was
    contended that under Regulation 27(4) the decision to deport Mr  Obiomo
    was required to be justified on imperative grounds of public  security.
    For that proposition reliance was placed on Aitjilal  -v-  SSHD  [2016]
    UKUT 563 (IAC) [29].

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 29 January 2018 on the ground I have  identified.   Other
    grounds had been advanced before us today, but I am satisfied  that  we
    can deal with the case on the basis of the first ground that  has  been
    identified.  I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  not
    addressed his  mind  to  the  applicable  protection  level  under  the
    Regulations in Mr Obiomo's case and in consequence he has not made  the
    necessary  findings  as  to  whether  the  Secretary   of   State   had
    demonstrated that  Mr  Obiomo  represented  such  a  threat.   That  is
    sufficient to allow Mr Obiomo's appeal.

 7. I am not persuaded that the Secretary of State  was  required  to  show
    that Mr Obiomo's removal was justified on imperative grounds of public
    security.  In my view, Mr Obiomo cannot qualify under Regulation 27(4),
    not because he does not have a  qualifying  period  of  residence,  but
    because he is  not  an  EEA  citizen.   The  distinction  is  drawn  in
    Regulation 27(3) and 27(4) between the EEA citizens and those with  the
    right of permanent residence in the UK.  Aitjilal is not authority that
    27(4) applies to those with a right of permanent residence in  the  UK.
    Given the clear distinction drawn in the Regulations, I do not consider
    that such a construction is permissible.  Nevertheless,  the  Secretary
    of State would have to demonstrate under Regulation  27(3)  that  there
    were serious grounds of public policy and  public  security  justifying
    his deportation.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no such  findings.
    In light of those decisions we consider it right to remit the case back
    to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
be reconsidered afresh before a judge other than  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Maxwell.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed: [pic]          Date: 20 February 2018

Mr Justice Nicklin

