
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00333/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2019                |On 27th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Kastytis [M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Craggs, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with  permission,   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Gumsley) promulgated on
    9  September  2019.   By  its  decision,  the  Tribunal   allowed   the
    Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary   of   State's   decision,
    dated,12th June 2019 (and supplementary decision of 30th  August  2019)
    to deport him from the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal did not
    make an anonymity order and Mr Craggs confirmed that he did not seek to
    advance any grounds as to why such an order would be necessary.

 1. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  [M]  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The decision to deport was made under Regulation 27 of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations"). The
    appellant's case was that the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 27 and Schedule 1 of the Regulations,  and/or  that  it  was
    incompatible with his rights  under Article 8 of  the  Convention,  and
    thus unlawful by reason of S.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 3. By a decision and reasons promulgated on the 9 September 2019, the FtTJ
    (Judge Gumsley) allowed the appeal, holding that the decision  was  not
    in accordance with  the  Regulations  as  he  did  not  find  that  the
    respondent had established that the appellant  represented  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to public  policy  or  security
    such that his deportation was justified. The judge did not need to, and
    did not, consider the Convention grounds.

 4. The Secretary of State appealed and permission to appeal was refused by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Landes)   but   on   reconsideration
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup.

Background:

 5. The Appellant is a citizen of Lithuania. The key factual background  is
    set out in the decision of  the  FtTJ,  the  decision  letter  and  the
    witness statements filed on behalf of the  appellant.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 3 January 2008 when aged 11 along with his mother and
    other siblings.  It is said that his father had  been  violent  to  his
    mother and that he had had no contact with his  father  since  he,  his
    mother and siblings had left  Lithuania.  He  has  remained  in  United
    Kingdom since that date  having  only  returned  to  Lithuania  on  one
    occasion.

 6. Between 2011 and 2017 he has committed criminal offences. As a juvenile
    in November 2011 he was convicted of possessing an offensive weapon  in
    a public place her and sentenced to a referral order  for  six  months.
    Also, as a juvenile on  24  April  2013  he  was  convicted  of  theft,
    possessing a controlled drug (class B cannabis) and common assault  and
    was sentenced to  a  youth  rehabilitation  order  with  a  supervision
    requirement valid until 21 May 2014. He  was  also  the  subject  of  a
    curfew requirement with electronic tagging. On 15 May  2013  whilst  on
    bail, he was convicted at the Juvenile Court for possession of a  class
    B controlled drug (cannabis).

 7. On 2 January 2015 he  was  convicted  at  the  Magistrate's  Court  for
    possessing a sharp pointed article in a public place, driving  a  motor
    vehicle excess alcohol, using a vehicle while uninsured, taking a motor
    vehicle without consent and was sentenced on 25 February 2015 to  youth
    rehabilitation order of 12  months,  a  curfew  requirement  for  three
    months with electronic tagging, a supervision requirement and an unpaid
    work requirement of 60 hours he was also disqualified from driving  for
    12 months with his licence endorsed.

 8. On 7 April 2017, when the appellant was aged 19, he appeared before the
    Crown Court and was sentenced as follows; for possessing class A  drugs
    with intent to supply (four counts)  he  was  sentenced  to  27  months
    imprisonment on each count concurrent. In respect of arson with  intent
    to endanger life he was sentenced to 56 months consecutive to the above
    sentence and for arson (five counts) he was sentenced to  6  months  on
    each count to be concurrent to the above sentences. In total this was a
    sentence of six years and 11 months. The appellant had  pleaded  guilty
    to the arson offences at an early opportunity and not pleaded guilty to
    the drugs matters until the day of his trial.

 9. The circumstances of the offences are set out in the sentencing remarks
    in the respondents bundle at (A1-A10). They are also summarised in  the
    decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs 14 - 18.

10. Following the imposition  of  the  sentence,  on  5  January  2018  the
    appellant was served notice that he  was  liable  for  deportation  and
    invited to make any representations as to  why  this  should  not  take
    place. Submissions were submitted on his behalf,  by  letter  from  his
    representatives, dated 29 January  2018.  Consideration  was  given  to
    those representations, but the respondent refused those representations
    in a  decision  letter  of  12  June  2019.  This  was  followed  by  a
    supplementary letter dated 30 August 2019.

11. The decision letter set out the appellant's criminal  history  are  set
    out above. The Secretary of State took into account that  he  had  been
    living in the UK since the age of 11 (having  taken  into  account  the
    documentary evidence relating to his  education  and  other  associated
    documentation) but  did  not  accept  that  he  had  been  continuously
    resident in the United Kingdom for 10 years in accordance with the  EEA
    regulations 2016, noting that having been  incarcerated  in  2017,  the
    continuity of residents was broken. It was accepted that  he  had  been
    resident in the United Kingdom in accordance with the  EEA  regulations
    2016 for a continuous period of five years and as such had  acquired  a
    permanent right  of  residence  under  the  EEA  regulations  and  that
    consideration was given to whether his  deportation  was  justified  on
    "serious grounds of public policy or public security."

12. The decision letter referred to the  material,  including  the  judge's
    sentencing remarks and the circumstances of  his  offending.  It  noted
    that he was being monitored  under  risk  management  strategies  which
    indicated that he was considered to pose a continuing risk  the  public
    and that other factors such as mental health problems,  ongoing  issues
    with drugs and alcohol, accommodation issues  and  maintaining  contact
    with other known offenders were relevant factors  in  that  assessment.
    Reference was made  to  the  OASY's  assessment  and  that  there  were
    identifiable indicators of risk of serious harm. In the  light  of  the
    material before the respondent, it was concluded that he demonstrated a
    propensity to offend, such that the appellant  represented  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to  justify
    deportation.

13.  The  decision  letter  went  on   to   consider   the   principle   of
    proportionality (regulation 27 (5)  (a)).  It  reviewed  his  offending
    history, his age and his health, his connections  with  Lithuania,  his
    family relationships in the UK, his  education  and  the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation,   before   concluding   that   his   deportation    was
    proportionate and in the public interest. The decision letter also made
    reference to Article 8 and that it was  not  accepted  that  he  had  a
    family life with his claimed partner which was genuine and  subsisting,
    nor had it been accepted that he been lawfully resident in  the  United
    Kingdom for most of his life or that he  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom in the light of his criminal offending
    and  that  he  had  provided  no  evidence  of  making   any   positive
    contribution to society. He was considered  that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration to Lithuania and that  there
    were no very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  significant
    public interest in his deportation.

The applicable legal framework:

14. The deportation of EEA nationals is subject to the regime  set  out  in
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ('The  EEA
    Regulations')  which  were  made  under  section  2  of  the   European
    Communities Act 1972 by way of implementation of Directive  2004/38  on
    the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and
    reside freely within the territory of Member States. The Directive sets
    conditions that must be satisfied before a Member  State  can  restrict
    the rights of free movement and residence provided for by EU law.

15. By virtue of Regulation 23(6) of the 2016 regulations an  EEA  national
    who has entered the United Kingdom or  the  family  member  of  such  a
    national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if:

         (a)  that person does not have or ceases to have a right to  reside
         under these Regulations; or

         (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's  removal
         is justified on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
         public health in accordance with regulation 27; or

         (c)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's  removal
         is justified on grounds of misuse of rights under regulation 26(3).

16. Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows: -

         27.- (1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA
             decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic
             ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except on serious grounds of public policy and public
             security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                      decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision
                      is in the best interests of the person concerned, as
                      provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the
                      Child adopted by the General Assembly of the United
                      Nations on 20th November 1989

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred
             by these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision is taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person concerned must
                      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                      society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                      which relate to considerations of general prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                      themselves justify the decision.

                  (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds,
                      even in the absence of a previous criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of
             public policy and public security in relation to a person
             ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the decision
             maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
             state of health, family and economic situation of P, P's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social and
             cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of
             P's links with P's country of origin.

             ...

             (8)  A court or Tribunal considering whether the requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of
             public policy, public security and the fundamental interests
             of society etc.).'




                                 SCHEDULE 1

          CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND THE
                    FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

         Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
         or public security values: member States enjoy considerable
         discretion, acting within the parameters set by the EU Treaties,
         applied where relevant by the EEA agreement, to define their own
         standards of public policy and public security, for purposes
         tailored to their individual contexts, from time to time.

         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
         extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
         nationality or language does not amount to integration in the
         United Kingdom; a significant degree of wider cultural and societal
         integration must be present before a person may be regarded as
         integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national
         has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the more numerous the convictions, the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present and sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of an EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national within the United
         Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at or around
         the same time as-

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of
                  society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national was
                  in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the
         family member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive
         evidence of not demonstrating a threat (for example, through
         demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member of an EEA
         national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely
         to be proportionate.

         6.   It is consistent with public policy and public security
         requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions may be taken
         in order to refuse, terminate or withdraw any right otherwise
         conferred by these Regulations in the case of abuse of rights or
         fraud, including-

             (a)  entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
                  to enter or to attempt to enter, a marriage, civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or

             (b)  fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain or
                  assisting another to obtain or to attempt to obtain, a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.




         The fundamental interests of society

         7.   For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)  preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the
                  immigration laws, and maintaining the integrity and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a conviction (including where the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities to take such
                  action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such as offences
                  related to the misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-
                  border dimension as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

             (h)  combating the effects of persistent offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if taken in
                  isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the
                  requirements of regulation 27);

             (i)  protecting the rights and freedoms of others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)  protecting the public;

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an EEA decision against a
                  child);

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared
                  values.

The decision of the FtTJ:

17. The FtTJ had  the  advantage  of  hearing  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant alongside the documentary evidence both  in  the  appellant's
    bundle and that of the respondent.

18. The FtTJ set out the relevant legal framework at paragraphs 5 -  6  and
    referred to the legal authorities that had been placed before  him.  He
    reminded himself of the general principles which  were  applicable  and
    that he must decide the case on the "individual  circumstances  of  the
    appellant". It was common ground before him that as he had a  permanent
    right of residence, he was required to  determine  whether  there  were
    "serious grounds of public security or public policy"  which  justified
    the respondent's decision to deport the appellant.

19. At paragraph [11] he set out the agreed issues that he  was  to  decide
    and that the  emphasis  on  his  consideration  was  not  on  what  the
    appellant had done in the past but rather (i) the effect on society  of
    his continued presence in the  United  Kingdom,  by  reference  to  any
    present threat, and (b) the proportionality of  the  interference  with
    the appellant's rights under the EEA regulations by deportation, in the
    context of any such threat."

20. His assessment of the issues and findings are set out at paragraphs  12
    - 51. The judge found that both sets of offences were very  serious  as
    evidenced by the lengthy sentence imposed upon the  appellant,  despite
    his relatively young age and it being his first custodial sentence.  He
    agreed with the sentencing judge and  his  assessment  that  the  index
    offence (arson) was an "immensely serious offence of  its  type"  which
    was "aggravated by the fact that within a very short  time  of  setting
    the fire, he set fire to no less  than  five  other  locations  in  the
    area." The judge found that the offences involving fire setting had the
    potential of the most serious of consequences. Similarly, as for drugs,
    those who deal in drugs take part in a trade which causes  considerable
    misery and whilst addiction was an explanation, it was  no  excuse  for
    being so involved (at [18]).

21. When considering the fundamental interests of society, the judge  found
    that the offences had a wide-ranging and wholly  negative  effect,  not
    only in individuals but also on the wider community. He concluded  that
    the offences carried out affected the fundamental interests of  society
    (at [19]).

22. He considered that if the appellant engaged  in  such  offending  again
    that he would have no doubt that this would present a threat  affecting
    one or more of the fundamental interests of society. He therefore  went
    on to state "the first issue for me to consider is whether there  is  a
    genuine and present in sufficiently serious threat" and  observed  that
    "the risk of him reoffending, particularly in relation to  offences  of
    this nature and/or seriousness, is therefore a  matter  of  fundamental
    importance in my consideration this matter. "The judge recorded that he
    had a number of concerns in this respect which he then referred to.

23. He began by making reference to his previous convictions which he found
    "do him no credit" and that he had managed to accumulate  a  number  of
    previous convictions as a juvenile or young person for various offences
    including  theft,  possession  of  class  B  drugs,  possession  of  an
    offensive weapon or bladed article, common assault and serious  driving
    offences. Some offences were  committed  whilst  on  bail  for  others.
    Several non-custodial disposals were imposed but given his  reoffending
    none were ultimately successful, and he continued to offend. The  judge
    found  that  there  were  attempted  intervention  in  the  appellant's
    behaviour during his childhood and youth and that as a child, he had  a
    number of issues and problems as to his behaviour at school, referrals,
    issues of attendance and effort. The judge concluded "these matters do,
    in my judgement go towards  the  level  of  entrenchment  of  his  poor
    behaviour, his attitudes and so his ability to reform" (at [21]).

24. Similarly, at [22] the judge found that the appellant's plans  for  his
    future upon release also gave cause for concern. He recorded  that  the
    appellant hoped that he could go home to his  mother   and  whilst  the
    judge understood that desire to go home, the judge found that this  had
    not been a place  that  had  "served  him  well  hitherto".  The  judge
    observed that whilst the appellant's case was that he would have family
    support upon release, despite providing evidence and  statements,  none
    of the family attended the hearing. Consequently, whilst he was invited
    to take into account the statements, in the absence  of  their  authors
    the judge said he found that to be "difficult"  and  having  considered
    the content of those statements decided that he could  only  give  them
    limited weight. The judge found  that  the  lack  of  anyone  from  the
    appellant's family attending the hearing was "troubling." He  therefore
    concluded that he was not satisfied that the  appellant  would  receive
    much, if any family support upon release (at 25]).

25. As to his girlfriend, whilst the judge was satisfied that the appellant
    generally  believed  he  would  obtain  help  and  support   from   his
    girlfriend, and whilst they had been together for 4� years,  the  judge
    concluded she was  unable to exert any form of influence  to  stop  his
    drug alcohol abuse. Therefore, was not satisfied that she  would  prove
    effective in preventing him from relapsing into crime (at [26]).

26. At [27] the judge  also  set  out  his  concerns  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's "hope" to return to his home area.

27. As to his employment prospects, the judge considered  evidence  in  the
    form of a letter but the judge found that it could  attach  very  would
    little weight to it in the light of the appellant's own  evidence  that
    he had worked the company for some time, had felt  ill  due  to  taking
    drugs and alcohol and not attended which went on for a few days and was
    then dismissed.

28. The judge concluded at [29] that those matters formed the basis for his
    concern. The judge went on to state that the appellant's case was based
    on what was described as his "integration and rehabilitation" and  that
    the appellant is "part of British society and not the same person as he
    was when he was sentenced" .

29. At paragraphs 30 - 31,  the  FtTJ  referred  to  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant, both the written and oral evidence, relevant to his analysis
    and consideration. In summary, the appellant had spoken of spending the
    first year of his incarceration processing  things  that  he  had  been
    through. When questioned about this, he had spoken of being bullied  at
    school due to his looks and his inability to  speak  English  well.  He
    said that it had mental health  issues  but  was  no  longer  obtaining
    treatment other than medication; he had completed courses in his action
    plan and others, including those  relating  to  education,  employment,
    offending and substance abuse. He expressed the view  that  he  wanted,
    upon release, the stay away from people who took drugs  and  drink  and
    that he didn't feel like taking any substances any longer. He  said  he
    would have to help family members and positivity from  his  girlfriend,
    and he hoped to work in construction.

30. As to his evidence concerning his links with Lithuania, he said that he
    returned once to see an aunt but didn't have contact  now.  His  father
    was a drunk and had been violent his mother and that it was not a  good
    idea him to get in contact his father now as he had shown  no  interest
    in him since he and his family  members  had   left  Lithuania.  As  to
    language, his knowledge was not very good - he could  speak  Lithuanian
    although he had difficulties in understanding.  He  referred  to  being
    ashamed of himself and previous behaviour and had decided to  turn  his
    life around and wanted a "second chance" start a  new  life  in  United
    Kingdom.

31. Mr Craggs on behalf the appellant had submitted that the appellant  was
    integrated in the UK-based on his  length  of  residence,  his  English
    language ability, his education and employment  history.  At  [33]  the
    judge found that is, apart offending did not show a desire to integrate
    into   mainstream   society,   and   that   the   only   evidence    of
    associates/friends related to those who are prepared to feed  him  free
    drugs and alcohol. The judge found no evidence of positive contribution
    to society during that period of his life.

32. At [34] the judge accepted that he had spent his  formative  years  and
    most of his life in the United Kingdom having left Lithuania at the age
    of 10. The judge accepted that whilst he could speak  some  Lithuanian,
    he had trouble understanding it. The judge rejected the  suggestion  in
    the decision letter that he could make contact with his father which he
    stated was not "viable or sensible" given that had not seen his  father
    since he left, that his father was drunk and was violent and  that  the
    vast majority of his family were in United Kingdom.

33. Therefore as to integration, the judge concluded that whilst there  was
    some evidence of integration  (length  of  residence,  some  education,
    family members, language ability), it was limited and not  particularly
    positive  therefore  the  weight  attached  of  integration  was  "also
    limited".

34. Having set out his concerns in the preceding paragraphs, at  paragraphs
    36- 51 the FtTJ then went on  to  consider  the  positive  evidence  in
    favour of the appellant. At [36] he found that  there  was  "much  more
    force in the submission of Mr Craggs that the appellant  is  a  changed
    man". The FtTJ found that the appellant was a most  frank  witness  who
    was polite and respectful and that  he  did  not  seek  to  excuse  his
    behaviour in anyway. Whilst  mindful  of  the  need  for  caution  when
    hearing from appellant facing deportation, he did appear to  the  judge
    to be "genuinely contrite". The  judge  recorded  his  assessment  that
    whilst he appeared to be na�ve at  times,  he  did  not  avoid  telling
    unhelpful truths,  such  as  how  he  left  his  employment,  which  is
    something he did not need to  say  and  that  it  provided  "additional
    credibility" for what the judge described as a "remarkably  honest  and
    impressive performance in evidence."

35. At [37] the FTT J stated that "more significantly", he  had  considered
    the comments and commendations from those who had been in contact  with
    the appellant whilst he was in custody. The  judge  then  recorded  the
    positive reports that were  before  the  tribunal.  They  consisted  of
    positive reports from his education tutors, speaking of him progressing
    well with a positive attitude and being polite and respectful. A report
    described by the judge as "what I consider  to  be  a  most  impressive
    commendation, speaking of seeing at first hand positive change" and the
    appellant being a pleasure to teach with him "growing from strength  to
    strength" and going to "great lengths to rehabilitate and adopt  a  new
    outlook of life." Further reports described him as "a big change in him
    as he's become more open" and that he is "always  lighten  respectful".
    In the author's opinion it was said  "he's  generally  sorry  that  his
    behaviour got the point it did and is really looking forward to  making
    something of his life.". The report spoke of him "growing  in  maturity
    and showing true remorse for his past behaviour". Other  reports  spoke
    of him to be a good worker and maintaining a positive attitude and  the
    prison officer in the report related to his attitude and  behaviour  of
    being a "really good standard and  that  he  comes  across  in  a  good
    manner."

36. At [38] the judge also referred to the  documentation  which  supported
    his achievements was in  custody  including  certificates  in  English,
    construction, IT as well as  alcohol  awareness,  thinking  skills  and
    employability.

37. At [39] the judge referred to his assessment of the evidence  from  the
    probation service and is present officer (dated May 2019) who described
    the appellant as "one of the most pleasant and polite young men that  I
    have on my caseload". He was described  as  working  on  completing  an
    offending behaviour accredited course which he did to a  high  standard
    and with much praise of the course leaders. She was of  the  view  that
    upon release he would likely be MAPPA level I or two  (not  considering
    it likely would be higher). She described him as  well-behaved,  having
    earned privileges and  having  interacted  well  with  the  staff.  She
    indicated that whilst he had five  adjudications,  none  of  them  were
    "particular concerning" and had none since August 2018.

38. The analysis of that evidence is given at [40]. The judge  stated  that
    the evidence of good behaviour and efforts of  rehabilitation  did  not
    appear to him to be "someone who was  recently,  post-adverse  decision
    (which was not made until June 2019), made  an  attempt  to  ingratiate
    himself with staff for "show". I am satisfied, both from  the  evidence
    he gave, which was supported by the professional view of  others,  that
    his commitment to change is genuine. There is  no  suggestion  that  is
    behaviour has anyway regressed since his commendations were written."

39.  As to the issue of rehabilitation, he recorded that the appellant  had
    said that he considered he was now rehabilitated. The judge found  that
    he had "certainly undergone various courses and his present position is
    positive" and that "I accept that  he  does  genuinely  believe  he  is
    changed and is reformed."

40.  The judge returned to the appellants offending  and  that  whilst  his
    youth offending (prior to the index offences) was "troubling",  it  was
    "sadly not out of the ordinary in respect of many  young  people."  The
    judge went on to state "I am extremely mindful of his  young  age  when
    committing these offences and that  such  type  of  offending  is  more
    frequently seen with young people, some of whom do  go  on  to  abandon
    such behaviour in later life." In his  judgement,  he  considered  that
    "this is an important factor when considering  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant is changing behaviour and become more mature."

41. The judge considered the evidence advanced by the respondent which  was
    the assessment of the appellant as a medium risk of reoffending and  of
    being a high risk to the public should he do so, but  found  that  this
    OASY's assessment had been completed in April 2018 and therefore needed
    to be considered in the context of the more recent  evidence  from  the
    probation officer. He also took into account that when dealing with the
    index offences the sentencing judge did not consider that he should  be
    sentenced within the "dangerousness provisions and that  there  was  no
    indication that he is a "fire setter"  or  that  he  has  a  propensity
    towards such offending.

42. As to his mental health, whilst he did not have the psychiatric  report
    prepared for the sentencing hearing, there  had  been  no  evidence  of
    psychiatric or psychological issues in the sentencing remarks.  He  was
    identified upon arrival to custody as having mental health issues.  The
    judge accepted the appellant's evidence that they arose  from  bullying
    from when he was younger and that he had a violent father in  Lithuania
    and that his mother and been the  subject  of  domestic  violence.  The
    judge referred to the more up-to-date evidence  from  July  2019  which
    spoke of the appellant continuing to engage with the mental health team
    and  having  undergone  DBT,  CPT,  counselling  and  being  prescribed
    medication. It also spoke of abstaining from drugs and maturing into  a
    very pleasant and decent man during his time  in  custody.  His  mental
    health problems were stable.

43. The judge also considered that his offence relating to  arson  occurred
    whilst he was under the influence of drink and drugs and that his drugs
    offending was motivated by his  own  addiction.  As  to  the  addiction
    issues, he had address this  with  the  assistance  of  the  DART  team
    (alcohol and drugs) and was referred  to  as  being  motivated  to  his
    continuing abstention.  In  the  light  of  that  evidence,  the  judge
    concluded at [46] that it was "significant that he has  now  cooperated
    with mental  health  services,  his  mental  health  issues  have  been
    recognised and are being addressed, something which does  not  seem  to
    have been done from the evidence   prior to his incarceration. This  is
    to his credit which also goes towards the issue of whether, having, now
    had treatment in recognising and accepting help in this regard,  he  is
    likely to relapse into criminal. Similarly, his willingness to  address
    his addiction issues also goes to risk of relapse (at [46]).

44. At paragraphs [47 - 51] the judge recorded his overall conclusions.  He
    was satisfied that having considered all the evidence in the round  the
    appellant shown that he had the benefit of being  covered  by  the  EEA
    regulations. He set out at [48] that the case  presented  a  "difficult
    balancing exercise" in which it highlighted the matters that  gave  him
    cause of concern when assessing risk. He observed  that  the  appellant
    had asked the second chance but that he had been given  several  second
    chances but not taken them and therefore could not say that "there  was
    no risk in this case". However, having taken into account that he was a
    child young person at the time of the majority of  his  offending,  his
    recent  incarceration  been  his  first  taste  of  custody,  and   was
    approaching his evidence with caution and  mindful  of  his  commitment
    that it had not been tested in the real world, the judge was  satisfied
    that he had done what he could to make use  of  his  positive  time  in
    custody and tried to demonstrate a desire to change. The  judge  stated
    "I am satisfied  that  his  commitment  to  change  is  genuine.  I  am
    satisfied that, in the context of this particular young man,  with  the
    various issues  he  clearly  had  when  first  detained,  he  has  made
    impressive steps to what I find is his goal. Having considered all  the
    circumstances  in  the  case,  notwithstanding  the  issues  that   are
    undoubtedly troubling, I am not satisfied that the risk of  reoffending
    is proper categorised as serious. Given this  finding  and  bearing  in
    mind the lack of connection the appellant had Lithuanian,  amongst  the
    other matter set out above, I  consider  his  deportation  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his rights as an  EEA  national.  In
    all  circumstances,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  respondent   has
    established that  the  appellant  represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to public policy or security such that  his
    deportation order is  justified.  Consequently,  it  follows  that  the
    appeal must succeed."

The appeal:

45. Before the Upper Tribunal, the Secretary of State was represented by Ms
    Petterson and the appellant represented by Mr Craggs,  who  represented
    him before the FtTJ. Ms Petterson relied upon the grounds  as  drafted.
    In addition, she made the following submissions:

      1. the FtTJ conflated the test under regulation 27 (5) (c) and 27(3).

      2. That when analysing the decision of the judge  there  were  several
         areas of concern.  At  paragraph  37  the  judge  referred  to  the
         positive reports from March - April 2018 and  an  email  dated  May
         2019 from the probation  service  at  paragraph  39.  However,  she
         submitted,  the  judge  did  not  engage  with  the  OASys's   risk
         assessment and failed to analyse how the risk had declined and that
         he needed to give particularly strong reasons as to why  the  email
         should weigh against the OASY's assessment.

      3. She submitted that whilst the judge had found the appeal to be  one
         that was "finely balanced", he had made findings as to the lack  of
         support from family, his girlfriend and employment prospects as set
         out at paragraph 29. Whilst the judge had said at paragraph  36  he
         was cautious of accepting the appellant's evidence that he was  not
         the same person as he was when he was convicted, the judge did  not
         exercise caution and did not deal with the risk of reoffending.

      4. She submitted that the good behaviour that  had  been  demonstrated
         was in a custodial setting under  controlled  conditions  and  that
         this did not diminish the risk. She submitted that the judge failed
         to consider risk outside of prison and whilst at paragraph  49  the
         judge was satisfied that the appellant had used his time in custody
         well, the issue related to being in the community where he  has  no
         meaningful relationships and which is untested. There had  been  no
         meaningful assessment of this beyond the email.

      5. She therefore submitted the decision to be set aside  as  the  FtTJ
         had erred in his  assessment  of  risk  given  that  he  was  in  a
         controlled environment and that a true assessment of risk  had  not
         been undertaken.

46. Mr Craggs on behalf of  the  appellant  had  provided  a  comprehensive
    skeleton argument which he invited the court to take it into account as
    the Rule 24 response.

47. As to the grounds generally, he submitted that it was  only  the  first
    ground of appeal that really reflected a challenge on a  point  of  law
    and that the remaining grounds related to matters of fact and arguments
    against the judge's findings which were matters on which the judge  was
    required to and did adjudicate,  and  which  did  not  contain  factual
    errors  and  therefore  did  not  constitute  errors  of  law.  In  the
    alternative the grounds had been answered in the skeleton argument.

48. He submitted that the judge properly analysed the issue  of  degree  of
    risk in the light of the  evidence  including  the  work  that  he  had
    undertaken and on the up-to-date material and  evidence.  He  addressed
    each of the regulations separately and undertook an  in-depth  analysis
    of the issues. He submitted that the grounds of appeal were focused  on
    factual matters raised but that it was clear from the judge's  decision
    that  he  had  carried  out  an  extensive  analysis  of  the   factual
    circumstances and it could not be said that he had failed to take  into
    account any relevant issue relating to assessment of risk.

49. As to risk assessment, the OASY's report was dated April 2018 which was
    18 months prior to the decision of the  FtTJ  and  did  not  take  into
    account his first year in prison and the judge had evidence before  him
    from the appellant stating that  he  had  spent  that  period  of  time
    processing and changing in an effort to address his behaviour.  It  was
    therefore not the position that the judge had failed to take account of
    the OASY's report as set out at paragraph 43. The grounds did not refer
    to the OASY's report as being 18 months old and was  therefore  a  bare
    assertion that this was the most cogent evidence.

50. He submitted that the judge did explore the work done  in  custody  and
    addressed this fully in his judgement. It had been a balancing act  and
    the judge had come to a decision on the specific facts  of  this  case.
    The judge was satisfied on the evidence that the appellant had  carried
    out sufficient work of a rehabilitative measure to make any risk to the
    public to be an acceptable one. It was therefore open to  the  FtTJ  on
    the evidence that he found as set out in his findings of fact to  allow
    the appeal.

51. Mr Craggs submitted that there had been substantial evidence about  the
    absence of links to Lithuanian having left at the age of 10 and that is
    only relative was a violent and alcoholic father and this was a  factor
    of relevance and that there was non-existent  integration  compared  to
    the United Kingdom and that he was more likely to be  rehabilitated  if
    he remained.

52. As to the major risk of concern, Mr  Craggs  submitted  that  this  was
    identified as the use of drugs and alcohol in  the  OASys's  assessment
    but that the judge accepted that he had engaged with the DART team  and
    this was addressed both in the documentary evidence  and  in  the  oral
    evidence. The judge referred to this at paragraph 45 in the context  of
    being motivated to continuing his abstention. This was  also  the  oral
    evidence before the judge. The documentary evidence  was  at  page  136
    which was a certificate of achievement dated  April  2019  relating  to
    relapse prevention and there had been a comprehensive  assessment  made
    as to his problems on 6 September 2017 (p149-150).

53. It was submitted that the FtTJ had sufficient evidence before him, both
    the documentary evidence as to work undertaken but also in the light of
    the oral evidence which the judge accepted as genuine  and  honest.  He
    was therefore entitled to consider the date of the OASys' report in the
    light of the other evidence and the oral evidence  upon  which  he  had
    been cross-examined and was therefore  in  a  position  to  conduct  an
    analysis of his rehabilitative steps taken whilst in custody. Thus  the
    risk assessment made by the  judge  was  in-depth,  it  identified  the
    negative issues  and  he  conducted  an  effective  balancing  exercise
    between the positive work undertaken  whilst  in  custody,  matters  of
    rehabilitation,  lack  of  links  and  relatives  in  Lithuanian,   his
    admissions and motivation to address the issues raised.

54. When looking at  the  appellant's  past  behaviour  it  was  influenced
    through drug and alcohol use at a young age but that  it  was  a  major
    element of the case that the judge had found  on the  current  evidence
    he was drug and alcohol free  and  thus  had  been  making  significant
    progress in addressing this issue.

55. In terms of the more recent evidence, the  probation  officer  who  had
    written the email was  his  offending  supervisor  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to take that evidence into  account.  He  therefore  submitted
    that there was no error of law disclosed in the approach taken  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge.

56. There was no reply to those submissions in behalf of the respondent. At
    the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give.

Discussion:

59.  I am grateful for the submissions made by  each  of  the  advocates.  I
    confirm that I have taken them into account and have  done  so  in  the
    light of the decision of the FtTJ and the material that was before him.

60.  The grounds relied upon by the Secretary of State  set  out  under  the
    heading "failing to give adequate reasons on material  matters/material
    misdirection." Paragraph 1 is the ground where it is asserted the judge
    made a material misdirection and the remainder of the  paragraphs  form
    the basis of a challenge to the adequacy of the reasons  given  by  the
    FtTJ in reaching his decision.

61.  Dealing with the first ground, it is submitted that the FtTJ  erred  in
    law by conflating the regulation 27 (5) ( c) test  with  regulation  27
    (3) -the first being a "risk of reoffending "test  and  the  second  is
    concerned with the potential consequences/seriousness of  the  offence.
    No further submissions were made in support of this ground.

62.  It is not in dispute that the test under regulation 27 (3)  relates  to
    the risk of reoffending and the  latter  to  the  consequences  of  the
    offences in question. The issue was whether the FtTJ did not appreciate
    that they were different tests. Having considered the decision  of  the
    FtTJ, it is not demonstrated that the judge  either  misunderstood  the
    legal  tests  that  he  was  bound  to  apply  or  made  any   material
    misdirection.

63.  The EEA regulations  provide  enhanced  levels  of  protection  against
    removal for EEA nationals who have become integrated in the host Member
    State as a consequence of living for a sufficiently lengthy  period  of
    time in that Member State.  The appellant  has  a  permanent  right  of
    residence with the result of the test set out in regulation 27 (3)  and
    in regulation 27 (5) have to be satisfied if the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to deport the appellant is to be  upheld.  The  FtTJ  properly
    directed himself to the  applicable  law  at  paragraph  [9]  where  he
    identified that the question that he had to determine was whether there
    was serious grounds of public security or public policy which justified
    the decision to deport the appellant. He went on to state that this was
    an "evaluative exercise" which was "based on the individual examination
    of his specific case."

64.  The FtTJ also set out  at  paragraph  [11]  that  it  had  been  agreed
    between both parties that he should consider the "effect on society  of
    the appellant's continued presence  in  the  UK  by  reference  to  any
    present threat and secondly, the proportionality  of  the  interference
    with the appellant's rights under the EEA regulations my deportation in
    the context of any such threat".

65.  In my view those self directions were consistent with the case  law  he
    cited at paragraph [9]  and  whilst  those  authorities  addressed  the
    previous regulations, it is not been argued on behalf of the respondent
    that the general principles set out in those  cases  were  not  of  any
    relevance. In Arranz (EEA regulations - deportation -test) [2017]  UKUT
    294 the Upper Tribunal held that the burden of proof lay on the SSHD to
    prove that a person represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    That the burden of proof lies on the SSHD has recently been accepted by
    the Inner House of the Court of Session in SA v SSHD  [2018]  CSIH  28.
    The person concerned must also be a present threat,  Orphanopoulos  and
    Oliveri v Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart, [2004] ECR  1999  and  previous
    convictions are relevant:

         "Only  insofar  as  the  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  that
         conviction are evidence of personal conduct constituting a  present
         threat to the requirements of public policy".

    It is also relevant to note that in the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department and Straszewski  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1245  Moore-Bick  LJ  at
    paragraph 13 confirmed  that  exceptions  to  the  permanent  right  of
    residence based on public policy are construed restrictively  and  that
    public revulsion is not generally relevant to decisions to deport under
    EU law.

66.  In  Goralczyk [2018] CSIH 60 at paragraph 22:

         "22. Moore-Bick LJ's expectation that  there  should  be  stringent
             restrictions on a Member State's  ability  to  remove  an  EEA
             national, including a 'foreign criminal', who has acquired the
             right to reside in the United Kingdom  is  borne  out  by  the
             terms of the 2006 Regulations. In particular,  a  decision  to
             deport an EEA national with a permanent right of residence may
             not be taken except on serious grounds  of  public  policy  or
             public security: regulation 21(3). Regard has to be had to the
             word 'serious', a point made by Mr Caskie when explaining  the
             effect of the 2006 Regulations as  being  to  establish  three
             levels of rights and consequent degrees of protection  against
             removal. A decision to remove a person who has resided in  the
             United Kingdom for less than  five  years  may  be  taken  'on
             grounds of public policy' but a decision to  remove  a  person
             who has resided in the United Kingdom for more than five years
             cannot be taken 'except on serious grounds of public  policy'.
             It follows that 'serious grounds' of public policy  must  mean
             something different from "grounds" of public  policy,  and  it
             follows from that that the decision-maker must  identify  just
             what the relevant grounds are and then  evaluate  them  as  to
             their seriousness. Moreover, a relevant decision must be taken
             in accordance with the principles set out in regulation 21(5).
             Finally, in terms of regulation 21(6), before  taking  such  a
             decision   the   decision-maker   must   take   into   account
             considerations such as the age, state of  health,  family  and
             economic situation of the person, his length of  residence  in
             the United Kingdom and  the  extent  of  his  links  with  his
             country of origin".

67.  In his decision, the FTT J was  plainly  aware  that  the  decision  to
    deport the appellant may not be taken  except  on  serious  grounds  of
    public policy or security and that as a consequence he was to  identify
    those relevant factors and evaluate them as to  their  seriousness.  He
    properly analysed the offences in detail at paragraph 14 -  21  of  his
    decision.

68.  Whilst observing  that  a  person's  previous  convictions  do  not  in
    themselves justify the decision to deport, he went on to state that "it
    is necessary to consider these matters when considering the wider tests
    to be applied" (at [14]).

69.  In carrying out his assessment, in my judgement the FtTJ  properly  had
    regard to the offences themselves and undertook an analysis of them  in
    some detail as set out at paragraphs 14  -  21.  In  that  analysis  he
    referred to the index offence by reference to the  sentencing  remarks,
    the circumstances of the offence themselves  and  the  appellant's  own
    conduct and circumstances (at [15] - [17)). His assessment was that the
    offences were very serious and at [18]  went  on  to  set  out  why  he
    considered that to be the case.  At  [19]  the  FTT  J  considered  the
    fundamental interests of society, which he stated included  maintaining
    public order, protecting the public and rights and freedom  of  others,
    preventing crime, preventing antisocial behaviour and persistent  crime
    and preventing social harm where offending leads to wider societal harm
    and against that background made an assessment of the  seriousness  and
    the consequences of such offending.

70.  It is also right to observe that the FtTJ expressly took  into  account
    that any reoffending by the appellant would present a threat  affecting
    one or more of those fundamental interests of  society  which  he  then
    went on to address during  his  judgement  stating  "the  risk  of  him
    reoffending, particularly in relation to offences of this nature and/or
    seriousness, is therefore a matter  of  fundamental  importance  in  my
    consideration of this matter" (at 20]).  This  not  only  included  the
    index offences but also the earlier offences committed as a juvenile.

71.  Against that background, the FtTJ's self-directions  and  his  analysis
    of the issues he was required to consider do not demonstrate in my view
    any conflation of the tests he was required to apply. I do not find the
    ground one is made out.

72.  Turning to the remaining grounds, at paragraph 3 it is  submitted  that
    the FtTJ identified real concerns as to the appellant's  likelihood  of
    reoffending at paragraph 20 - 28 but erred in law by failing to  engage
    with them  and  finding  that  the  appellant's  commitment  to  change
    addressed them. The grounds go on to say, "it is respectfully submitted
    that it does not  and  that  these  concerns  remain  outstanding".  At
    paragraph 8, the grounds also assert that it was too soon to find  that
    the appellant was a changed character and at paragraph 7 it is asserted
    that the FtTJ erred in law  in  minimising  his  earlier  offending  by
    stating that he was a youth (by reference to paragraph 21 and 24).

73.  Insofar as those grounds could  be  read  as  challenging  the  judge's
    assessment of risk, the FtTJJ's consideration of the  factors  relevant
    to the risk of reoffending demonstrate  that  he  undertook  a  careful
    assessment of all the relevant issues. Between paragraphs  [21  -  28],
    the FtTJ undertook an analysis of  the  issues  which  plainly  counted
    against the appellant. As  summarised  in  the  earlier  part  of  this
    decision those findings related to his previous convictions and that in
    the appellant's case the court had imposed interventions to assist  him
    by way of non-custodial sentences, but none had been successful.

74.  Whilst paragraph 7 of the grounds referred to the FtTJ  minimising  the
    appellant's early  offending  by  reference  to  his  age,  this  is  a
    criticism which is not justified. On a careful reading of the  decision
    the FtTJ's analysis took into account his age but this should  be  read
    alongside the other negative features such as his previous  failure  to
    engage with non-custodial sentences  offered  to  him  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 21 but also in the light of the reasoning  at  [42].The  FtTJ
    also identified at paragraphs  22  -  25  that  in  the  light  of  his
    assessment of the evidence of the appellant he would not  receive  much
    by way of family support and also attach little weight to the help  his
    family could provide in obtaining employment.

75.  Having identified the matters that counted against  the  appellant,  he
    turned to the other relevant factors relating to  the  issue  of  risk.
    Those were the ones identified in the OASY's  report  relating  to  his
    ability to change, his motivation, the work undertaken to  bring  about
    the change necessary and the success of the intervention and  the  work
    undertaken to address his drug and alcohol dependency which had  formed
    the backdrop to his offending and level of cooperation demonstrated.

76.  The FtTJ  at  [48]  observed  that  the  case  presented  a  "difficult
    balancing exercise" which  was  supported  by  the  analysis  that  was
    undertaken. This does not mean, as the grounds assert, that  he  failed
    to address  those,  the  FtTJ  did.  He  reached  the  conclusion  that
    notwithstanding the negative features identified, they were  outweighed
    by  the  positive  factors.  It  is  plain  that  the  judge   attached
    significant weight to the appellant's evidence and  the  FtTJ  had  the
    advantage of hearing the appellant give evidence and for that to be the
    subject of cross-examination and therefore was in the position to  make
    an assessment of the appellant's evidence when seen in  context.  I  do
    not accept the submission made by Miss Petterson that the  FtTJ  failed
    to exercise caution in accepting his evidence. In fact,  the  FtTJ  was
    very alive to the fact that he was  required  to  exercise  caution  in
    accepting evidence from someone in the position of  the  appellant  who
    was facing deportation (see [36]). However, it was open to the FtTJ  to
    place weight upon the appellant's evidence. He gave reasons as  to  why
    he found him to be "genuinely contrite" and also set out the  appellant
    had proffered evidence which was adverse to him which  in  the  judge's
    view  provided  additional  credibility  to  what  he  described  as  a
    "remarkably honest and impressive performance in evidence". In my view,
    the FtTJ was  entitled  to  place  this  evidence  alongside  the  more
    independent and potentially  corroborative  evidence  from  the  prison
    staff, the probation officer and the courses undertaken.

77.   As  to  paragraph  4  of  the  grounds  it  asserts  that  it   is   a
    "contradiction" in the FtTJ's findings concerning the  appellant  as  a
    "reformed character". The grounds point  out  that  at  [21)  the  FtTJ
    referred to  the  previous  convictions  going  towards  the  level  of
    entrenchment of his poor behaviour and that the appeal had been allowed
    based on his believed changed character. I accept the  submission  made
    by Mr Craggs that when the decision is read as  a  whole  there  is  no
    contradiction the judge's analysis. At [21]  the  FtTJ  considered  the
    early convictions as a juvenile and that this went "towards" the  level
    of entrenchment behaviour. It was open  to  the  judge  to  assess  his
    recent behaviour and conduct in the light of that and to consider  that
    he demonstrated positive  change  which  was  supported  by  the  other
    evidence. The FtTJ did not make a finding that the appellant had  as  a
    matter-of-fact entrenched behaviour but hat the  previous  conduct  was
    relevant in assessing the present risk.

78.  The submissions made on behalf of the respondent  as  set  out  in  the
    grounds as drafted and not clearly set  out.  By  way  of  example,  at
    paragraph 5, there is reference to  the  FtTJ  erring  in  law  by  not
    putting weight on the negative aspects of the probation officers report
    which had referred to 5 adjudications.  Paragraph  5  does  not  proper
    identify how the FtTJ made an  error  of  law  and  fails  to  properly
    explain or particularise that submission. Ms  Petterson,  in  her  oral
    submissions put those paragraphs in the context of her submission  that
    the FtTJ failed  to  properly  considered  the  OASY's  report  in  his
    analysis of risk. However, the FtTJ was plainly aware of  the  contents
    of the OASY's report and at [43] expressly referred to the  conclusions
    reached in April 2018 as to the medium risk of reoffending and  a  high
    risk to the public if he did so. He was equally aware and taken account
    of the extent of the appellant's criminality. In  the  FtTJ's  analysis
    considered that risk assessment in the context  of  when  it  was  made
    (April 2018) and in the light of the more recent evidence  relevant  to
    risk, which included the evidence  of  his  current  probation  officer
    given in May 2019. The effect of  the  FtTJ's  reasoning  was  that  he
    departed from the assessment of the probation  officer  in  the  OASY's
    report for the reasons set out at paragraphs [43-44].

79.  The courts have recognised that an OASys Report is a document  compiled
    by a trained Probation Officer and cannot be lightly dismissed (see  AM
    v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 163 and the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Vasconcelos  [2013]  UKUT
    06378).  However, it is  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  depart  from  the
    findings of such a report if there is evidence upon which to do so  and
    reasons are given. The FtTJ did give  reasons  for  doing  so  and  the
    weight to be attached to that assessment was a matter for the judge. It
    was open the judge to place  weight  on  the  more  recent  documentary
    evidence of probation officer and based on the more recent evidence set
    out in the courses undertaken which were  relevant  to  addressing  the
    risks identified. He was also entitled  to  reach  the  view  that  the
    hearing before him had taken place 17 months  after  the  date  of  the
    OASY's report. Contrary to the grounds, the FtTJ did take into  account
    the evidence of the adjudications but was entitled to place  weight  on
    the evidence of probation officer  that  they  were  not  "particularly
    concerning. On the face of it  did  demonstrate  misbehaviour  but  the
    judge was also entitled to take into account that the  latest  incident
    was said to have taken place in August 2018 and  since  that  time  the
    appellant  had  engaged  in  successful  work  that  was  relevant   to
    minimising the risks to an acceptable level as identified.

80.  As Mr Craggs submitted, the judge found as a fact  that  the  appellant
    had spent the first year  in  prison  reflecting  and  processing  what
    occurred and had embarked on rehabilitative work.  The  FtTJ  therefore
    properly considered the context of the report but did so in the context
    of the more recent evidence of the probation officer and those who  had
    worked with the appellant. It does not appear that  this  evidence  was
    the subject of challenge.

81.  The submission made at paragraph 8 is that it was too soon to find  the
    appellant was a changed man  is  not  a  submission  that  is  properly
    characterised as "an error of law". This is simply a disagreement  with
    the finding of fact reached by the judge which  was  open  to  him.  Ms
    Petterson put the submission on a different footing and  on  the  basis
    that the appellant was in custody and therefore there was  no  evidence
    as to how we would behave in the "real world". Of  course,  someone  in
    the position of the appellant in custody would not have the opportunity
    to  demonstrate  any  conduct  either  positive  or  negative  in   the
    community. However, the decision to deport the appellant  was  made  by
    the respondent and in  consequence  of  that  decision,  the  FtTJ  was
    required to carry out an assessment based on the evidence as it was  at
    the date of the hearing. This is what  the  FtTJ  did  concluding  that
    whilst he had not been released, he had  demonstrated  sufficient  work
    relating to his previous offending and  that  the  assessment  of  risk
    which demonstrated clear evidence of change and motivation  and  desire
    to change therefore minimised the identified  risks  to  an  acceptable
    level. In his skeleton argument Mr Craggs drew a comparison between the
    instant case and matters heard by the  parole  board,  where  offending
    behaviour work is a highly influential factor in awarding a progressive
    move and that its importance cannot be overstated and  that  successful
    completion of such work is a major indicator that an individual is less
    likely to  reoffend  if  released.  That  seems  to  me  to  be  useful
    comparison.

82.  There is no error as asserted in paragraph 11 of the grounds. The  FtTJ
    plainly acknowledged that the appellant's past conduct was a factor  in
    the assessment of future risk and this was set out as a negative factor
    that was placed in the balance.

83.  Paragraph 9 of the grounds also does not demonstrate any error of  law.
    The FtTJ accurately set out the nature of the drugs  offences  and  the
    FtTJ took into account the significant impact of such offences  on  the
    wider public (see [18]).

84.  In summary, the public policy grounds for removal are an  exception  to
    the fundamental principles of the free exercise of  EU  rights  and  as
    such an EU citizen should not be expelled  as  a  deterrent  to  others
    without the personal conduct of the person  concerned  giving  rise  to
    consider that he will commit other offences that are against the public
    policy of the state.  Furthermore, it is accepted and  acknowledged  by
    both advocates that the appellant's deportation could not be  justified
    simply on the basis of his previous criminal conviction, even of such a
    serious nature as the offences carried out by this appellant   and  the
    imposition of the lengthy sentence he received.  This  is  because  the
    legal regime for deporting EU criminals is different and  can  properly
    described as more restrictive than that for foreign national  criminals
    under the UK Borders  Act  2007.   It  must  be  established  that  the
    Appellant represents "a genuine, present or sufficiently serious threat
    affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society".   In  this
    context the FtTJ properly considered the future risk of reoffending and
    did so in the light of all the evidence before him. As the  deportation
    decision cannot be founded upon a previous history of offending  alone,
    and as the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct
    of the person concerned, so that deterrence of others  plays  no  part,
    for this appellant to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to public policy, there must be a real and  sufficiently
    serious threat that he would re-offend.

85.  As set out in the decision of SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA  Civ  1245
    at paragraph [25],  it  required  an  evaluation  to  be  made  of  the
    likelihood  that  a  person  concerned  would  offend  again  and   the
    consequences if he did so.  In addition, the need for  the  conduct  of
    the person concerned to represent a "sufficiently  serious"  threat  to
    one of the fundamental interests of society required the decision maker
    to balance the risk of future harm against the need to give  effect  to
    the right of free movement. This was the evaluation carried out by  the
    FtTJ.

86.  I remind myself I can only interfere with the decision of  a  judge  if
    it has been demonstrated that there was an error of  law  and  in  this
    case, the judge had the opportunity to hear the oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and for this to be the subject of cross-examination.

87.  As set out in the well-known case of Piglowska v Piglowski [1999]  UKHL
    27, Lord Hoffmann said this:

         "...the appellate court must bear in mind the advantage  which  the
         first instance judge had  in  seeing  the  parties  and  the  other
         witnesses. This is well understood on questions of credibility  and
         findings of primary fact. But it goes further than that. It applies
         also to the judge's evaluation of those facts. ..."

    Then there is a quotation from his own decision in Biogen Inc v  Medeva
    Ltd [1997]

         "The need for appellate caution  in  reversing  the  trial  judge's
         evaluation of the facts is based upon much more solid grounds  than
         professional courtesy. It is because  specific  findings  of  fact,
         even by the most meticulous judge,  are  inherently  an  incomplete
         statement of the impression which was made upon him by the  primary
         evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are  always  surrounded  by  a
         penumbra of imprecision as  to  emphasis,  relative  weight,  minor
         qualification and nuance ... of which  time  and  language  do  not
         permit exact expression, but which may play an  important  part  in
         the judge's overall evaluation."

88.  As stated in  the  decision  of  Straszewski,  in  any  given  case  an
    evaluative exercise of this kind may admit of more than one answer.  If
    so, provided all the appropriate factors have been taken into  account,
    the decision cannot be impugned unless it is perverse or irrational, in
    a sense of falling outside the range of permissible decisions.  It  has
    not been advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State that the decision
    of the judge or his findings of fact were either irrational or perverse
    and in light of  the  foregoing,  the  judge  properly  considered  the
    appropriate factors and made findings of fact  based  on  the  evidence
    before him.

89.   Even  if  the  conduct  did  represent  a  genuine  and   present   in
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, before taking a relevant decision the  decision-maker  must
    on to take into account the other  relevant  characteristics  including
    age, length of residence social and cultural  integration  in  the  UK,
    extent of links with  the  country  of  origin  therefore  to  consider
    whether it  is  proportionate  to  proceed  with  removal  in  all  the
    circumstances and whether it is the least onerous method of achieving a
    legitimate  aim  (  and  see  the  matters  set  out  in  Schedule  1).
    Specifically, the Tribunal must  consider  the  relative  prospects  of
    rehabilitation, that  is  ceasing  to  commit  crime  when  considering
    whether an offender should be deported  (see  SSHD  v  Dumliauskas  and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 145. The FtTJ concluded in the alternative  that
    he  was  not  satisfied  that  his   deportation   was   justified   or
    proportionate based on the factors he had identified on the appellant's
    side of the balance which included  his  length  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, the lack of connection that he had with Lithuanian, his
    commitment to change, the evidence concerning the steps  taken  towards
    rehabilitation and the impressive evidence that he had given as to  his
    reform. Those were findings that were  open  to  him  to  make  on  the
    evidence that was before him.

90.  The judge indicated  that  he  found  the  appeal  before  presented  a
    "difficult balancing exercise" (at [48]) and within  his  decision  set
    out clearly the factors that weighed against and for the appellant when
    making  his  overall  assessment.  It  is  plain   from   reading   the
    determination that he found the Appellant's oral evidence  to  be  both
    credible and persuasive and along with  the  documents  that  had  been
    produced concerning his efforts to reform, reached a decision that  was
    open to him on the evidence.  It may well be that this was not the only
    outcome possible on the facts in this particular appeal but this  judge
    directed himself correctly in law and  that  his  conclusion,  even  if
    properly characterised as one that might be thought to  be  a  generous
    one, does not disclose any legal error.



Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
    allow the appeal stands.


Signed                              Dated: 21/1/20

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

