


                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal                    Appeal Number: DA/00126/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On Wednesday 19th February 2014        |On 11th March 2014       |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before


                               Mr Justice Jay
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

                                   Between

                             MR BRIAN BEANGSTROM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms E King, Counsel
For the Respondent:      Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction
   1. This is the resumed hearing of the appeal against the decision of  the
      Secretary of State to deport the Appellant.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
      allowed the appeal, but the case falls to be re-determined  by  us  in
      the circumstances which have arisen.


   2. On 10th December 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede found two errors  of
      law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision. Those  errors  are  closely
      related. The first error is that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
      consider whether the Appellant was able to meet  the  requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules before proceeding to  address  the  question  of
      exceptional circumstances: it therefore appears that its  decision  on
      Article 8 of the Convention was a free-standing conclusion.  Secondly,
      the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for concluding
      that the Appellant's circumstances  were  exceptional  such  that  his
      right to family and private life outweighed  the  public  interest  in
      favour of deportation.

   3. This Determination should be read in conjunction with  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge's Kebede's decision promulgated on 10th December 2013, a copy of
      which is annexed at Appendix A.


Essential Factual Background

   4. Mr Brian Beangstrom was born in Durban, South Africa on  4th  December
      1951. His original name was Conway Ray Abrahams. He was adopted by  Mr
      and Mrs Dickinson in 1955. His adoptive mother (n�e Mackay)  was  born
      on 10th January 1924 of British parents in  Mombasa,  Kenya.  We  have
      seen a copy of her birth certificate which bears this out. Mr and  Mrs
      Dickinson  divorced  and  Mrs  Dickinson  then   married   Mr   Robert
      Beangstrom, date of birth 28th May 1931. The Appellant was adopted  by
      the Beangstroms on 15th October 1957.


   5. Mr Beangstrom claims first to have come to this  country  in  1978  or
      1979 when he was granted indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a
      British national. He returned to South Africa in 1987, and  claims  to
      have re-entered the UK in October  1998.  The  Appellant's  assertion,
      which the First-tier Tribunal appears to have  accepted,  is  that  he
      entered the UK on that occasion on an ancestral visa, entitling him to
      four years' leave to enter. This was  stamped  on  his  South  African
      passport. The Secretary of State has no record of this,  although  she
      accepts that the status of the Appellant's  adoptive  mother  entitled
      him to an ancestral visa.

   6. According to the questionnaire which he completed on 29th  June  2012,
      Mr Beangstrom 'applied to stay longer' when his original leave expired
      in  2004  or  2005.  Again,  the  Appellant  has  no  record  of  this
      application. In any event, his original leave expired in 2002 or 2003.



   7. The Respondent's Notice of Intention to  Deport  records,  'you  state
      that you applied for  naturalisation  in  2004/5  and  that  this  was
      granted'. Mr Beangstrom disputes that he said this, although his  case
      is that in 2009 his South African passport and 'naturalisation papers'
      (we will be returning to this latter point) were stolen in Brighton. A
      pro forma letter from the Brighton police  vouches  that  a  crime  of
      unspecified nature was  reported  to  them.  It  is  unclear  why  the
      Appellant's 'naturalisation papers' were on his person, and it is also
      unclear why the Appellant has failed to obtain evidence from the South
      African Embassy corroborating his case that  his  passport  issued  in
      2009 was to replace a passport which  had  been  stolen  earlier  that
      year.

   8. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that  Mr  Beangstrom's
      son, Brett (d.o.b. 5th May 1985) is  now  a  British  citizen,  having
      married a British spouse, and that through him the Appellant  has  two
      grandsons, Angelo, born  in  April  2006,  and  Bjorn,  born  on  18th
      December  2013  (evidently,  a  post-decision  fact).  They  lived  in
      Newquay, Cornwall, but we were told that fairly recently they moved to
      the Bournemouth area to be with other close family members.

   9. Mr Beangstrom also has a step-son, Giovanni Mossa (d.o.b.  11th  April
      1980), who is also a British citizen and whom he regards and treats as
      his son. Through Giovanni the Appellant  has  a  granddaughter,  Vega,
      born in 2011. They live in Boscombe, Bournemouth.

  10. The First-tier Tribunal referred to the fact that  Mr  Beangstrom  and
      his two sons gave oral evidence  which  was  robustly  cross-examined.
      However, that tribunal undertook no analysis as to the strength of the
      relationships, save to observe that these were 'strong'; and the sons'
      letters of support in the  bundle  are  quite  general  and  certainly
      lacking in much particularity.

  11. Mr Beangstrom's partner is Ms Elisabeth Day who holds both French  and
      British citizenship. Although it was clear to the First-tier  Tribunal
      that Ms Day was supporting the Appellant whilst he was imprisoned,  it
      also noted:

         'The Pressure of the  potential  deportation  has  put  significant
         pressure on the relationship to such an extent that Ms Day has  had
         an emotional breakdown  and  is  currently  recuperating  with  her
         parents in France before  returning  [to]  the  United  Kingdom  to
         complete her Masters degree.'

  12. The circumstances relating to the Appellant's criminal conviction  may
      be summarised as follows. On 30th November 2011 he  was  convicted  at
      the City of London Magistrates' Court on his guilty plea of conspiracy
      to supply over 140 kgs of cannabis. On 3rd May 2012 he  was  sentenced
      at the Central Criminal Court by HHJ Pontius to a term of  18  months'
      imprisonment. His pre-sentence report assessed him as being at  a  low
      risk of re-offending.


The Immigration Rules


  13. The Immigration Rules applicable to Mr Beangstrom's case are those set
      out in paragraphs 396-399B of HC 395, which provide as follows:
         '396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall
         be that the public interest requires  deportation.  It  is  in  the
         public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make  a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007.
         397. A deportation order will not be made if the  person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Where
         deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is outweighed.

      Deportation and Article 8

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and
         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
         which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
         least 4 years;
         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
         which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
         than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good because, in the view of the Secretary of State, their
         offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender
         who shows a particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of
         State in assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399
         or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only be in exceptional
         circumstances that the public interest in deportation will be
         outweighed by other factors.
         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
      if -
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
         (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
         (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7
         years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision;
         and in either case
         (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK;
         and
         (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for the
         child in the UK; or

         (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK, or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and
         (i) the person has lived in the UK with valid leave continuously
         for at least the 15 years immediately preceding the date of the
         immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment); and
         (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
         partner continuing outside the UK.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -
         (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
         years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
         (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties
         (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which he
         would have to go if required to leave the UK; or
         (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half
         of his life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding the
         date of the immigration decision (discounting any period of
         imprisonment) and he has no ties (including social, cultural or
         family) with the country to which he would have to go if required
         to leave the UK.
         399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  limited  leave  may  be
         granted for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such  leave  shall  be
         given subject to such conditions as the Secretary  of  State  deems
         appropriate. Where a person  who  has  previously  been  granted  a
         period of leave under paragraph 399B would  not  fall  for  refusal
         under paragraph 322(1C), indefinite leave to remain may be granted.


Relevant Jurisprudence
  14. We need to refer to two Court of Appeal authorities.


  15. In SS(Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 550, which was a decision on the  old  Rules,  the  Court  of
      Appeal was concerned with the deportation of a  foreign  national  who
      had remained in the UK without  leave,  and  then  married  a  British
      citizen with whom he now has a  child.  Laws  LJ  emphasised  what  he
      characterised  as  the  powerful  public   interest   in   favour   of
      deportation, and the need - in assessing proportionality - to identify
      a strong claim under Article 8 if the private and family rights of the
      putative deportee are to prevail.

  16. In MF(Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1192,  a  different  constitution  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
      addressed the new Rules, for the avoidance of doubt  the  Rules  cited
      under  paragraph  13  above.  The  issues  were  whether  those  Rules
      constituted a complete code, whether they were  Strasbourg  compliant,
      and the meaning of 'exceptional circumstances' in paragraph  398.  The
      decision of the Court of Appeal Lord Dyson MR presiding, was that  the
      new  Rules  did  constitute  a  complete  code  which  was  Strasbourg
      compliant, and that the test was not 'exceptionality'  but  -  in  the
      case of a foreign criminal to whom paragraphs 399  and  399A  did  not
      apply - the need to identify  'very  compelling  reasons'  before  the
      public interest in favour of deportation did not prevail. The need for
      the existence of such reasons was  underlined  in  a  case  where  any
      family life was 'precarious'.



Evidence as to the Appellant's Status in the UK

  17. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the Appellant entered the UK on
      an ancestry visa in October 1998, that he has not  returned  to  South
      Africa since then, and that he 'has now been in the United Kingdom for
      15 years' (see paragraph 18 of the Determination).


  18. Mr Melvin sought to re-open the finding that  the  Appellant  came  to
      this country on an ancestral visa. We do not consider that it was open
      to him to do so, but we heard  further  evidence  from  the  Appellant
      regarding his immigration status at all material times. Mr  Beangstrom
      told us that back in 1998 an agent  acting  for  him  applied  to  the
      British consulate in Durban for an ancestry visa on the basis that the
      father of his adoptive mother was a British citizen born in the UK. He
      paid approximately 500 rand for the agent's services, and then flew to
      this country, probably on a KLM flight, although he could  not  recall
      precisely. The visa occupied a full page  of  his  passport,  and  was
      valid for 4, possibly 5 years.

  19. Upon the expiry of the ancestry visa, although he could not be precise
      about the date, the Appellant told us that he went to the Home  Office
      in order to apply for what he called 'naturalisation'. He was told  to
      go  to  an  office  in  Hackney,  where  he  formally  applied  for  a
      certificate of naturalisation. He could not recall ever  receiving  an
      acknowledgement of his application, still less the outcome of  it.  In
      2009 he was mugged in Brighton and  his  South  African  passport  was
      stolen. The Appellant told us that his naturalisation application form
      was also stolen. He confirmed that he has never applied for a  British
      passport, and he told us that in 2009 or 2010 he instructed  an  agent
      to obtain a visa in order to travel to France.

  20. We asked Ms King to explain to us the basis on which the Appellant was
      entitled to an ancestry visa in 1998. She drew our  attention  to  the
      provisions of paragraph 186 of the Immigration Rules (it  was  unclear
      whether she was referring to the Rules extant in 1998, or the  current
      Rules, but we strongly doubt whether anything  turns  on  this),  from
      which it became apparent that the Appellant's entitlement was based on
      showing that the father of his adoptive mother was born in the UK. The
      Appellant told us that he was, and if the copy  birth  certificate  we
      have seen is genuine we believe that it is extremely likely that  this
      was the case. It follows that the Appellant has advanced  an  entirely
      plausible case that he was entitled to, and obtained, an ancestry visa
      in 1998, and that he entered the UK on the basis of it. That  case  is
      not undermined by the Secretary of State's assertion that she  has  no
      record of an application being made in the Appellant's name  in  1998.
      In the absence of clear  evidence  to  the  effect  that  the  British
      Embassy's records in Durban were computerised back in 1998,  and  that
      computer files have been retained, we cannot place much weight on this
      point in the circumstances of this case. Accordingly, we see no reason
      to upset the finding of the First-tier Tribunal on this issue.

  21. However, it is also clear that the Appellant's leave to remain in this
      country was not extended by the Secretary of State upon the expiry  of
      the ancestry visa in 2002 or 2003. The highest the Appellant now  puts
      the case is that he applied for 'naturalisation' on a date  he  cannot
      now remember; it is not his case that he was granted it, or (as he put
      the matter) that he 'received any return on it'.  In  fact,  the  only
      application he could have made at that stage  was  for  ILR,  but  the
      Appellant may not have understood the finer points of this  issue.  We
      think it rather odd that the application form for 'naturalisation', or
      for whatever it was, was stolen in 2009 (why would  the  Appellant  be
      carrying around the application form, we ask rhetorically), and it  is
      also an unsatisfactory feature of  the  evidence  that  the  Appellant
      apparently did nothing to chase up the application over many years.

  22. In our view, even if, which  we  doubt,  the  Appellant  did  make  an
      application for ILR back in 2002 or 2003, in the sense that he sent  a
      form into the Home Office or some other agency, that in  itself  would
      fail to demonstrate that he was granted any leave  or  entitlement  to
      remain in this country at any stage.  Merely  sending  in  a  form  is
      insufficient.

  23. Ms King urged us to consider the case on the basis that her client was
      clearly entitled to ILR upon the expiry of his ancestral visa, and  so
      it may safely be inferred on the balance of probabilities both that he
      applied for and received an extension of his leave.  We  disagree;  we
      have to consider the issue on the basis of the evidence the  Appellant
      gave us, not on the basis of a  generalised  appeal  to  plausibility,
      abstracted from the precise circumstances of this Appellant.  Ms  King
      also invoked the provisions of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971,
      but in our view it would be an exercise  in  speculation  to  conclude
      that a valid application for ILR was received and acknowledged by  the
      Home Office within the currency of any extant leave; and so we do not.
      Finally, Ms King submitted in the alternative that her  client  should
      be treated as occupying some sort of 'half-way house' in that  he  was
      clearly entitled to an extension of his leave regardless of whether he
      was actually granted it. But in  our  view  the  issue  of  status  is
      binary, and cannot be glossed over in this suggested manner.

  24. It follows that the Appellant has been an over-stayer in the UK at all
      material times since 2002 or 2003.


Private and Family Life

  25. We asked Mr Beangstrom to expand on the  nature  and  quality  of  his
      existing relationships with his sons, grandchildren  and  partner.  He
      told us that he is very close to his family,  communicates  with  them
      daily  by  phone  and/or  email,  and  that  he  gets  to   see   them
      approximately once per month. We heard nothing to indicate that  these
      are  other  than  'strong  family  ties'  (see  paragraph  19  of  the
      Determination), although  nothing  was  drawn  to  our  attention,  or
      appears to  have  been  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, suggesting emotional ties above and beyond  the  ties  which
      are prevalent in all close, well-functioning families.


  26. As for Ms Day, the position has not changed. She lives  with  a  close
      friend in Stoke Newington; the Appellant and Ms  Day  see  each  other
      once or twice a week;  the  relationship  is  'on  the  threads',  and
      contingent on the outcome of the current appeal.


The Appellant's Application that the Case  be  Remitted  to  the  First-Tier
Tribunal

  27. Ms King submitted that it would be unsatisfactory for this Tribunal to
      decide this appeal on  a  'half-baked'  basis  (our  formulation,  not
      hers), namely on the basis of some limited further evidence  from  the
      Appellant, and nothing more. The findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      would be in danger of acquiring  some  sort  of  hybrid  quality,  she
      argued, not merely as regards the primary facts  found  but  also  the
      evaluative conclusions to be drawn from them. Ms King argued that  the
      First-tier Tribunal had been best placed to assess the  witnesses  and
      to undertake the relevant evaluations, and that this  Tribunal  should
      do nothing to interfere with the findings made.


  28. We did not rule on Ms King's application at the  outset.  Our  purpose
      was to investigate how far we could fairly and properly proceed on the
      basis of asking further questions of clarification of  Mr  Beangstrom,
      without seeking to impugn or re-write the findings of fact made by the
      First-tier Tribunal. Our view was that if  we  were  to  come  to  the
      conclusion that it would be unfair to Mr Beansgstrom  to  decide  this
      appeal without remitting the case to the First-tier Tribunal, then  we
      would be obliged to accede to Ms King's application.

  29. In our judgment, having heard further evidence on a limited number  of
      issues, as recorded above, we have reached the clear  conclusion  that
      it would not be unfair to proceed to determine  this  appeal  at  this
      appellate level. The Appellant's additional evidence served to clarify
      his immigration status at all material  times,  and  in  our  view  no
      further evidence is required, or indeed could reasonably be  obtained.
      The First-tier Tribunal did not properly investigate the issue of  the
      lawfulness of the Appellant's remaining in  the  UK  at  all  material
      times, and we have now done so. As for the  private  and  family  life
      issues,  the  further  evidence  we  have  heard  does  not  serve  to
      contradict the findings made below; rather, it enables us to expand on
      them.


The Appellant's case on appeal

  30.  Ms  King  conceded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not   apply
      MF(Nigeria). Her first submission  was  that  this  omission  made  no
      difference to the outcome of her  client's  successful  appeal  before
      that tribunal because it was always made  clear  that  the  claim  was
      being made under Article 8 of the Convention, and outside the scope of
      the applicable Immigration Rules.  Furthermore,  and  approaching  the
      issue on that basis, the First-tier Tribunal clearly found that  there
      were exceptional circumstances  which  outweighed  the  strong  public
      interest in favour of deportation of foreign criminals. Her second and
      alternative submission was that, in the event that this Upper Tribunal
      undertakes the proportionality exercise for itself  in  the  light  of
      Court of Appeal guidance, the outcome should be  the  same.  In  other
      words, and paying appropriate regard  to  the  findings  of  fact  and
      evaluations made below, we should equally  conclude  that  the  public
      interest in favour of deportation  is  outweighed  by  the  compelling
      Article 8 features of the instant case.


  31. We are grateful for Ms King for her clear and sustained submissions on
      these issues, advanced both orally and in writing.


Our Findings and Conclusions

  32. We cannot accept Ms King's first submission.  In  effect,  it  was  an
      attempt by her to re-visit the error of law  decision  made  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Kebede (see Appendix A). We cannot do that, nor are  we
      disposed to.


  33. It follows that it is, and always has been  since  the  error  of  law
      decision  was  made,  for  this  Upper  Tribunal  to   undertake   the
      proportionality assessment merited  by  this  case  in  the  light  of
      binding authority from the Court of Appeal. We  do  so  on  the  basis
      previously foreshadowed: namely, we  have  regard  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's findings of fact; we may supplement those findings  to  the
      extent that the Appellant's further evidence throws light  upon  them;
      we may undertake our own evaluation of all of the available  evidence,
      drawing inferences to the extent that we may fairly  and  properly  do
      so.

  34. Our point of departure is to consider the Appellant's case within  the
      framework of the applicable Immigration Rules.

  35. Given that the Appellant was convicted of  an  offence  for  which  he
      received a sentence of imprisonment of between 12 months and 4  years,
      the first stage is to consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies.

  36. Paragraph 399(a) does not apply because the Appellant does not have  a
      child in the UK under the age of 18 years. Paragraph 399(b)  does  not
      apply because,  although  the  Respondent  concedes  the  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with Ms Day, the Appellant has  not  lived  in
      the UK with valid  leave  continuously  for  at  least  the  15  years
      immediately preceding the date of the decision, discounting any period
      of imprisonment.

  37. Paragraph 399A does not apply because the Appellant has not  lived  in
      the UK for at least 20 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
      immigration decision,  discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment.  If
      necessary, we would have been prepared to hold that the Appellant does
      not have any ties, including social, cultural  or  family  ties,  with
      South Africa.

  38. It follows that for the purposes of the Rules  the  issue  is  whether
      there are exceptional circumstances present in this case such that the
      public interest in deportation is outweighed. In view of the  decision
      of the Court  of  Appeal  in  MF(Algeria),  that  issue  needs  to  be
      reformulated in this way: are there very compelling  reasons,  related
      to the family and private life of the Appellant, such that  the  clear
      public interest in favour of deportation is outweighed?

  39. On the one hand, there is  a  strong  public  interest  in  favour  of
      deporting the Appellant as a foreign criminal. We adopt  the  approach
      of Laws LJ in MS(Algeria). We accept Ms King's  submission  that  'the
      public interest is not a fixity', although we would prefer  to  phrase
      it in terms of the public interest varying to some extent  to  reflect
      the circumstances of the offence and of the offending. Plainly,  there
      is a low risk of reoffending. Yet, the public interest  in  favour  of
      deportation does not dwindle to a correspondingly low level. This  was
      a serious offence, and although we take into  account  the  sentencing
      remarks  of  HHJ  Pontius  as  regards  the   Appellant's   level   of
      culpability, the public's clear revulsion in offending of this  nature
      needs to be recognised, as does the public interest in deterrence.

  40. On the other hand, the Appellant's Article 8 rights fall to be  placed
      in the balance. We accept that the Appellant's family ties are strong,
      and we do not seek to go behind the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  in
      any way. However, the context is important. The Appellant's  sons  are
      fully grown up and are no longer dependent on him. They  live  in  the
      Bournemouth area and there are visits on a monthly  basis.  We  accept
      that this is a warm, close-knit family with strong interpersonal ties,
      but we do not accept that there are any special or particular  factors
      in play which might elevate this case  above  the  norm.  Furthermore,
      contact by email, telephone and Skype, much of which takes place  now,
      can continue to take place  if  the  Appellant  is  removed  to  South
      Africa.

  41. The Appellant's relationship with Ms Day must also be  placed  in  the
      balance - in his favour -  but  it  is  not  a  particularly  powerful
      consideration in the circumstances of this  case.  Ms  Day  no  longer
      lives with the Appellant and they see each other only once or twice  a
      week. It is true that these deportation proceedings  must  be  placing
      considerable pressure on the relationship, and we were also told  that
      it would end if the Appellant were deported. Overall, this is a factor
      which carries some weight but probably  not  as  much  weight  as  the
      Appellant's family ties, which appear to be more robust.

  42. The issue for us is whether there exist very compelling reasons which,
      taken cumulatively, outweigh the strong public interest in  favour  of
      deportation of a foreign criminal whose status  in  the  UK  has  been
      precarious since 2002 or 2003. Our clear conclusion is that there  are
      not. We naturally  have  some  sympathy  for  the  Appellant,  and  we
      recognise the frankness of much of the evidence he gave  us.  However,
      his case under Article 8 of the Convention, viewed as  sympathetically
      as it is possible to do, is not sufficiently compelling to defeat  the
      case of the Secretary of State in upholding the strong public interest
      which Parliament has stated must be recognised.

  43. This appeal is therefore dismissed.











Signed
       Date


Mr Justice Jay
                                 APPENDIX A


                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: DA/00126/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision Promulgated        |
|On : 3 December 2013                 |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              BRIAN BEANGSTROM
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:      Ms E King, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb Solicitors




                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Beangstrom's  appeal
against a decision to deport him from the United Kingdom. For  the  purposes
of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary of State as the  respondent
and Mr Beangstrom as the appellant, reflecting their positions as they  were
in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of South Africa, born  on  5  December  1951.  He
claims to have first entered the United Kingdom in 1978 or 1979 when he  was
granted indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a British  national  and
to have left the United Kingdom on at least two occasions since  then,  most
recently in 1987. He claims to have returned to the United Kingdom  in  1998
on a four year ancestry visa and that  he  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
naturalisation in 2004 or 2005, but  had  his  passport  and  naturalisation
certificate stolen in a robbery in  2009.  However  the  respondent  had  no
records to support that claim.

On  30  November  2011  the  appellant  was  convicted  at  City  of  London
Magistrates Court for conspiracy to supply  a  class  B  controlled  drug  -
cannabis. On 3 May 2012 he was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment  and  on
7 June 2012 he was notified of his liability to  automatic  deportation.  He
responded to that notice on 3 July 2012 and enclosed a  statement  in  which
he claimed to have been threatened by his co-defendant who had links with  a
drugs cartel in South Africa. In response to  the  respondent's  enquiry  he
made a claim for asylum and was interviewed in  that  regard  on  31  August
2012. A deportation order was signed  on  9  January  2013  and  a  decision
subsequently made that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

The respondent, in making that decision, addressed the appellant's claim  to
fear persecution from his co-defendant who was also  facing  deportation  to
South Africa, but considered that he would not be  at  risk  on  return  and
that in any event there would be a sufficiency of  protection  available  to
him or he could  safely  relocate  to  another  part  of  the  country.  The
respondent then gave consideration to the immigration rules with respect  to
Article 8 of the ECHR, concluding that the appellant fell  within  paragraph
398(b), applicable to offences leading to  a  sentence  of  imprisonment  of
less than four years but at least twelve  months.  The  respondent  did  not
accept that paragraph 399(a) applied to the  appellant  since  his  son  and
stepson were adults. Neither was it accepted that paragraph 339(b)  applied,
although his relationship with his  partner  was  accepted  as  genuine  and
subsisting, since he had not been living in the United  Kingdom  with  valid
leave continuously  for  at  least  15  years  preceding  the  date  of  the
deportation  decision  and  it  was   not   considered   that   there   were
insurmountable obstacles to her accompanying him to  South  Africa.  It  was
not accepted that paragraph 399A applied, since he  had  not  lived  in  the
United Kingdom for 20 years and had failed to establish that he had no  ties
to South Africa. The respondent did not accept that there  were  exceptional
circumstances such that the appellant's right to family and/or private  life
outweighed the public  interest  in  his  deportation.  It  was  accordingly
concluded that his deportation would  not  breach  Article  8.  It  was  not
considered that the appellant's relationship with his  partner,  who  was  a
dual British/ French national,  would  benefit  him  under  The  Immigration
(European Economic Area)(Amendment) Regulations 2012.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 11 September 2013,  before  a  panel  consisting  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Morgan  and  Mr  G  F  Sandall.  The  panel  heard  from  the
appellant and his two sons and found their evidence  to  be  credible.  They
accepted that the appellant had previously lived in the United  Kingdom  for
almost ten years following his marriage to a British citizen,  that  he  had
on this occasion been in the United Kingdom for fifteen years  and  that  he
had entered on an ancestry visa. They accepted that he had no  close  family
in South Africa and that he had strong family ties to  the  United  Kingdom,
including his stepson Giovanni, an Italian citizen, who had a partner and  a
son, and his son Brett who was a British citizen  and  was  married  with  a
seven-year-old son. They also accepted that he was in a relationship with  a
French national who was at the time recuperating with her parents in  France
after  having  an  emotional  breakdown  as  a  result  of  the  deportation
proceedings.  The panel considered the part played by the appellant  in  the
importation from South Africa of cannabis, noting that his  involvement  was
at the lower end of the scale and taking account of the  sentencing  judge's
remarks.   They   concluded   that   the   appellant's    deportation    was
disproportionate and in breach of Article 8  and  they  accordingly  allowed
the appeal on human rights grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
following grounds: that the panel had erred by failing to make any  findings
on the immigration rules; and that they had  failed  to  apply  the  correct
approach to the question of "exceptional circumstances",  to  make  findings
on the establishment of family life, to give adequate weight to  the  public
interest and to identify any insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
family accompanying him back to South Africa.

Permission to appeal was  granted  on  24  October  2013,  with  respect  in
particular to the first ground.

 The appeal then came before me on 3 December  2013.  I  heard  submissions
from the parties on the error of law.

Mr Tufan submitted that the Tribunal had erred in law. There was nothing  in
the appellant's circumstances that was exceptional.  His  relationship  with
his grandchildren was not exceptional: there was no evidence  of  dependency
outside the  normal  emotional  ties.  This  was  not  in  the  category  of
exceptional  cases.  The  Tribunal  had  also  erred  by  relying  upon   RG
(Automatic deport Section 33(2) (a) exception) Nepal [2010] UKUT 273,  since
that decision had been overturned  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Gurung  v
Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  62  and  the
appeal subsequently re-made and dismissed by the Upper  Tribunal.  Mr  Tufan
relied on the case  of  PK  (Congo)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1500 in submitting that the Tribunal  had  failed
to consider the  three  relevant  facets  in  deportation  cases:  society's
revulsion at serious crimes; deterrence; and risk of re-offending.

Ms King submitted that whilst the immigration rules paragraphs 399 and  399A
should have been referred to, any error on  the  part  of  the  Tribunal  in
failing to do so was not material in the light of the two-stage approach  in
MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
1192 and also on the basis that it was  accepted  that  the  rules  did  not
apply. The rest of the grounds were re-arguing the  case.  The  question  of
exceptional family ties and insurmountable obstacles was not relevant  since
the Tribunal was concerned with private life rather than  family  life.  The
Tribunal had considered the risk of  re-offending  and  the  nature  of  the
offence, as well as the question of deterrence at  length  and  was  clearly
mindful of the public interest. The Tribunal concluded that the  appellant's
circumstances  were  exceptional,  when  looked  at  as  a  whole  and  when
considered cumulatively.

Mr Tufan, in response, submitted that although the Tribunal had referred  to
the question of deterrence, there was no  indication  in  the  determination
that it had analysed the matter.

Consideration and findings

In my view the Tribunal made material errors of law such that  its  decision
has to be set aside and re-made.

Ms King's response to the first ground of appeal was that any error  on  the
part of the Tribunal in failing to make  any  findings  on  the  immigration
rules was immaterial, given the two-stage approach in the  consideration  of
Article 8, which the Court of Appeal subsequently found in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  inevitably
involved the same consideration of proportionality. However it seems  to  me
that that is to take an overly simplistic view of the  matter.  In  omitting
an analysis of the appellant's ability to meet the immigration rules, it  is
far from clear how the Tribunal reached the decision that it  did.  Had  the
Tribunal simply moved on to a  consideration  of  Article  8  in  its  wider
context, in accordance with  the  two-stage  approach  taken  by  the  Upper
Tribunal in MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393  and  on  the
basis of an accepted inability to meet the rules, it is not at all  what  it
intended by its conclusion at paragraph  23  that  there  were  "exceptional
circumstances" in the appellant's case. On the basis of a proper  conclusion
that such circumstances existed, it was open to the Tribunal  to  find  that
the requirements of paragraph 397 and 398 of the rules had been met  and  to
allow the appeal on that basis. Yet that is not what they did. They did  not
provide any explanation as to how they were able to  conclude  (if  that  is
what they did) that the requirements of the rules had not been met, but  yet
go on to allow the appeal under the wider Article 8. Accordingly it  is  far
from clear how they reached  the  conclusion  that  they  did  and  in  that
respect they materially erred in law.

In any event it seems to me  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate
reasons for concluding that the appellant's circumstances  were  exceptional
such that his family and private life considerations outweighed  the  public
interest in deportation.  The  Tribunal's  approach  appears  to  have  been
largely that because of the circumstances of the  appellant's  offence,  his
limited culpability and the low risk of re-offending,  the  public  interest
in his deportation was not strong and thus  deportation  was  in  breach  of
Article 8 of the ECHR. However such an approach was not a complete  one  and
did not involve a full and proper  consideration  of  the  strength  of  his
family and private life ties. The facts, as accepted by the  Tribunal,  were
that the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for  fifteen  years,  that
he had two adult children and  two  grandchildren  and  that  he  was  in  a
relationship  with  his  British/French  partner.  There  was,  however,  no
analysis of the strength of the relationships other than a  conclusion  that
the family ties were strong: in fact the evidence before  the  Tribunal  was
that his relationship with his partner was under stress and  that  his  sons
and grandchildren lived in different cities with limited contact.  Similarly
there was no proper analysis of the appellant's  private  life  outside  his
family ties, other than his employment history and length  of  residence  in
the United Kingdom. Although the Tribunal accepted that he had  entered  the
United  Kingdom  on  an  ancestry  visa,  no  findings  were  made  on   his
immigration status after the expiry of that visa, which  was  said  to  have
been a four-year  one.  Clearly  the  question  of  the  lawfulness  of  his
residence in the United Kingdom was a material one in the  consideration  of
proportionality, in particular as that had been a matter relied upon by  the
respondent, yet no findings were made in that  regard.  Accordingly,  it  is
difficult to ascertain, on the findings made by the  Tribunal,  how  it  was
able to conclude that his family and private  life  ties  were  sufficiently
exceptional so as to justify a conclusion that his deportation would  be  in
breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

For all these reasons I find that the Tribunal's determination cannot  stand
and must be set aside. In view of the fact that it was not its  findings  of
fact as such that have been challenged, but rather what it  did  with  those
findings, I consider that it will simply be for the Upper Tribunal,  in  re-
making the decision, to undertake  its  own  proportionality  assessment  in
accordance with the guidance in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192. I do  not
agree with Ms King's submission that the appeal needs to be  fully  re-heard
but consider that it can proceed largely by way of further submissions  from
both parties. It will be  helpful  to  be  provided  with  further  evidence
relating to the appellant's current  circumstances,  in  particular  to  his
immigration status and his relationships, and to that extent, therefore,  it
may well be appropriate to hear limited oral evidence.

I make the following directions for the resumed hearing.

Directions


    (a) No later than ten days before the date of  the  next  hearing,  any
    additional documentary evidence relied upon by either party, including,
    where possible, evidence of the appellant's immigration status  in  the
    United Kingdom and evidence relating to subsisting relationships, to be
    filed with this Tribunal and served on the opposing party.
    (b) The appellant or his representatives are to file with the  Tribunal
    and serve upon the respondent a  consolidated,  indexed  and  paginated
    bundle containing all documentary evidence relied upon.
    (c) In respect of any witness who is to be called to give oral evidence
    there must be a witness statement drawn in sufficient detail  to  stand
    as evidence in chief filed  with  the  Tribunal  and  served  upon  the
    respondent.
    (d) The appellant's representatives are to file with the  Tribunal  and
    serve upon the other party a skeleton argument setting out all lines of
    argument to be pursued at the hearing.




                               Signed


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

