
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00121/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 May 2019                       |On 31 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                TOMAS VILKAS
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McTaggart, instructed by McCourt & Maguire
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr  Tomas  Vilkas,  is  a  national  of  Lithuania.   He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State on 18 January  2018  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him.  The decision is, because of his nationality, taken  under
    the provisions of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2016.  The regulation particularly relevant  to  the  decision  is  Reg
    27(5) which I do not need to set out: it was set out  in  full  by  the
    judge who dealt with his appeal and the grounds of appeal before me  do
    not specifically relate to the judge's application of that regulation.

 2. The appeal was heard on 12 February 2019 by Judge Gillespie in Belfast.
     He dismissed the appeal.  The grounds of appeal are that it was unfair
    for the judge to deal with the appeal on that occasion.  Two issues are
    raised.  The first is that it was wrong in law for the judge to proceed
    to deal with  and  determine  a  deportation  appeal  when  there  were
    extradition proceedings outstanding in relation to  the  appellant,  as
    indeed there were, and which I shall refer to in a moment.  The  second
    ground is that it was unfair for  the  judge  to  proceed  because  the
    appellant was represented newly by a firm of solicitors who had not had
    proper time to take instructions.

 3. So far as the extradition is concerned, the  position  is  as  follows.
    Extradition proceedings have been taken under a European arrest warrant
    in relation to this individual and a number of others  from  Lithuania.
    The Northern Ireland court system has before it  a  number  of  appeals
    against the extradition proceedings by Lithuanian nationals of whom the
    appellant is one.  They are being dealt with by Her Honour Judge  Smith
    in Belfast; she has so far  issued  two  intermediate  judgments.   The
    first  sought  specific  undertakings   or   indicated   that   certain
    undertakings would need to be given by  the  Lithuanian  government  in
    relation to prison conditions in Lithuania.  The second seeks  specific
    undertakings.  I am told by Mr McTaggart who appears on behalf  of  the
    appellant before me that the last set  of  undertakings  have  not,  at
    present been given.  Thus, so far as the  extradition  proceedings  are
    concerned, they are outstanding before the  Northern  Ireland  judicial
    system.  There is the possibility of a judicial review of Judge Smith's
    decision when it is eventually given but  the  extradition  proceedings
    have to be regarded as in progress and currently undetermined  for  the
    purposes of the proceedings in this Tribunal.  Those proceedings raise,
    of course, different matters from those to be considered by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.   Nevertheless,  if  the   challenge   to   the   extradition
    proceedings is successful it  is  unlikely  that  the  appellant  could
    properly be removed  to  Lithuania.   If,  however,  the  challenge  is
    unsuccessful,  the  appellant  might  be  able  to  resist  removal  to
    Lithuania on the basis of matters relating to his own circumstances.

 4. Why  are  there  extradition  proceedings  raised  by  Lithuania?   The
    position is as follows; and in looking at that issue I  shall  try  and
    summarise the little that is known of the appellant and his  movements.
    He was in Lithuania on 26 October 2012 - that is the last date given by
    him in oral evidence before the judge, on which he was convicted of  an
    offence in  Lithuania.   It  appears  that  on  that  occasion  he  was
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment in Lithuania  of,  in  total,  four
    years.  However, by December 2012, two months later he is  recorded  as
    entering the United Kingdom.  Nothing else is known  about  that  entry
    other than its approximate  date.   It  was,  however,  evidently  very
    shortly after his sentence in Lithuania and the position appears to  be
    that he managed to escape prison in Lithuania in order to come  to  the
    United Kingdom on that date.  Nothing then appears to  be  known  about
    him until there were proceedings in the Republic  of  Ireland  for  his
    extradition to Lithuania.  I  know  little  about  the  date  of  those
    proceedings other than  that  they  continued  for  some  time  in  the
    Republic, going as  far  as  the  Supreme  Court,  which  then  made  a
    reference to the Court of Justice  of  the  European  Communities;  and
    thereafter the final decision by the Supreme Court of the Republic  was
    issued on 5 December 2018.

 5. Those proceedings were  also  extradition  proceedings  raised  by  the
    government of Lithuania.  I do not know, and Mr McTaggart has not  told
    me, the circumstances under which the appellant was in the Republic  of
    Ireland during  the  course  of  those  proceedings.   However,  it  is
    apparent that if there were any provisions restricting his movement, he
    probably breached them because on 11 April 2017 he was  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  We know that  because  on  that  date  he  was  arrested  for
    possession of false documents, which he said later that he obtained  in
    order to work in the  United  Kingdom.   On  20  April  an  extradition
    warrant was signed against him in relation to his extradition from  the
    United Kingdom.  He has, I understand it, been in custody  ever  since.
    The false documents offence was dealt  with  by  a  separate  suspended
    sentence.

 6. So far as his presence in the United Kingdom is  concerned,  therefore,
    all that is known is that he was here for at least part of one  day  in
    December 2012 and that he was here on 11 April 2017.  There is, so  far
    as Mr McTaggart has been able to tell me,  no  other  evidence  of  his
    presence in the United Kingdom except in custody.  His criminal  record
    shows, apart from the offences in Lithuania, apparently a breach of the
    Republic's conditions, under which he was kept pending his  extradition
    proceedings there; and  false  documentation  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There is also what appears to be a persistent  difficulty  in  that  he
    does not receive, or claims not to have received, official notices sent
    to him  in  custody:  that  indeed  is  part  of  the  history  of  the
    proceedings before Judge Gillespie in relation to the appeal.

 7. So far as  the  United  Kingdom  is  concerned  however,  he  has  been
    throughout, in what may be called a rather  intermittent  way,  he  has
    been represented by solicitors.  The position is that  the  deportation
    proceedings with which Judge Gillespie was  concerned  were  originally
    listed for hearing in July  2018.   At  that  time  Mr  McTaggart,  who
    appears before me today representing him,  sought  an  adjournment:  on
    that occasion  Mr  Vilkas  was  represented  by  Rafferty  and  Donaghy
    Solicitors.  There were further hearings, and as I have  said  some  of
    them were affected by claims that notices had not  arrived.   When  the
    hearing was listed for 12 February 2019 a Notice of Hearing was sent on
    2 November 2018 to the appellant in custody; the appellant claimed that
    he had not received that.  There was then also a letter  of  8  January
    2019 to the Governor of the prison. The appellant  nevertheless,  as  I
    understand it, complained on 12 February 2019 that he had no idea  that
    he had an appeal hearing.

 8. What also happened was that the solicitor at Rafferty & Donaghy who had
    been representing him, a Mr Ruairi Maguire, had moved firms to  McCourt
    and Maguire and had become indeed a principal in that firm (as  perhaps
    its name reflects).  On Friday 8 February, it  is  said  the  appellant
    instructed McCourt and Maguire.  On 12 February, the following Tuesday,
    Mr McCourt of that firm appeared before Judge Gillespie and  sought  an
    adjournment apparently solely on the basis that he  had  not  had  time
    properly to prepare.  I say 'apparently solely on that  basis'  because
    there has been no evidence before this Tribunal which might  supplement
    what is in the judge's decision.  What is in the judge's decision is an
    account of Mr McCourt's indication that he had not had time to prepare,
    followed by "Mr McCourt requested an adjournment."  The judge indicated
    that he was satisfied that the Notices of  Hearing  had  been  properly
    served and that the history of the proceedings indicated  that  it  was
    now right to proceed.

 9. Mr McCourt's further contributions  appear  to  have  been  limited  to
    indicating  with  some  brevity  the  progress   of   the   extradition
    proceedings in Northern Ireland and  also  saying  that  he  would  not
    continue with the hearing as he did not  have  sufficient  material  to
    enable him to do so.

10. The appellant therefore presented his case in person and  was  able  to
    tell the judge about his own perception of the proceedings against  him
    and about his own personal life; and the  facts  that  I  have  already
    related in relation to his  movements  from  Lithuania  to  the  United
    Kingdom, from the United Kingdom to the Republic, and from the Republic
    back to the United Kingdom are derived from what he told the  judge  on
    that occasion.

11. It is, I think, convenient to deal first with the second  ground,  that
    is to say, the unfairness of proceeding, separated for the moment  from
    the issue as to extradition, although in the grounds of  appeal  it  is
    asserted that the second ground really interacts with the first.  As  I
    have said, there has been no evidence in relation to the appeal to this
    Tribunal.  Of what happened before the judge I am limited  to  what  is
    found in the judge's decision, and indeed Mr McTaggart did not  suggest
    that I should go outside  that  decision  for  consideration  of  these
    issues.  The judge was aware of the extradition  proceedings.   He  was
    made further aware of them by Mr McCourt's brief submission about them.
     He was essentially being asked however, to adjourn, not because  there
    was an argument that in law  he  should  not  proceed  because  of  the
    pending expedition proceedings, but because the solicitor had  not  had
    time to prepare the case.

12. It seems to me that the judge was wholly entitled to reach the view  he
    did on the history as he knew it.   This  was  not  a  case  where  the
    appellant was taken by surprise in the sense of needing  to  prepare  a
    case.  He had, after  all  already  prepared  a  case  in  a  different
    country, and had had in the circumstances of the present  appeal  ample
    time to get the material together.   He  had  been  represented  for  a
    considerable length of time by a solicitor who was now a member of  the
    very firm of solicitors who had been recently instructed and  who  said
    they had not had time to represent him.  But even  if  Mr  McCourt  had
    only heard on 8 February that he was instructed, there was  still  time
    to do more than he appears to have been able to do,  which  is  to  say
    that he wrote on 11 February, three days later (I accept that there  is
    a weekend but it is three days later) to Mr McGuire's old firm  seeking
    the papers.  There cannot have been any realistic  prospect  that  that
    was acting quickly  enough  for  a  hearing,  which  following  earlier
    adjournments, was to take place on the Tuesday.  It seems to me that if
    the appellant's appointed solicitors knew little about the case  on  12
    February then that is a matter which was  not  primarily  one  for  the
    judge to do other than make a decision about.   It was  not  one  which
    ought to have caused the judge to think that  it  would  be  unfair  to
    proceed.  The lack of knowledge was `the result of a combination of the
    appellant's and his solicitors' conduct over many months previously.

13. For that reason, I regard Ground 2 as not made out.

14. I turn then to ground 1, which is the  ground  that  it  was  wrong  to
    proceed on the basis that the extradition proceedings were outstanding.
     As I have said, the extradition proceedings relate to different issues
    and different  considerations;  and  the  outcome  of  the  extradition
    proceedings might have an effect of the eventual fate of the appellant.
     But there are a number of other factors to bear in mind, of which  the
    crucial one  is  that  noted  by  the  judge:  that  the  matters  were
    different; and further that this was  a  case  where,  although  on  12
    February 2019, the date of the hearing, the appellant was  represented,
    the point  that  an  adjournment  should  be  granted  because  of  the
    continuing  extradition  proceedings  does  not  appear  to  have  been
    specifically made: as  I  have  indicated,  the  only  ground  for  the
    adjournment appears to have been Mr McCourt's ignorance  of  the  case.
    Under those circumstances it appears to me  that  there  is  no  proper
    basis for saying that this judge should not have proceeded.   He  dealt
    with the issues  before  him,  in  circumstances  where,  although  the
    appellant was represented by a solicitor, it was  not  agreed  that  it
    would be wrong in law for him to proceed.  For those reasons  I  reject
    Ground 1.

15. That means that my judgment is that the Ground  fails  and  it  follows
    that  the  determination  dismissing  the  appeal  should  stand.    Mr
    McTaggart has been anxious to say that I ought to be concerned with the
    appellant rather than  his  solicitors.   That  is  quite  a  difficult
    argument to make, bearing in mind that the appellant was represented by
    solicitors and unless a judge has taken the view  that  the  solicitors
    are incompetent, the judge probably ought to  deal  with  the  case  as
    presented by the solicitors.  In any event, what is the real position?

16. The judge, as I have said, applied Reg. 27(5); he noted the appellant's
    criminal convictions; he  noted  his  lack  of  any  real  evidence  of
    presence in the United Kingdom  other  than  in  custody.   He  had  to
    determine whether the decision of the Secretary of State complied  with
    the principle of proportionality; was based exclusively on the personal
    conduct of the appellant; and whether that personal conduct represented
    a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of society, taking into account his past  conduct
    and that the threat does not need to be imminent.  It seems to me  that
    the judge  dealt  with  those  factors  properly  in  paragraph  35  in
    particular of his decision, and as I have said  there  is  no  specific
    challenge to the merits of the judge's decision.

17. So far as matters which might go to proportionality are concerned,  the
    position is that the appellant has, as I have indicated, failed to show
    that he was in the United Kingdom, other than in custody, except on one
    day in 2012 and one day in 2017.  On the occasion in 2017 he appears to
    have been working but the work was evidently unlawful and was supported
    by unlawful documentation.  He  has  been  in  custody  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a considerable period of time, I assume he has also been in
    custody in the Republic.

18. In the United Kingdom it is said that he has a mother and perhaps  some
    siblings (in Great Britain, not in Ireland) and  that  his  mother  has
    visited him in prison.  There are no details of that.  As  I  indicated
    to Mr McTaggart the matters that can be adduced on his  side  going  to
    the proportionality of the  decision  are  laughably  inadequate.   The
    judge was right to consider that there was really nothing to be weighed
    on the appellant's side in that respect.

19. There is a further issue, however, raised by Mr  McTaggart  today,  but
    not so far as I can see at any stage raised in the  appeal  proceedings
    previously, which is  precisely  the  issue  which  is  raised  in  the
    deportation proceedings: that is  to  say  that  prison  conditions  in
    Lithuania to which  he  will  have  to  return  if  he  is  removed  or
    extradited are a breach of article 3 and possibly of article 8.    That
    is a matter which has not been argued in the  deportation  proceedings.
    It would have been a new matter before Judge Gillespie if it  had  been
    argued.  There seems no reason to suppose  that  bearing  in  mind  the
    continuation of the extradition  proceedings  the  Secretary  of  State
    would have consented for Judge  Gillespie  to  deal  with  it.  If  the
    outcome of the extradition proceedings  merits  it,  no  doubt  further
    issues along those lines may be raised by the appellant in due  course;
    but as I have said they are not part of these proceedings.  So  far  as
    these proceedings are concerned it seems to me that not merely  is  the
    decision to dismiss this appeal the right one on the grounds, but  that
    looking at the merits in the way that I have done it  is  difficult  to
    see that any injustice is suffered by the appellant by a  determination
    to that effect.

20. I therefore  dismiss  the  appeal  and  order  that  Judge  Gillespie's
    decision shall stand.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 21 May 2019

