
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00572/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|Oral determination given following   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 13 January 2016                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                    A M L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born in 1974, is a national of  Sri  Lanka.   He
    entered this country in August 1997 and applied for  asylum.   Although
    his application was refused by the respondent his appeal  against  that
    decision was successful in consequence of which he was granted  ILR  in
    1998.  It was at that time accepted that he  was  entitled  to  refugee
    status.

 2. Prior to the grant of refugee status  a  warrant  for  the  appellant's
    arrest had been  issued  by  a  German  court  and  the  appellant  was
    thereafter extradited to Germany and in 2000 he was sentenced to a term
    of imprisonment of three years and six months  suspended  to  probation
    for an attack on a Tamil in Germany.  The appellant was  then  deported
    from Germany to the UK later in 2000 and  subsequently  on  16  January
    2004 he was sentenced to four  years'  imprisonment  for  possessing  a
    prohibited weapon and  possessing  ammunition  without  a  certificate.
    Thereafter on 27 April 2005 the appellant was  issued  with  notice  of
    liability to deportation and he was then on 18 September 2005  released
    from prison on licence.

 3. In the letter of 27 April just referred to the respondent  gave  notice
    to the appellant under Section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 that the appellant would  not  be  able  to  claim  the
    benefit of  the  Refugee  Convention  by  reason  of  the  respondent's
    decision that he was a danger to the community of the United Kingdom by
    reason of his conviction.  Reference will be made to this aspect of the
    letter below.  Subsequently on 17 January 2011 the respondent wrote  to
    the appellant giving her reasons for ceasing his refugee status.  These
    are set  out  in  some  detail  in  the  letter  of  17  January  2011.
    Subsequently on 4 May 2011 the respondent issued a notice of  liability
    to deportation and on 29 November 2011 a decision to make a deportation
    order and refusing a claim for asylum were  served  on  the  appellant.
    The appellant appealed against that decision on 30 January 2012 and  on
    20 March 2012 the appellant's appeal was allowed to the extent that  it
    was held that the respondent's decision had not been in accordance with
    the law.

 4. On 31 May 2013 the respondent issued a further notice of liability  for
    deportation to which the appellant responded on 24 June 2013.   A  week
    later on 1  July  2013  the  respondent  served  a  further  notice  of
    liability for deportation to which the appellant responded on  16  July
    2013.  Two weeks later on 30 July 2013 the appellant's asylum claim was
    refused and then on 27 August 2013 a decision to deport was made and  a
    deportation order signed by the  respondent.   The  appellant  appealed
    against this decision and yet again on 11 March  2014  his  appeal  was
    allowed to the limited extent that the decision was held to be  not  in
    accordance with the law.  The  respondent  withdrew  that  decision  to
    deport and the deportation order  which  had  subsequently  been  made.
    Thereafter on 13 March 2014 a further decision  to  deport  letter  was
    served on the appellant setting out the respondent's  reasons  and  the
    appellant appealed against this decision on 1 April 2014.

 5. This appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach sitting at
    Taylor House on  17  December  2014  and  in  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 20 January 2015 the judge  dismissed  his  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals with leave  against  that  decision.   There  are
    essentially two grounds within this appeal.  The first ground  is  that
    the judge failed to  consider  whether  the  decision  "to  invoke  the
    cessation clause" was made out and that he erred further in  proceeding
    to determine the asylum and Article 3  appeal  afresh.   It  is  argued
    within the grounds that as the initial decision to deport the appellant
    was set aside as not being in accordance with the law "it followed that
    all the decisions which were served with the immigration decision  fell
    away" (paragraph 6 of the grounds)  which  included  "the  decision  to
    cease refugee status".  The effect of this was that there was "no valid
    decision  ceasing  refugee  status  served  upon  the  applicant"   (at
    paragraph 8 of the grounds).

 6. In any event and in the alternative it was submitted within the grounds
    that even if the decision to cease refugee  status  had  been  properly
    served nonetheless this issue "should have been considered and  decided
    on by the FtTJ in this appeal, this being  the  first  opportunity  for
    this decision to be considered and tested" and it is  argued  that  the
    appellant "has been denied the opportunity of putting the SSHD to proof
    that cessation of refugee status is  made  out  in  the  instant  case"
    (still at paragraph 8).  It is said that  this  was  a  material  error
    because the effect was that the appellant was required to "reprove  his
    claim [to] have a well-founded fear of persecution" whereas the  burden
    of proof was on the respondent  to  establish  that  circumstances  had
    changed.  As it is put at  paragraph  11  of  the  grounds,  the  judge
    "failed to determine whether the SSHD had established  that  there  had
    been a fundamental and durable change in  circumstances  in  Sri  Lanka
    such  that  he  was  no  longer  entitled  to  protection  but   rather
    reconsidered the  applicant's  asylum  claim  afresh  [which]  approach
    amounts to an error of law".

 7. The second ground is that in any event the judge failed to have  regard
    to the appellant's evidence in relation to his  current  circumstances.
    At paragraph 12 it is stated that "in  the  applicant's  statement,  he
    refers, inter alia, to his  attendance  at  demonstrations  in  the  UK
    against  the  killing  and  tortures  of  Tamils  by  the  Sri   Lankan
    government", but "the FtTJ made no  reference  to  this  evidence"  and
    "failed either to take it into account or make a  finding  of  fact  in
    relation to the evidence when assessing whether  the  applicant  is  at
    risk of persecution today".  It is further submitted  at  paragraph  13
    that the judge "had an obligation to have regard to  the  Adjudicator's
    determination as a starting point, to  consider  any  further  evidence
    submitted by or on behalf the applicant and  then  to  assess  risk  on
    return with reference to the current situation".

 8. On behalf of the appellant before this Tribunal, in the course  of  her
    succinct but well-argued submissions Ms Allen relied upon the  grounds.
    Essentially her case with regard to the first ground was  that  if  the
    cessation decision had been sent at the same  time  as  the  notice  of
    intention to deport, which it was, effectively it formed  part  of  the
    same decision so that this aspect of the decision should be treated  as
    having been set aside by the decision of the  earlier  judge  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the  law.   If  that  decision  was
    still live then this judge's approach was incorrect because  he  should
    have considered whether there had been  a  fundamental  change  in  the
    appellant's position and even if the refugee  status  had  been  ceased
    there was still Article 3  to  consider  and  the  burden  was  on  the
    respondent rather than the appellant and she had to prove the  lack  of
    risk under Article 3.

 9. So far as the second ground was concerned in terms of consideration  of
    Article 3 the judge had failed  to  consider  the  appellant's  current
    circumstances in terms of his attendances at demonstrations and  so  on
    and how that impacted on the current risk.

10. On behalf of the respondent Mr  Bramble  in  his  equally  concise  and
    persuasive submissions relied on the Rule 24 response  which  had  been
    made.  It was the  respondent's  case  that  the  respondent  had  been
    entitled to give notice under Section 72  of  the  2002  Act  that  the
    provisions of Article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  whereby  the
    benefit of the Refugee Convention may not be claimed by a refugee  whom
    there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to the  security
    of the country applied.  It  was  the  respondent's  position  that  by
    virtue of his criminal activities which extended beyond  those  matters
    of which he had been convicted he was a danger  to  the  community  and
    thus was not entitled to the benefit of the Refugee Convention.

11. In any  event  the  judge  considered  carefully  whether  or  not  the
    appellant would be at risk in any event and while it was accepted  that
    had there been no change of circumstances the appellant would still  be
    entitled to protection under Article 3 of the  ECHR  the  judge  having
    considered this aspect of the case carefully concluded  that  he  would
    not be at risk  on  return  and  therefore  was  not  entitled  to  the
    protection provided under Article 3 either and with regard to the  risk
    on return the respondent and the Tribunal had to look forward which was
    what the judge clearly did.  It was clear  from  paragraph  92  of  her
    decision that the judge had taken as a starting point the Adjudicator's
    decision in 1998 when the appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    asylum had been allowed but she  then  considered  the  up-to-date  law
    including in particular the recent country guidance decision in GJ  and
    others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

12. So far as ground 2 was concerned, which was that the judge  had  failed
    to take account of the appellant's sur place  activities,  although  at
    paragraph 12 of the grounds  there  is  reference  to  the  appellant's
    witness  statement  where  he   had   said   that   he   had   attended
    demonstrations, in the witness  statement  prepared  for  the  hearing,
    which amounts to some five pages and 22 paragraphs, the only  reference
    to his attending demonstrations is one sentence at the end of paragraph
    14 where it is said that "I have taken part  in  peaceful  protests  by
    Tamils in London against the torture and killing of Tamils by  the  Sri
    Lankan government".

13. The submissions made on his behalf are set out at paragraphs 47  to  53
    of the judge's decision and it seems clear that no submission was  made
    with regard to any risk which would be faced by the appellant by reason
    of his sur place activities.  The judge at paragraph 96 had had  regard
    to the UNHCR guidelines and then at paragraphs 97 to 99 dealt with  the
    Freedom from Torture report dated September  2012.   The  evidence  was
    concisely brought together at paragraph 100 where it was said that "the
    appellant has not put forward any new  evidence  regarding  his  asylum
    claim other than updated background evidence and UNHCR  guidelines  all
    of which I have taken  into  account  when  assessing  the  appellant's
    claim".

14. At paragraph 92 the judge had taken as his starting point the  decision
    of the Adjudicator who had allowed his appeal.  Although  there  is  no
    reference to the brief comment referred to above made by the  appellant
    at paragraph 14 of his witness statement it was hard to  see  how  this
    could be material, and it was not backed up by any evidence.

15. In reply Ms Allen without repeating the first submission she  had  made
    reminded the Tribunal of what it had been.  If  the  issue  of  refugee
    status was a live issue at the time of the appeal before the judge then
    the first consideration should have been  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    cessation decision was correct.  By starting with Section 72, which was
    all to do with  a  person's  conviction,  she  had  adopted  the  wrong
    approach.  This was relevant to the submission made on  behalf  of  the
    appellant as to whether or not the refugee status should be treated  as
    having been ceased.

16. In terms of the cessation of refugee status there had to be a change in
    the circumstances such that it was now safe for  the  appellant  to  be
    returned.  His refugee status could not be revoked and a  cessation  of
    refugee status could only be justified on the  basis  of  there  having
    been a fundamental change in the situation in the country.  So  far  as
    the second ground is concerned it was not correct that nothing new  had
    been raised as was  stated  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  100  of  her
    determination.

Discussion

17. In my judgment the respondent was entitled to place reliance on what is
    set out within Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention, which  provides
    as follows:

         "Article 33

         PROHIBITION OF EXPULSION OR RETURN ('REFOULEMENT')

         1.   No contracting state shall  expel  or  return  ('refouler')  a
             refugee  in  any  manner  whatsoever  to  the   frontiers   of
             territories where his life or freedom would be  threatened  on
             account of his race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a
             particular social group or political opinion.

         2.   The benefit of the present  provision  may  not,  however,  be
             claimed by a refugee whom there  are  reasonable  grounds  for
             regarding as a danger to the security of the country in  which
             he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment of  a
             particularly  serious  crime,  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
             community of that country."

18. Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides
    as follows:

         "Removal

         72.  Serious criminal

             (1)  This Section applies for the purpose of the  construction
                  and application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention
                  (exclusion from protection).

             (2)  A person shall be presumed to have been  convicted  by  a
                  final judgment of a  particularly  serious  crime  and  to
                  constitute a danger to the community of the United Kingdom
                  if he is -

                  (a)  convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

                  (b)  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two
                      years.

             (3)  A person shall be presumed to have been  convicted  by  a
                  final judgment of a  particularly  serious  crime  and  to
                  constitute a danger to the community of the United Kingdom
                  if -

                  (a)  he is convicted outside  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                      offence,

                  (b)  he is sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at
                      least two years, and

                  (c)   he  could  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period   of
                      imprisonment of at least two years had his conviction
                      been a conviction in the United Kingdom of a  similar
                      offence.

             ...

             (6)  A presumption under subSection (2), (3)  or  (4)  that  a
                  person constitutes a danger to the community is rebuttable
                  by that person.

             ...

             (9)  SubSection (10) applies where -

                  (a)  a person appeals under Section 82 ... of this Act ...

                  ...

             (10) The ... Tribunal ... hearing the appeal -

                  (a)  must begin substantive deliberation on the appeal  by
                      considering the certificate, and

                  (b)  if in agreement that  presumptions  under  subSection
                      (2), (3) ... apply (having  given  the  appellant  an
                      opportunity for rebuttal)  must  dismiss  the  appeal
                      insofar as it  relies  on  the  ground  specified  in
                      subSection (9)(a) ... [that is that the removal would
                      be in breach of this country's obligations under  the
                      Refugee Convention]."

19. According to statute the judge was obliged to consider first whether or
    not the respondent's decision that because the appellant was  a  danger
    to the community he should not be entitled to enjoy the benefit of  the
    Refugee Convention before considering the substantive appeal  and  this
    is what the judge did.  It is not necessary for the  purposes  of  this
    decision to analyse the basis upon which the judge considered that  the
    presumption had not being rebutted because  this  is  clearly  set  out
    within the decision and that aspect of  it  has  not  been  challenged.
    Essentially the judge had  regard  to  all  the  factors  including  in
    particular the convictions in Germany and the UK, the conviction in the
    UK being particularly serious.

20. The effect of the certification under Section 72 is that by  virtue  of
    Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention the appellant is  not  entitled
    to the protection afforded under  that  Convention.   He  is,  however,
    still entitled to the protection afforded by  Article  3  of  the  ECHR
    which for present purposes would continue to provide him  with  similar
    protection  against  removal  as  that  provided  under   the   Refugee
    Convention because the respondent would still not be allowed to  remove
    him if in consequence of his removal he would be at risk  of  treatment
    such as to breach his Article 3 rights which in this case  are  not  in
    any significant way different from the protection  he  would  have  had
    under the Refugee Convention.

21. To that extent I accept the submission made by Ms  Allen  that  it  was
    incumbent on the judge to consider whether or  not  the  situation  had
    changed in respect of the risk  the  appellant  faced  were  he  to  be
    returned now to Sri Lanka because  the  starting  point,  under  normal
    Devaseelan principles, would have to be the earlier  decision  made  in
    1998 that as at that time the appellant would be  at  risk  on  return.
    However, that is precisely the basis upon which the judge did  consider
    this appeal because she says in terms at paragraph 92, when considering
    the  appellant's  asylum  claim  that  "the  starting  point   for   my
    consideration of this claim is  the  appeal  determination  of  Special
    Adjudicator Swanney promulgated on  7  September  1998".   Although  it
    would have been preferable if the judge had stated in  terms  that  she
    was considering the appellant's Article 3 rights nothing turns on  this
    because the same considerations would apply and so to the  extent  that
    this was an error it was not a material one.

22. The judge  noted  the  basis  of  the  Adjudicator's  decision  and  in
    particular the rejection of  parts  of  the  appellant's  evidence  but
    stated at paragraph 93 correctly that "the appeal was  allowed  on  the
    basis of the particular circumstances in Sri Lanka and the  appellant's
    personal circumstances as a Sri Lankan Tamil  from  the  North  of  Sri
    Lanka with no travel documents".

23. The judge then had specific  regard  to  the  most  up-to-date  country
    guidance given in GJ and others and also to the Court of  Appeal  order
    in MP  and  NT,  before  considering  the  most  up-to-date  background
    evidence.  In my judgment, in light  of  the  recent  country  guidance
    given in GJ , the submission that a fundamental change in circumstances
    in Sri Lanka had not been shown is unarguable.  There clearly  has  and
    this is set out in that decision.  The issue which this  judge  had  to
    consider was whether or not on the basis of the evidence in  this  case
    this appellant would now be at risk on return to Sri Lanka (albeit such
    as to engage his Article 3 rights rather  than  his  rights  under  the
    Refugee Convention) and accordingly the real  issue  in  this  case  is
    whether it is arguable that the judge failed in her  decision  to  have
    proper regard to this issue.

24. I should deal with one other aspect of the appeal with  regard  to  the
    cessation of the appellant's refugee rights which is the argument  that
    because an earlier immigration decision to  deport  the  appellant  had
    been set aside as not being in accordance with  the  law  this  somehow
    invalidated the appellant's decision to certify that the appellant  was
    not entitled to the protection on which he would otherwise be  entitled
    to rely pursuant to Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.  I do  not
    accept Ms Allen's submissions in this regard.  This  certification  was
    only part of the decision making  process  and  is  not  appealable  in
    itself and the judge considered very carefully in this case whether  or
    not the presumption that the appellant was a danger to the security  of
    the country had been rebutted and as I have already noted his  decision
    that it had not has not specifically been challenged in this appeal.

25. Accordingly I am satisfied that the judge's consideration of the  issue
    as to whether or not the appellant would now be at risk on  return  has
    been properly considered in all respects other than the matters  raised
    in ground 2 to which I now turn.   The  argument  within  ground  2  is
    essentially that because the appellant said in his  statement  that  he
    had taken part in peaceful protests by Tamils in London against actions
    of  the  Sri  Lankan  government  that  was  a  matter   which   should
    specifically have been considered by the judge  and  therefore  to  the
    extent that it was said at paragraph 100 that the appellant had not put
    forward any new evidence  regarding  his  asylum  claim  this  was  not
    correct.

26. While for the sake of completeness the judge might have made a  passing
    reference to this sentence within the appellant's witness statement  in
    my judgment if this was an error it was not a material one.  There  was
    very limited evidence as to precisely what activities the appellant had
    been engaged in in this country but the fact that  he  had  engaged  or
    taken part in peaceful protests against some of the activities  carried
    out by the Sri Lankan government in light  of  all  the  other  matters
    considered by the judge cannot in the judgment of  this  Tribunal  have
    brought him within the risk categories as set out within GJ.  Had  this
    been arguable no doubt submissions would have been made to this  effect
    by Counsel  who  represented  the  appellant  before  the  judge;  this
    Tribunal's  conclusion  is  that  such  submissions  could   not   have
    succeeded.

27. It follows that there having been no material error  in  Judge  Beach's
    decision this appeal must be dismissed and I so find.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  Judge  Beach  is
affirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 8 February 2016

