
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00307/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2018                  |On 26 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              Jeyathevaraj [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Thomas, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.
    The appellant is the Secretary of State (hereafter  the  SSHD).   In  a
    decision sent on 26 July 2017 I set aside the decision of Judge  Dineen
    who had allowed the claimant's appeal against a deportation  order  the
    SSHD had made against him on 30 December 2013.   This  order  had  been
    made because the  claimant  had  been  sentenced  to  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment  for  dishonestly  making  false  representations.   Judge
    Dineen's decision was set aside because he had not addressed  paragraph
    399(b) which considers whether in the case of the parent of  a  British
    citizen child "it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the
    UK without the person who is to be  deported".   However  I  stated  at
    paragraph 9:


         "Whilst it is not necessary for me to  address  [the  Secretary  of
         State's] grounds 2 and 3, it may assist the next  Tribunal  dealing
         with the case if I state my assessment of them.  I do not  consider
         ground 2 is made out.  Whilst  the  judge's  decision  is  somewhat
         brief on the issue of whether for the family  unit  living  in  Sri
         Lanka would be unduly  harsh,  almost  all  of  his  assessment  is
         directed at explaining why he considered it would be unduly  harsh.
         Paragraph 24 traverses a wide  range  of  conclusions  relevant  to
         assessment of this matter ..."


2.   At the further hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  Ms  Ahmed  and  Ms
    Thomas.


3.   Ms Ahmed said she relied  on  the  SSHD's  written  submissions  of  18
    October 2017 drafted by Mr Melvin.  There was a strong public  interest
    in deportation of the claimant.  On  21  September  2012  he  had  been
    convicted on four counts of fraud committed in 2010 and sentenced on 12
    October 2012 to a total of eighteen months' imprisonment.


4.   As regards the best interests of the children, Mr  Melvin's  submission
    stated that it was accepted that the two children (aged 9 and  13)  are
    British citizens and have lived in the UK all  their  lives  and  while
    being brought up by  Sri  Lankan  parents  will  have  little  cultural
    knowledge of that country.  Neither child is at a critical juncture  in
    their education but it is  accepted  that  the  educational  system  is
    different in Sri Lanka.  The written submissions went on to state  that
    it was accepted that it would be in the children's  best  interests  to
    remain with both parents.


5.   The written submissions ended by making four main points: that  removal
    of the appellant would not be unduly harsh as the family had coped well
    whilst the claimant was in prison  and  since  his  release  has  coped
    financially given that the claimant had  his  status  removed  and  was
    unable to support his family; the claimant's index offence  was  not  a
    one off but a series of offences committed over a  lengthy  period  and
    according to the criminal judge's sentencing remarks  involved  victims
    who were desperate, vulnerable people who did not have much in the  way
    of resources; that the claimant did not plead guilty  to  the  offences
    but denied the charges and was convicted; that the public  interest  in
    the matter outweighs the best interests of the children  to  remain  in
    the UK with their father.


6.   Ms Ahmed's submissions reinforced those made by Mr Melvin  adding  that
    even though the children may be well-integrated  into  British  society
    they have clearly been exposed to Sri Lankan culture; that even  though
    the claimant had had ILR previously his  immigration  status  had  been
    rendered precarious by his committing crimes;  the  children  would  be
    adversely affected by their father's deportation, but they managed  for
    nine months without their father (when he was in prison).


7.   Asked by me, what relevance if any the IDI policy of the  Secretary  of
    State relating to parents of British citizen children had in this case,
    Ms Ahmed submitted that its terms clearly excluded parents such as  the
    claimant, whose criminality fell within the  scope  of  paragraph  398.
    If, however, that policy were taken to reflect  EU  law  principles  as
    elaborated by the Court of Justice in Case C-304/14 SSHD v CS, then she
    would not be able to submit that  the  claimant  posed  a  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to public order, as he had not  re-offended
    in over five years.


8.   Ms Ahmed referred to a number of higher court authorities including  MM
    (Uganda) and AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 in which at [31] of the
    latter Elias LJ had stated that "separating parent  and  child  cannot,
    without more, be a good reason to outweigh the powerful public interest
    in deportation".


9.   Ms  Thomas  elaborated  her  submission  by  reference  to  a  detailed
    skeleton argument.  She submitted that two matters that might  normally
    be in dispute in a case such  as  this  had  been  broadly  settled  by
    proceedings so far.  The SSHD had accepted that  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the children to remain with the claimant and his  wife  in
    the UK.  Further, in my decision finding an error of law I  had  stated
    that I saw no error in the assessment made by the  FtT  Judge  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the family unit to resettle in Sri Lanka.


10.  Given that the only  remaining  issue  was  therefore  whether  it  was
    unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without their father,
    Ms Thomas submitted that it would clearly be  contrary  to  their  best
    interests to separate them from their father. She drew attention to the
    evidence from their school headteacher who noted that the older child's
    progress was adversely affected during  the  time  his  father  was  in
    prison and expressed her view that if the claimant were  deported  that
    that would have "a devastating effect on the family".  Consistent  with
    having lived in the UK for over 30 years the claimant had organised his
    children's lives on the basis that their future lies  in  the  UK.  The
    claimant is the children's authority figure and has taken a close  role
    in supervising their education and taking them  to  sports  activities.
    The claimant understandably identified as British  on  account  of  the
    time he has lived here and had brought his sons up to speak English  at
    home. Both children have lived their entire lives in the UK and are  of
    an age where they have established meaningful private  lives  of  their
    own, outside the family unit. The claimant's wrongdoing cannot be  held
    against the children  in  an  assessment  of  what  is  in  their  best
    interests (ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4).  The  claimant  had  lived
    lawfully in the UK since 1986 and obtained ILR as  long  ago  as  1994.
    During that time, he has become socially and culturally integrated.  He
    no longer enjoys meaningful ties in Sri Lanka.


11.  As regards the public interest factors, Ms Thomas  submitted  that  the
    claimant had not sought to condone his past wrongdoing nor does he seek
    to diminish the impact of his offending upon his victims; his fraud was
    short-lived encompassing a two month period  between  April-June  2010;
    the offence was committed within the context of  spiralling  debt  with
    the  claimant  being  unable  to  adequately  manage,  culminating   in
    repossession of the family home; the offence was a product of desperate
    circumstances rather than a pro-criminal attitude; he was  of  hitherto
    unblemished character;  whilst  in  prison  he  was  commended  by  the
    governor for his  "exceptional  work  ethic",  "positive  attitude  and
    trustworthiness"; prison records show he was respected amongst staff as
    diligent, "a major support to other prisoners" and someone who had been
    entrusted with a range of duties.


12.  In relation to the public interest factors identified within  S117B  of
    the NIAA 2002, the claimant and his family all spoke good English; they
    do not represent  a  burden  to  the  taxpayer;  the  claimant  has  an
    impeccable immigration history; the ties on which he  now  relies  have
    not been formed when his immigration status was precarious.


My Assessment


13.  It is common ground that the claimant is entitled  to  succeed  in  his
    appeal if able to establish that he meets the requirements of paragraph
    399 which provides:


         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
                  the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                  immigration decision; and in either case


                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and


                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported; or


           ..."


    Also applicable is S117C(3) which  provides  that  in  the  case  of  a
    foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest  requires  C's
    deportation unless Exception 1 or 2  applies.   S117C(5)  enjoins  that
    "Exception 2 applies where C ... has a genuine and subsisting potential
    relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation
    on ... the child would be unduly harsh".  It is not in dispute that the
    claimant's two children are both qualifying children.


14.  The different stages of the proceedings in this case has  not  made  it
    an easy one for the parties to target their  submissions.   In  certain
    respects their written and oral submissions talked past each other  and
    still sought to raise arguments relating to the first limb of paragraph
    399(a)(ii)(a) which relates to whether "it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the child to live  in  the  country  to  which  the  parent  is  to  be
    deported".  In my error of law decision I stated that I saw no error on
    the part of the  judge  in  concluding  that  this  limb  of  paragraph
    399(a)(ii) was met.  Ms Ahmed did not ask that I revisit  that  opinion
    in the context of re-making my decision and I do not consider it  would
    be appropriate to revisit it as neither Mr Melvin's written submissions
    nor Ms Ahmed's oral submissions directly challenged it.


15.  The sole issue then is whether the claimant satisfies the  second  limb
    of paragraph 399(a)(ii), namely whether "(6) it would be  unduly  harsh
    for the child to remain in the UK without  the  person  who  is  to  be
    deported".


16.  It is  well-established  that  the  assessment  of  this  unduly  harsh
    requirement calls for a wide-ranging assessment of relevant factors and
    that these include the strong public interest in deportation.


17.  In the claimant's case his was a "white collar" crime but  it  was  one
    that had devastating consequences for those he duped.  It was not a one-
    off offence but was carried out over a period of two  months  in  2010.
    The claimant used his reputation and position of trust as  the  company
    director of a letting agency to commit four counts of  fraud.   He  did
    not plead guilty.  The sentencing judge described him as  a  "con-man".
    For these he  received  a  sentence  of  eighteen  months.   Whilst  he
    obtained ILR in 1994, he did  not  take  steps  to  apply  for  British
    citizenship prior to his committing his  offences,  although  he  would
    have been eligible at the time.


18.  Also even though he had ILR at the time he committed his offences,  his
    decision  to  embark  on  criminality  was  sufficient  to  render  his
    immigration status precarious for the  purposes  of  S117B(5):  see  AM
    [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) paragraph 33.


19.  Weighing against the effect on his children being unduly harsh  is  the
    fact that his wife managed to continue to care for them for the  period
    of  nine  months  whilst  he  was   in   prison   without   significant
    difficulties.  The oldest boy was assessed as to  whether  he  required
    special needs, but it was found he did not.  Also relevant is the  fact
    that if the claimant was deported it is reasonable to  expect  that  he
    would find well-paid employment in Sri  Lanka  and  would  be  able  to
    support and assist his family financially out of his earnings there.


20.  On the other  side  of  the  scales,  the  children  are  both  British
    citizens.  Both have lived all their lives in  the  UK  and  both  have
    lived here over seven years.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that  they  are
    socially and culturally integrated into British society.  Whilst it  is
    not entirely clear to what extent  they  have  developed  cultural  and
    linguistic ties with Sri Lanka through their parent's influence, it  is
    clear that they have developed a strong British identity.  The evidence
    relating to how they coped for the time their father was in prison does
    not indicate they  suffered  significant  difficulties,  but  I  attach
    weight to the letter from the oldest boy's headteacher that his  school
    progress was affected in that he found it difficult to concentrate.  It
    is not in dispute that the claimant has been closely  involved  in  the
    boys' upbringing and schooling.  The  most  recent  witness  statements
    from the parents, whose contents is not disputed by  Ms  Ahmed,  attest
    that he is playing a very prominent role as a primary carer,  and  that
    his wife has health problems that reduce the degree to  which  she  can
    look after them.


21.   As  regards  the  public  interest  considerations,  I  have   already
    identified that they count heavily against the  claimant.   That  said,
    the offences in 2012 were his first and only offences.  He has not  re-
    offended for over  four  and  a  half  years.   All  the  documentation
    relating to his stay in prison attest to him playing  a  very  positive
    role in carrying out designated tasks and  being  a  major  support  to
    other prisoners.  That  is  evidence  of  rehabilitation.   Whilst  the
    claimant pleaded not guilty no issue is taken with the  view  expressed
    by Ms  Thomas  that  he  had  fully  accepted  responsibility  and  was
    remorseful. These last  two  considerations  cannot  carry  significant
    weight in the deportation context, but they are  nevertheless  part  of
    the overall picture.


22.  I have given consideration to  whether  the  claimant  is  entitled  to
    benefit directly from jurisprudence of the Court of Justice relating to
    Union citizen children who have a parent who  commits  criminality,  in
    particular case C-304/14, SSHD v CS.


23.  In this case the CJEU noted that a Member State may adopt on  expulsion
    measure against a non-Union citizen who is the primary carer of a young
    child who is a national of that Member  State  in  which  he  has  been
    residing from birth without having exercised his right  of  freedom  of
    movement, when the expulsion of the person concerned would require  the
    child to leave the  territory  of  the  European  Union.   However  the
    expulsion measure must be founded on the personal conduct of that third-
    country  national,  which  must  constitute  a  genuine,  present   and
    sufficiently serious threat adversely affecting one of the  fundamental
    interests of the society of that Member State.


24.  I do not consider that I should seek to determine the  claimant's  case
    on the basis of this judgment nor by making any assumption that the IDI
    policy on parents of British citizen children is grounded in  the  CJEU
    jurisprudence (although arguably it has to be).  What I do derive  from
    it, however, is that it reinforces the importance in cases  of  foreign
    criminals with British citizen children of  considering  whether  their
    conduct is not only  serious  historically  but  in  the  present.   As
    already noted, the evidence in the claimant's case  does  not  indicate
    that he is a "present"  threat  to  the  fundamental  interests  of  UK
    society, although he  clearly  was  in  2012.   Ms  Ahmed  specifically
    acknowledged he no longer  posed  a  present  threat.   Whilst  I  have
    weighed the factors relating to the issue of the unduly harsh effect on
    the children  without  regard  to  this  judgment,  it  underlines  the
    importance I have attached to the fact that the claimant  has  not  re-
    offended and appears to have taken steps  to  ensure  better  financial
    management, so that it is unlikely he will face a similar situation  to
    that which led him to his serious criminality  in  2012.   Whilst  such
    considerations do not on their own carry significant weight this  is  a
    case in which the best interests  of  the  child  considerations  weigh
    heavily in the claimant's favour.


25.  Having weighed all the competing considerations in the  balance,  I  am
    satisfied that  the  claimant  comes  within  the  terms  of  paragraph
    399(a)(ii)(b).  Accordingly it is not  necessary  for  me  to  consider
    separately whether he comes within Exception 2 of S117(5), although  it
    is clear to me, pari passu, that he does.


26.  To conclude:


    The decision of the FtT Judge has already been set aside  for  material
    error of law.


    The decision I re-make is to allow  the  claimant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 22 March 2018

    [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
