
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00301/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Reasons and Decision Promulgated     |
|On 3 November 2014                   |On 17 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                         MR TANAKA GILBERT SEKERANI
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville-Smart, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  who  appeals  with  permission
    against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan  and  Sir
    Geoffrey James KBE CMG sitting as a Panel promulgated on 8 May 2014  in
    which they dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  deportation
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 14 February 2014  to  remove
    him  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  section  5  (1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.



The appellant's case

 2. The appellant had claimed asylum on the bases that he fears the ZANU PF
    in Zimbabwe which claim was rejected in 2003. The appellant  no  longer
    relies  on  his  asylum  claim  but  on  his  claim  for   humanitarian
    protection.

 3. The appellant claims he cannot return to Zimbabwe because of his mental
    health problems as he has been diagnosed  as  suffering  from  paranoid
    schizophrenia. He relies on a  report  from  Dr  Gillian  Wainscott,  a
    consultant psychiatrist dated 27 February 2014.  The  appellant  claims
    that he has established a family and private life in the United Kingdom
    because he has a cousin in this country who has been helping him.

    The respondent's case

 4. The respondent's case is the following which I summarise. The appellant
    gave two different dates for when he entered the United Kingdom. One is
    29 December 2002 and the other is 12 July 2002. His screening interview
    took place on 25 April 2003. The appellant  made  several  applications
    for voluntary return on 17 September  2004,  17  October  2008  and  21
    February 2013. The first two applications were withdrawn and  his  last
    application was rejected by the respondent. The appellant also  applied
    for return to Zimbabwe  under  the  Facilitated  Return  Scheme  on  28
    February 2013 but that application was rejected. The appellant  had  no
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and remained here illegally.

 5. On 9 September 2010 the appellant was convicted of  causing/inciting  a
    female child under 16 to engage in sexual activity.  He  was  convicted
    and sentenced to a hospital order to be detained under  section  37  of
    the Mental Health Act 1983. He was also made to sign the sex  offenders
    register for seven years and a sexual offences prevention order  for  a
    period of seven years. The sentencing judge also made an order that the
    appellant should be prevented from loitering  within  50meters  of  any
    children's play area or school and not to have unsupervised  access  to
    children under the age of 16.  The  respondent  issued  the  notice  of
    decision to make a  Deportation  Order  under  the  1971  Act  and  the
    appellant appealed against the decision  and  the  first-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed his appeal.

 6. The appellant can be returned to Zimbabwe as there is medical treatment
    available to him after considering the background evidence on Zimbabwe.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  sitting  at
    Birmingham hearing  Centre  on  7  April  2014.   The  Judge  made  the
    following findings.

      i)  The  appellant's  case  falls  under  paragraph  398  (c)  of  the
         Immigration Rules "the deportation of the person  from  the  UK  is
         conducive to the public good because in the view of  the  Secretary
         of State, their offending his cause serious  harm  or  they  are  a
         persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  of  the  law.
         The appellant has to show that there are exceptional  circumstances
         that the public interest in  deportation  would  be  outweighed  by
         other factors [22];

     ii) The findings of the previous Judge of the  starting  point  in  the
         appellant's appeal [28] in line with the case of Devaseelan v  SSHD
         [2002] UK IAT 00702. The previous Judge  made  adverse  credibility
         findings against the appellant and the appellant has not challenged
         the decision. Therefore the findings in respect of the  appellant's
         asylum appeal remains the same as in 2003. The real issue that  has
         to be considered is risk on return bearing in mind that  more  than
         10 years have lapsed since the previous hearing. [30];

    iii) In respect of the appellant's return and considering the case of  N
         v Secretary of State for the home Department [2005] UK HL  31,  the
         background evidence on medical treatment available to the appellant
         in Zimbabwe and Dr Wainscott's reports  [35-46]  demonstrates  that
         mental health treatment is available in Zimbabwe but that is not in
         itself a reason for him to be granted leave to remain.

     iv) While it is appreciated that the appellant is suffering from mental
         illness, however it is not the case that no treatment or medication
         is available to him in Zimbabwe  even  though  it  is  not  to  the
         standard of this country but that is not the  test.  The  appellant
         has a mother and step-father in Zimbabwe and has  been  in  contact
         with them. There is no reason why the appellant could not return to
         his family and continue his treatment in Zimbabwe [47];

      v) In the case of Bensaid [48] it was  stated  at  paragraph  37  that
         deterioration in his already existing mental illness could  involve
         relapse into hallucinations and psychotic delusions involving self-
         harm and  harm  to  others,  as  well  as  restrictions  in  social
         functioning (such as withdrawal and lack of motivation). The  court
         considers that the suffering associated with such a  relapse  could
         in principle, fall within the scope of Article 3. However [49]  the
         EEC HR went on to find that article 3 would not be engaged  in  the
         applicant's  case  as  they  were  no  exceptional   circumstances.
         Similarly the appellant fails to establish his case under article 3
         and article 8 of the ECHR.

    The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal which are dated 9 July 2014, state the  following
    which I summarise. On 9 September 2010 the appellant was  convicted  of
    causing/inciting a female child under 16 to engage in  sexual  activity
    and was sentenced to a hospital order under section 37  of  the  Mental
    Health Act 1983 following his  arrest  and  detention  in  custody.  In
    custody he presented with symptoms including hallucinations,  attending
    to personal needs (such as  obtaining  food)  only  when  prompted  and
    neglected  his  personal  safety.  The  appellant  was  diagnosed  with
    paranoid schizophrenia  which  is  currently  managed  with  20  mg  of
    Olanzapine, a powerful antipsychotic medication at maximum  dosage.  He
    has insight both into his illness and his offending and the  connection
    between the two. The hospital order was discharged on 8 September  2012
    but the appellant remains voluntarily as an  inpatient  at  Ross  House
    Community Rehabilitation Unit where he was moved on 3 April 2012.

 9. The First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  following  Bensaid  v  United
    Kingdom [2001] AC Article 8 and Article 3 could be engaged  in  a  case
    involving mental illness, but as in that case, the  appellant  has  not
    shown any  exceptional  circumstances.  The  Tribunal  found  that  the
    medical treatment was available in Zimbabwe  and  the  appellant  could
    return to be with his family.

10. The first ground of appeal states that the Panel failed  to  take  into
    account relevant evidence  and  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  their
    finding that there is medical treatment available to the  appellant  in
    Zimbabwe. The country guidance cited by  the  Tribunal  notes  that  in
    respect of the health system infrastructure in Zimbabwe that there have
    been improvements in some areas including access to drugs. However  the
    assessment of mental health care is assessed as inadequate, identifying
    only 10 psychiatrists in  the  entire  country,  a  shortage  of  drugs
    resulting in patients not receiving adequate therapy  and  in  patients
    subjected to deplorable living conditions.

11. Dr Wainscott the appellant's treating  consultant  psychiatrist  states
    that enquiries were made but she could not establish with any certainty
    whether similar  treatment  in  terms  of  medication,  monitoring  and
    rehabilitation is available in Zimbabwe. Furthermore she notes  in  her
    letter dated 28 November 2013 that psychiatric help is  only  available
    on a private basis. The Tribunal nevertheless concluded that the mental
    health treatment is available and drugs (unspecified) are available.

12. The Tribunal does not make any  finding  as  to  whether  the  kind  of
    antipsychotic drugs  the  appellant  would  require  are  available  in
    Zimbabwe or why the panel concludes that it has  not  been  established
    that Olanzapine is not available. This contrasts with the  analysis  of
    the European Court of  human  rights  in  Bensaid  which  had  positive
    evidence  that  Olanzapine  was  available  in  Algeria  (free  as   an
    inpatient, possibly on payment as an outpatient) and  finds  it  likely
    that other medication in the management of mental illness is likely  to
    be available. It is noted that the evidence cited by  the  Tribunal  in
    respect of improvements in access to drugs refers  to  essential  drugs
    and not to specialised antipsychotic medication.

13. The Tribunal makes finding as to how the appellant might be expected to
    pay for any treatment by psychiatrist professionals he has  to  access,
    despite the  evidence  of  Dr  Wainscott  that  it  is  only  available
    privately. In doing so they failed to consider the evidence  that  even
    if, treatment for  paranoid  schizophrenia  is  available,  it  is  not
    available for this appellant.

14. The second ground of appeal states that the Panel  did  not  take  into
    account the evidence that the appellant's mother is too unwell to  care
    for him and that he has  no  other  family  support  in  Zimbabwe.  The
    Tribunal  notes  at  paragraph  47  of  the  determination   that   the
    appellant's mother is in  Zimbabwe  that  the  appellant  has  been  in
    contact with her on the telephone regularly and concludes that there is
    no reason why he could not return to his family in Zimbabwe.  This  not
    only disregards the evidence of the appellant that his  mother  is  too
    unwell to care for him but in any case his mother is not  qualified  or
    capable of coping with his needs.  The  Panel  further  disregards  the
    evidence of Dr Wainscott and her letter dated 28 November  2013  states
    that the appellant healthcare team (as understand from his  family)  is
    that they are not able  to  support  him  financially,  emotionally  or
    physically thereby implying that they made separate enquiries  directly
    with the appellant family. It is submitted  that  this  is  a  material
    error of law. The European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in  Bensaid  gave
    significant  weight  to  the  applicant  having  family   in   Nigeria,
    conversely in D v United Kingdom it was of great significance  that  he
    did not have any family support in St Kitts and Nevis.

15. The third ground is that the Tribunal failed to take into account  give
    adequate  reasons  for   rejecting   Dr   Wainscott,   the   consultant
    psychiatrist evidence. The Tribunal  disregarded  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Wainscott in respect of the availability of mental health treatment  in
    Zimbabwe. The Tribunal at paragraph 40 and 42 highlights the fact  that
    Dr Wainscott has not outlined in her report as to what exact  enquiries
    were made about availability of treatment  in  Zimbabwe.  The  Tribunal
    appears to impugn the credibility of Dr Wainscott  despite  her  senior
    professional status, without giving sufficient reasons  for  doing  so.
    The Tribunal further doubts at paragraph 38 that on  the  basis  of  Dr
    Wainscott conclusion at paragraph 8 of her report that if the appellant
    is forcibly sent back to Zimbabwe it is inevitable that his health will
    deteriorate dramatically. This is despite the fact that in paragraph  7
    and 10 Dr  Wainscott  clearly  indicates  deterioration  is  linked  to
    treatment stopping and  in  her  letter  Mr  Mellor  also  states  that
    deportation "would be a powerful trigger for a serious relapse as  less
    robust plans were in place in  Zimbabwe  for  his  continuing  care  as
    previously described".

    Permission to appeal

16. First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane gave the appellant permission to appeal
    on only the third ground stating that it was arguable  that  the  Panel
    failed to give any or adequate reasons for refusing to accord weight to
    Dr Wainscott's  conclusion  that  upon  his  return  to  Zimbabwe,  the
    appellant's mental health condition would deteriorate dramatically.

17. On 6 August 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan in a  renewed  application
    granted the appellant permission to appeal on all grounds.

    Respondent's Rule 24 response

18. By way of a reply to the grant  pursuant  to  Rule  24  the  respondent
    stated the following which I summarise. The  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal directed  himself  appropriately.  The  Panel  considered  the
    report of Dr Wainscott in detail as set out in  paragraph  36  onwards.
    The Panel noted that the report asserted that  the  appellant's  health
    would deteriorate rapidly on return although the reasoning  to  support
    this was not clear. The availability of treatment and the needs of  the
    appellant were apparently researched. However, the Panel found that  it
    was not clear what enquiries were made. The Panel concluded that if the
    appellant continued to take his medication he would not be at risk. The
    Panel took full account of the background evidence to conclude that  it
    was not established that the drugs required by the appellant  were  not
    available. The  Panel  applied  the  threshold  test  contained  within
    Bensaid and concluded that the appellant did not succeed.  The  Panel's
    findings were open to them based on the evidence and does not  disclose
    an error in law.

Submissions of the parties as to whether there is an error of law

19. Ms Wilkins in her submissions stated the following which  I  summarise.
    She adopted her grounds of appeal. She said  that  the  Judge  did  not
    consider all the evidence of the medical treatment  was  available  for
    this particular appellant in Zimbabwe. It is not disputed that there is
    some mental health available in Zimbabwe but it  is  not  available  to
    this particular appellant. The appellant has been  detained  under  the
    Mental Health Act and is on medication  which  cannot  be  reduced.  In
    Zimbabwe, 90% of the clinics in mental health are in Bulawayo  and  the
    appellant lives  in  Harare  as  does  his  family  and  this  was  not
    considered by the Judge. The appellant will not be able to  afford  the
    treatment even if he can get it privately. The Judge did not take  into
    account that his mother in Zimbabwe is too unwell to care for him.

20. The appellant was discharged on 8  September  2012  but  the  appellant
    continues to live voluntarily as an inpatient at Ross  House  Community
    Rehabilitation Unit where he was moved on 3 April 2012.  The  appellant
    has has mental health support in this country. The existence of  family
    support is crucial as was stated in the  case  of  Bensaid.  The  Judge
    doubted Dr Wainscott's conclusions and the enquiries as she did not say
    from whom she  made  these  enquiries.  The  appellant's  condition  is
    crucial. There are exceptional circumstances in  the  appellant's  case
    because he faces a real risk of harm on return to Zimbabwe due  to  his
    mental situation.

21. Mr Smart on behalf of the respondent adopted the rule 24  response  and
    stated the following in summary.  The  Judge  considered  the  evidence
    fully and consider the evidence of Dr Wainscott adequately.  The  Panel
    was entitled to ask why Dr Wainscott did not set out in her report what
    enquiries she made. The Judge was entitled to reach the  conclusion  on
    the evidence. The Judge was entitled to conclude that  given  that  the
    appellant has a mother and stepfather in Zimbabwe that  there  will  be
    some element of support.

22. In reply Ms Wilkins said that at page 20 of  the  original  grounds  it
    that "we don't dispute that in Zimbabwe there will be  treatment".  The
    appellant will relapse if he returns because he will  not  get  medical
    treatment and that fact engages Article 8.

Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
error of law?

23. In his determination at [7], the Panel states that more than  10  years
    have passed since the appellant's previous appeal hearing based on  his
    claim for asylum and therefore the Panel will consider the risk to  the
    appellant on return as at the date of hearing. The [8]  the  Panel  was
    aware therefore that the main issues in the  appellant's  claim  is  in
    respect of his mental health problems because he has been diagnosed  as
    suffering from paranoid schizophrenia and at [8] the appellant's  claim
    that he has established a family life and private life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

24. The Panel  [22]  stated  that  as  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, he has to establish  that  there
    are exceptional circumstances that the public interest  in  deportation
    would be outweighed by other factors". The Panel took into account  the
    Court of Appeal [23] case of MF Nigeria v SSHD  EWCA  Civ  1192  as  to
    would amount to exceptional circumstances. It was  held  in  that  case
    that exceptional  circumstances  simply  mean  sufficiently  compelling
    reasons that outweigh the public interest in deportation.

25. The Panel had regard to the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  in  respect  of
    mental health relevant to  Article  3  and  Article  8  in  respect  of
    physical and moral integrity. They referred to the leading case of N  v
    Secretary of State for the home Department [2005] UK HL 31 where it was
    held by  the  House  of  Lords  that  there  must  be  shown  that  the
    appellant's medical condition has reached such a  critical  state  that
    there are compelling and humanitarian grounds for not removing  him  or
    her to a place which lacks the medical and social services which he  or
    she would need in order to prevent acute suffering. The House of  Lords
    approach was confirmed by the European Court of Human Rights. The Panel
    was therefore aware of  the  standard  against  which  the  appellant's
    appeal has to be assessed and recognised that the threshold to  succeed
    under Article 3 on medical grounds is very high.

26. The Panel took into account the case of  Bensaid  where  the  applicant
    suffered from long-term schizophrenia and it was argued on  his  behalf
    that his condition would seriously deteriorate if he  returned  to  his
    home country because of difficulties in obtaining suitable  medication.
    It was found that while in principle this could engage  Article  3  the
    Court found that there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    claimant should succeed.

27. Similarly the  Panel  found  [49]  that  in  this  case  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances and the appellant's appeal fails to establish
    his case under Article 3 and Article 8 of the ECHR in  respect  of  his
    mental health problems.

28. The Panel [36] in making this decision gave proper consideration to  Dr
    Wainscott's report and take into account that at paragraph 2 the report
    states that the appellant's "symptoms  are  well  controlled  with  the
    administration of Olanzapine 20 MG at night". In the same paragraph  Dr
    Wainscott notes that the  appellant  "no  longer  presents  a  risk  to
    himself through neglect". The Panel took into account that Dr Wainscott
    stated that the appellant will need to continue his treatment  for  the
    rest of his life which was the administration of 20 mg  of  Olanzapine.
    The panel also considered [36. 4] that the appellant  is  no  longer  a
    danger to the public since his illness has been controlled  and  during
    his time at Ross House, there was no suggestion that he has  posed  any
    threat to children. They also considered that the  report  stated  that
    the appellant was aware that he has been placed on  the  sex  offenders
    register for seven years which imposes certain restrictions on  him  as
    to his proximity to children under the age of 18 years and the need for
    supervision. The report noted that the  appellant  has  been  "entirely
    compliant with these restrictions".

29. This report demonstrated to the Panel that the appellant has understood
    why he has been placed on the sex offenders register and his  behaviour
    has been accordingly compliant.  It  cannot  in  the  circumstances  be
    properly argued that the Panel did not take into account Dr Wainscott's
    report.

30. However, the Panel questioned [38] on what basis Dr Wainscott made  her
    finding if the appellant "is forcibly  sent  back  to  Zimbabwe  it  is
    inevitable that his health will deteriorate  dramatically".  The  Panel
    questioned the expert's conclusions in her report which stated "we have
    made enquiries and have not been able to ascertain with  any  certainty
    that similar treatment i.e. medication,  expert  monitoring  of  mental
    state with adjustments to medication and progress  with  rehabilitation
    into the community-based  activities  is  available  at  any  level  in
    Zimbabwe". The panel was entitled and indeed duty-bound to require  the
    psychiatrist to have included in her report the source of the enquiries
    that she had made which formed the bases for the expert psychiatrist to
    reach this conclusion. The Panel [39]

31. I do not take their enquiries to indicate that the  Panel  in  any  way
    impugned the psychiatrist credibility. The Panel's findings in  respect
    of Dr Wainscott's report was not perverse  and  open  to  them  on  the
    evidence. The Panel took into account [41] that it is apparent from  Dr
    Wainscott's report that as long as the appellant continues to take  his
    medication, his symptoms will be controlled  and  he  will  not  be  no
    danger to the public.

32. The Panel took into account [42]  the  country  of  origin  information
    report in July 2012 in respect of medical  treatment  in  Zimbabwe  and
    noted that it states that the international committee of the Red  Cross
    report on Zimbabwe  published  in  May  2011  stated  that  "people  in
    Zimbabwe have improved access to healthcare". The Panel also took  into
    account [44] that the UKBA FFM report 2010 recorded the  comments  were
    representative of the Zimbabwe human rights Forum that there have  been
    improvements in the health sector and people  are  getting  drugs  many
    being provided by humanitarian organisations. The Panel [45] considered
    the background information in respect of mental health specifically and
    stated that paragraph 25.52 of the country  report  refers  to  the  US
    State Department's country  reports  on  human  rights  practices  2011
    published on 24 May 2012 notes that persons  with  mental  disabilities
    also suffer from inadequate medical  care  and  general  provisions  of
    health  services.  There   are   eight   centralised   medical   health
    institutions in the country with a capacity of more than 1300  patients
    in addition to the three special institutions run by the ZP S for long-
    term patients and those considered to be dangerous to society. Patients
    could wait for at least one year for a full medical review. A  shortage
    of drugs and adequately trained mental health professionals resulted in
    patients  not  been  properly  diagnosed  and  not  receiving  adequate
    therapy. There were fewer than 10 certified  psychiatrists  working  in
    public and private clinics and teaching in Zimbabwe. There  was  a  50%
    vacancy rate for psychiatric trained  nurses.  More  than  90%  of  the
    available psychiatric services were provided at the mental  institution
    in Bulawayo.  NGOs  reported  patients  subject  to  deplorable  living
    conditions due in  part  to  shortages  of  food,  water  clothing  and
    sanitation.  Budgetary  constraints  and  limited  capacity  at   these
    institutions resulted in persons with mental disabilities been kept  at
    home  and  cared  for  by  family,  normally  in  chains  and   without
    treatment".

33. The Panel was aware as the low quality of the  treatment  available  to
    Zimbabwean nationals with mental disabilities and  found  that  medical
    facilities in Zimbabwe are not at par with the  medical  facilities  in
    this country but noted that that is not reason enough for the appellant
    to be granted humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom. The  Panel
    [47] considered that  the  appellant's  immediate  needs  are  that  he
    continues to take 20 mg of Olanzapine every day and that would  control
    his mental condition.

34. The Panel found that  the  appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  the
    medication Olanzapine is not available in Zimbabwe and Dr Wainscott did
    not provide details of the  enquiries  she  made  as  to  whether  this
    particular drug is available. The evidence before the  Panel  was  that
    the appellant is no longer under a mental  health  order  and  that  he
    voluntary continues to live at Ross House. This  evidence  demonstrated
    to the Panel that the authorities in the United Kingdom have deemed the
    appellant to be safe to be released into the community, albeit with his
    name on the sex offenders register.

35. The Panel [47] also took into account that the appellant has his mother
    and stepfather in Zimbabwe and  noted  that  the  appellant  stated  at
    paragraph 11 of his statement that he speaks to his  mother  every  two
    weeks on the  telephone.  This  demonstrated  to  the  Panel  that  the
    appellant was sufficiently close to his parents for them to be of  some
    support to him on his return. I do not accept the argument put  forward
    for the appellant that the Panel did not take  into  account  that  the
    appellant's mother cannot look after him. The Panel made it clear  that
    if the appellant returns to Zimbabwe he will live with his parents  who
    will be able to provide him with emotional support, if not financial. I
    find that there is nothing perverse on this  conclusion  based  on  the
    fact.

36.  The  Panel  was  entitled  to  find  [57],  taking  into  account  the
    appellant's conviction and sentence for a very serious  crime  relating
    to sexual activities with minors, that it would  be  conducive  to  the
    public good that the appellant is deported from the United Kingdom. The
    Panel was entitled to find that the appellant has failed  to  establish
    any exceptional circumstances and that any difficulties he has  on  his
    return to Zimbabwe [58] will be of a temporary nature and his mother in
    that country will be able to help him and antipsychotic medication will
    be available for him in Zimbabwe  because  background  evidence  states
    that while it is limited and of poor quality, it does not say it is not
    available

37. The Panel were of the view that the appellant cannot continue  to  live
    in this country to benefit from the medical care being provided to  him
    for the rest of his life. It is implicit in the determination that  the
    Panel found that the Strasbourg jurisprudence does not impose  such  an
    obligation of medical care upon the contracting State.

38. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Panel  did  not  make  a  material
    error of law in refusing the appellant's appeal was under Article 3 and
    Article 8. I find that a different Upper Tribunal Judge would not reach
    any other conclusion taking into account all the evidence and  the  law
    in this appeal.


Signed by   Date 12th day of November 2014
Mrs S Chana
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



