
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00825/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 June 2013, 6 August 2013 and 12         |On 24 December 2013          |
|September 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                            Ageell Chiyamalendran
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Easty, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis and Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Respectively, Mr Tufan, Mr Allan and Mr Deller, Home
                    Office Presenting Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a German national, who was born on 8 August 1992.   He
    claims to have arrived in this country in 2006,  although  it  was  the
    respondent's case that he had not established that he had been in  this
    country before 2007.  His family had arrived in  the  UK  in  or  about
    2006.  The appellant went to school in England.

 2. The appellant has committed a  number  of  criminal  offences.   On  10
    December 2010 he was convicted of battery at Harrow Magistrates' Court.
     A community order was made with a curfew  requirement  for  ten  weeks
    with electronic tagging and the appellant was required  to  participate
    in a thinking skills program.  He also  had  to  pay  compensation  and
    costs.  Then on 21 March 2012, at Northwest London  Magistrates'  Court
    he was convicted again of battery, for which on 14 April 2012,  he  was
    sentenced  to  42  days  in  a  young  offenders'  institution,  and  a
    restraining order was issued against  him,  in  order  to  protect  his
    victim from harassment by him.

 3. On 6 August 2012, the appellant was convicted of intimidating a witness
    who had made a complaint about him, which offence was committed  whilst
    he was on bail.  For this offence, he was sentenced to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment in a young offenders' institution.

 4. On 31 August 2012, the respondent notified the appellant that  she  was
    considering whether his deportation was justified on grounds of  public
    policy and requested reasons why he should not  be  deported  from  the
    United Kingdom.  Following consideration of those representations which
    were made, on 15 October 2012 made a decision to deport  the  appellant
    to Germany.  The respondent's reasons are set out in her  "reasons  for
    deportation" dated 15 October 2012, in  the  course  of  which  it  was
    stated that the  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  had  not
    acquired the right  of  permanent  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    because it had not been established that he had been residing in the UK
    in accordance  with  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  for  a
    continuous  period  of  five  years.    Accordingly,   the   respondent
    considered that she did not have to establish that his deportation  was
    justified on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

 5. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before a panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  consisting  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Traynor and Mr G F Sandall, sitting at Taylor  House  on
    18 February 2013.

 6. In a determination promulgated on 26 April 2013,  the  panel  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.  In the course of its determination, the  panel
    found that the appellant had not established that his family  had  been
    present in the UK until March 2007, and that because  by  the  date  of
    decision the appellant had already spent 42 days in a young  offenders'
    institution, he had not established a continuous and unbroken  presence
    in this country for five years, and that for this reason the respondent
    did not have to establish that there were  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security in order to justify her  decision  to  deport
    him.

 7. The appellant appealed against this decision and was granted permission
    to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Pullig on 15 May  2013.   When  giving
    his reasons for granting permission, Judge Pullig stated as follows:

         "...

         3.   At paragraph 66 of the determination the panel found that  the
             earliest date of which there is evidence  of  the  appellant's
             presence was 2 March 2007.  The respondent's decision is dated
             15 October 2012.  At paragraph 67 of  the  determination,  the
             panel found that the appellant had already spent 42 years in a
             young  offenders'  institution,  as  a  consequence  had   not
             established five years' continuous residence.  As the  grounds
             state, that sentence was imposed on 24 April  2012,  by  which
             time the appellant would have already  completed  five  years'
             residence  in  this  country,  which  appears  to  have   been
             continuous.

         4.   I find that this amounts to an arguable error  of  law  as  it
             results in the panel applying the wrong  level  of  protection
             against removal.  For that reason along  permission  but  [be]
             granted and all grounds are arguable."

 8. The hearing before me commenced on 25 June 2013, at which  hearing  the
    appellant was represented by Ms Easty (who has continued  to  represent
    the  appellant  through  the  proceedings)  and  the   respondent   was
    represented by Mr Tufan.  As I  recorded  following  this  hearing,  on
    behalf of the respondent Mr Tufan  accepted  that  the  panel  had  not
    addressed the question  of  whether  or  not  the  appellant  had  been
    exercising treaty rights in this  country  during  the  period  he  had
    resided here or whether he was a member of a qualified person  who  had
    been exercising such treaty rights.  He accepted  that  the  panel  had
    found, wrongly, that he had not even been  in  this  country  for  five
    years before going to prison, whereas on any view he had in  fact  been
    present for more than five years.

 9. As I stated during the  hearing  on  that  date,  and  repeat  in  this
    determination, that was a material error of law, because  in  fact,  on
    its own finding, the panel had accepted that the appellant had been  in
    this country at least from 2 March 2007, which was more than five years
    before he was sentenced in April 2012.  The panel had not then gone  on
    to consider whether during that period the appellant  had  either  been
    exercising treaty rights or been  the  family  member  of  a  qualified
    person who had been exercising treaty rights, which it needed to do  in
    order to determine whether or not the respondent  needed  to  establish
    that  there  were  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  security"
    requiring his removal.  As the panel had not determined this issue, but
    had considered the appeal  only  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's
    removal was justified on grounds (but not serious  grounds)  of  public
    policy, public security or public health,  its  decision  must  be  set
    aside and remade.

10. Following my decision that the panel's determination  had  contained  a
    material error of  law  such  that  its  decision  must  be  remade,  I
    proceeded to hear evidence with a view to re-making  the  decision.   I
    heard evidence from the appellant and his  father  which  was  directed
    primarily to the issue of whether or not  the  appellant's  father  had
    been exercising treaty rights in this  country  for  over  five  years,
    during a period when the appellant had been living with him as a family
    member, but before he went  to  prison.   During  the  course  of  this
    hearing, the appellant's father claimed to have been seeking work since
    August 2006 and to have obtained employment  as  a  minicab  driver  in
    December 2007.  He claimed that he had various documents  at  his  home
    which could support this claim.

11. Because there was in any event insufficient  court  time  available  to
    conclude the hearing without a further  adjournment,  I  adjourned  the
    hearing part-heard until 6 August 2013, and  gave  directions  for  the
    service of further documents by the  appellant.   I  recorded  that  Mr
    Tufan was unable to state whether or not he would be able to attend  at
    the resumed hearing on behalf  of  the  respondent,  and,  as  will  be
    apparent below, in the event he was not.

12. The hearing resumed on 6 August 2012, on which date the respondent  was
    now represented by Mr Allan.  On this date  I  heard  further  evidence
    from the appellant and his mother and father, all of whom  were  cross-
    examined.  Although the evidence was concluded, there was  insufficient
    time available for the Tribunal to hear submissions and so the  hearing
    had to be adjourned yet again and  I  gave  further  directions  giving
    permission to the appellant to adduce further evidence as  appropriate,
    but in particular with regard to documents relating to the education of
    the appellant, which was an issue that had arisen during  the  hearing.
    It was felt that it might be possible to establish when  the  appellant
    had first arrived in this country more accurately  if  relevant  school
    reports could be made available.

13. The hearing then resumed again on 12 September 2013, at which  hearing,
    unfortunately,  Mr  Allan  could  not  be  present,  because  of  other
    commitments.  On this  date,  the  respondent  was  represented  by  Mr
    Deller.

14. I made a contemporaneous note of the evidence  and  submissions  during
    all the hearings, in which I attempted to set out everything which  was
    said during the course of the hearing.  As these notes are contained in
    the Records of Proceedings, I shall not set out below everything  which
    was said, but only such part of the evidence  and  submissions  as  are
    necessary for the purposes of this determination.  However, I have  had
    regard to all the evidence I heard, and to everything  said  to  me  on
    behalf of the parties, as well as to all the documents contained within
    the file, whether or not the same is specifically referred to below.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

