
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 00458 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 October 2013                            |On 22 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Julie Odigie
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Goldborough, Solicitor, instructed by Cleveland
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against a  decision  to  make
    her the subject of a deportation order following her being sentenced to
    twelve months' imprisonment for  offences  of  dishonesty.   In  simple
    terms she told lies to establish herself in the United Kingdom and  she
    got caught.  The First-tier Tribunal  heard  arguments  and  considered
    carefully points that were made but decided that the appeal against the
    decision to make the appellant the subject of a deportation  order  had
    to be dismissed.

 2. The appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since 2004. Her stay  has
    been entirely without permission.

 3. There are really two criticisms made  in  the  grounds  supporting  the
    application for permission to appeal.  The  first  is  that  no  proper
    regard was taken of the appellant's fear that  her  daughter  would  be
    subject to FGM in the event of their return and the second is that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not have proper regard to the interests of  the
    appellant's children when it made its decision.  There are two children
    here to consider, a girl who was born in 2007 and a boy who was born in
    2009.

 4. There really is no merit of any kind in the criticism of  the  Tribunal
    for its consideration of the  claim  that  there  was  a  risk  of  the
    appellant's daughter  being  subject  to  FGM.   The  Tribunal  clearly
    appreciated the background material and recognised that FGM is  a  risk
    for some women in Nigeria, although it is a practice that is  declining
    and is a practice that is more prevalent  amongst  certain  communities
    and families.  It noted there was no evidence that began to show  there
    was a particular  risk  for  the  appellant's  daughter  and  concluded
    entirely realistically on the material before it that this  was  not  a
    real issue in the case.

 5. Mr Goldborough addressed me in measured terms and referred me helpfully
    to the  background  material,  particularly  the  Operational  Guidance
    Notes, but I find it impossible to see anything  to  criticise  in  the
    Tribunal's findings on this point which were properly underpinned by  a
    lawful adverse credibility finding.

 6.  The  second  criticism  has  theoretical  attraction.   The   Tribunal
    correctly directed itself to have regard to the best interests  of  the
    appellant's children, but did not make many findings, and in a  perfect
    world the determination would have been improved by a  short  paragraph
    or so  dealing  expressly  with  how  removal  would  impact  upon  the
    interests of the children.  That was not done.  It was a fair criticism
    and I am quite sure this is the reason for permission to  appeal  being
    granted.

 7. However, when the determination is considered more thoroughly  than  is
    warranted when an application for permission to appeal  is  considered,
    it is plain that the criticism is without substance.  The  children  do
    not have any particularly strong elements to their private  and  family
    lives in the United Kingdom.  In the  absence  of  evidence  suggesting
    otherwise it must be assumed that the most  important  relationship  is
    with their mother.  There is no evidence, for example, of strong social
    contacts, although these would  be  unlikely  for  small  children,  or
    particular medical or educational needs might possibly have supported a
    different conclusion.  There is evidence of  children  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom and in the case of the older child doing well at school.
     This was all recognised by the Tribunal and commented upon  expressly.
    It is quite clear to me that the Tribunal, although perhaps slightly at
    fault for not addressing the evidence specifically, had regard  to  all
    material points and  made  a  conclusion  wholly  consistent  with  the
    evidence before it and the established case law, namely that  generally
    small children are best off living with  their  mother.   There  is  no
    contraindication in the evidence and neither was it argued  before  me,
    and I can see no substantial criticism against the  decision  that  has
    been made.

 8. It follows therefore that although I have looked  at  the  points  that
    have been raised I find no material error in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal and I dismiss the appeal before me today.

 9. I am grateful to Mr  Goldborough  for  putting  his  submissions  in  a
    measured and realistic way.



Decision

The Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 October 2013                |








