
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00641/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 April 2015                     |On 3 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                     FB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rana, Counsel, instructed by Clapham Law LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a  national  of  Ghana,  challenges  with  permission  a
    determination of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge W. L. Grant dismissing
    his appeal against a decision made by the respondent on 10  March  2014
    to deport him as a foreign criminal in accordance with s.32(5)  of  the
    Borders Act 2007.

2.   It is unnecessary to say very much about the grounds  as  both  parties
    were broadly in agreement that the decision was  vitiated  by  multiple
    legal errors and should be set  aside  and  I  found  myself  in  clear
    agreement with them. In essence the FtT judge applied the wrong set  of
    Immigration Rules (a pre-28 July instead of a post- 28 July set):  even
    in respect of the Rules of the  FtT  Judge  did  apply,  he  failed  to
    properly differentiate the criteria set out in paragraphs 398, 399  and
    399A (he simply lumped them together); he failed  to  address  properly
    the issue of the best interests of the three children, one of whom  was
    British; and he failed to address adequately the s.117C considerations.

3.   The error on the part of the FtT judge necessitate that I set aside  is
    determination.

4.    Mr  Rana  initially  sought  to  submit  that  in  setting  aside  the
    determination I should specify that the next  hearing  should  consider
    the appellant's appeal de novo. I decline to do so.  The grounds raised
    no challenge to the FtT Judge's findings of fact.  He saw and heard the
    appellant and witnesses.  In such  circumstances  it  would  have  been
    entirely wrong in my view not to preserve unchallenged  findings.   The
    only caveat I make is that since Mr Deller himself urged that the  next
    Tribunal adopt  a  "Devaseelan"  approach,  so  that  the  FtT  Judge's
    findings are only a starting point.  I will take that as an  indication
    that the respondent is prepared to have some flexibility left as to the
    extent to which those findings are preserved.

5.   Mr Rana urged that I exercise my power to remit this case  rather  than
    set it down for the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision.   Mr  Deller
    said he was content with either course.  On reflection I  have  decided
    to remit the appeal to the FtT with  a  direction  that  it  takes  the
    findings of fact made by FtT Judge W.L. Grant as its starting point. My
    essential reason is that the legal framework the judge sought to  apply
    to the appellant's appeal was so erroneous that it could be  said  that
    he did not have a fair hearing.  I bear in mind also that remittal  may
    well result in a speedier disposal of this appeal.  I accept  that  the
    negative terms of my decision do not positively assist  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who inherits this appeal or knows the  correct  laws  to
    apply, but there is a considerable benefit of  doubt  of  higher  court
    authority on the relevant law - see more  recently  SS  (Congo)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 387 - and there is no value in my seeking to add my own  gloss
    to that.

6.   For the above reasons:

7.   The FtT judge materially erred in law

8.   The FtT judge's decision is set aside.

9.   The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  a  direction
    that the findings of fact made by the FtT judge be taken as a  starting
    point.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
