
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00711/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Judgment given orally at hearing     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|On 27 February 2015                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YTH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Buley, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State,  but  for
    convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Thus, the appellant is a  citizen  of  Vietnam  born  on  22
    December 1981.

 2. The proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal followed  a  refusal  by
    the respondent to revoke a deportation order, that decision having been
    taken on 4 April 2014.  The deportation order was originally made as  a
    result of the appellant's offending,  consisting  of  convictions  from
    about October 2004 until 17 August 2007 for various offences as set out
    in  the  respondent's  decision  letter.   Those   offences   included,
    materially, an offence of possession of a Class A drug, namely  heroin,
    with  intent  to  supply,  for   which   she   received   a   community
    rehabilitation order for one year. The appellant was sentenced for that
    offence on 4 October 2004. Thus it was that there  was  a  decision  to
    make  a  deportation  order,  and  a  deportation  order  was  made  in
    consequence.

 3. An application was made in about 2011 for  revocation  of  that  order.
    The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    revoke the deportation order  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Osborne and Mrs N Bray, a non-legal member, on 27 June  2014  with  the
    determination being promulgated on 15 July 2014.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal  with  reference
    to  the  relevant  deportation  Immigration  Rules,  that  is  to   say
    paragraphs 399(a) and (b). I should state that neither  the  provisions
    of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  nor  the  recent  amendments  to   the
    Immigration Rules are pertinent to the decision I  make  today  because
    although they would apply  on  any  re-making  of  a  decision  or  any
    subsequent hearing, those statutory provisions and the changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules were not in force at the time  of  the  hearing,  and
    more importantly, nor at the date of  promulgation  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

 5. It is not necessary for me  to  set  out  extensively  the  appellant's
    history in terms of the circumstances in which  she  came  to  the  UK.
    That is set out in  detail  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I can summarise it probably rather crudely  by  saying  that
    the question of whether the appellant had been a victim of  trafficking
    was considered. That relates to her history  of  having  left  Vietnam,
    gone to China apparently having been placed  in  a  brothel,  and  then
    having moved to various other countries including countries in  Europe.
    She then came to the UK. Her account is also  of  having  worked  in  a
    brothel in London.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant's overall  account
    of her experiences was consistent, and applying the lower  standard  of
    proof (about which no issue has been taken) it  was  decided  that  the
    appellant is likely to have told the truth  about  her  background  but
    also noted that her recollection of events was somewhat hazy due to her
    addiction to heroin.  It is as well at this stage to point out that the
    decision to make a deportation order was on the basis that  she  was  a
    persistent offender who in the view of the Secretary of State  shows  a
    particular disregard for the law.  That is evident  from  the  decision
    letter at, for example, [43] and [44].

 7. The First-tier Tribunal  made  positive  credibility  findings,  having
    taken into account a determination from an appeal  hearing  some  years
    earlier at which her credibility was rejected.  There is  no  challenge
    on behalf of the respondent to that re-assessment and  re-appraisal  of
    the appellant's credibility.  It is relevant to point out that  at  the
    time of that earlier hearing,  the  appellant  was  still  addicted  to
    heroin and there was no reason at that time to believe that  she  would
    not continue to commit offences as before.

 8. At [31] of its determination the panel of the First-tier Tribunal noted
    that after spending a lengthy period of time both completing her  final
    sentence  for  criminal  matters  and  in  immigration  detention,  the
    appellant appeared to have received appropriate treatment for her  drug
    addiction and there is no sign  now  that  she  continues  to  be  drug
    dependent.  The Tribunal  noted  that  she  had  committed  no  further
    criminal offences, indicating that she does not require  the  money  to
    feed her habit, and is no longer associating with  her  former  partner
    who was also a heroin addict.  The panel noted that the  appellant  had
    given birth to two children since the date of the  first  determination
    and that she had demonstrated by her actions an ability and willingness
    to care for them appropriately.  Those are matters that they considered
    should be given considerable weight in their overall assessment of  the
    appellant's situation.  I pause there to indicate that the  appellant's
    two children, whom I shall identify by initials, are T who was born  on
    7 October 2010, a daughter, and a son, W, born on 13 July 2012.

 9. Continuing with the First-tier  Tribunal's  credibility  assessment,  I
    note that at [36] of the determination it is stated that the  appellant
    has benefited significantly from her friendship with a witness who gave
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, and  who,  to  summarise,  has
    supported the appellant.  It was noted that there had been  significant
    delays in the respondent's decision-making in terms of the  refusal  to
    revoke the deportation order and that  that  decision  was  taken  some
    three years after the application for revocation  was  made.   Although
    noting that that was a significant  delay  the  Tribunal  did  in  fact
    reflect on the possibility, if not probability,  that  that  delay  had
    actually worked to the advantage  of  the  appellant.  Nevertheless  it
    concluded at [38] that  the  appellant's  circumstances  are  now  very
    different from those which pertained at the time she was sent to prison
    for the last time in 2007.  I quote as follows:

         "She appears to have turned her life around and it is against  that
         general background that we move  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's
         rights under Article 8 both in terms of her right  to  private  and
         family life."

10. I revert to an earlier part of the determination, that is  [24],  where
    paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules is set out. It  is  as  well  to
    note that in the grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal it
    was thought by the judge who granted  permission  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not adverted to the provisions to paragraphs 390  and  391
    which deal with revocation of a deportation  order.   Of  course,  with
    reference to [24] of  the  determination  it  can  be  seen  that  that
    conclusion was in error.

11. Continuing with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, it agreed that
    between 2004 and 2007 the appellant could properly be  described  as  a
    "persistent offender" and thus paragraph  398(c)  applied.   The  panel
    went on to look at the provisions of paragraph  399  in  terms  of  her
    relationship with her children.  It was not  apparently  disputed  that
    the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    those children who are British citizens but the  Tribunal  went  on  to
    identify and recognise  that  the  question  of  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK  had  to  be  decided
    with  reference  to  paragraph   399(a)(ii)(a),   and   whether   under
    subparagraph (b) there is another family member who is able to care for
    the children in the UK.

12. The Tribunal expressed itself not satisfied that the appellant had lost
    all ties with her home country and gave reasons for coming to that view
    at [40] and [41].  It concluded that the appellant was not able to meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules with regard  to  her  private
    life. In respect of her family  life  it  concluded  that  she  had  no
    partner at the present time but that it  was  very  much  in  the  best
    interests of her children that they should continue to live  with  her,
    she having cared for them from birth.

13. I deal next with the arguments that have been advanced on behalf of the
    parties.  The challenge to the determination on behalf of the Secretary
    of State relates principally, it seems to me, to what is said  to  have
    been an inadequate consideration  of  the  public  interest,  reference
    being made in the grounds  to  the  "severity  of  the  offence  (sic)"
    committed. The issue of serious crime and deterrence is  also  referred
    to and various decisions of the Court of Appeal including DS (India)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  544  are
    cited.  It is pointed out that the public interest in  the  deportation
    of those who commit serious crimes goes well beyond the need to deprive
    the individual of the opportunity to re-offend.  It extends to the need
    to deter others and to prevent serious crime generally  and  to  uphold
    the public abhorrence of such offending. Other authorities are cited.

14. In terms of the factual situation, it is said in the  grounds  and  was
    advanced on behalf of the respondent by Mr Tarlow, that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred by failing to have a genuine and proper regard as to
    whether the appellant's circumstances have altered either by  a  change
    of circumstances since the order  was  made  or  by  fresh  information
    coming to light which was not before the appellate authorities  or  the
    Secretary of State.  The argument continues that there was only  "self-
    serving evidence" that her ex-partner cannot care for her  children  in
    her absence.  It is suggested in the grounds that it  remains  open  to
    the appellant for her children to relocate with her as they  are  young
    enough to adapt to life in Vietnam where she has family support.  It is
    also said that the British citizen children can return at any time  and
    can  maintain  contact  with  their  father  via  modern   methods   of
    communication.

15. So far as the application of the  rules  is  concerned,  paragraph  390
    provides that

         "... an application for revocation of a deportation order  will  be
         considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
         following:

             (i)  The grounds on which the order was made;

             (ii) Any representations made in support of the revocation;

               (iii)    The  interests  of  the  community,  including  the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;

             (iv)  The  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
             compassionate circumstances."

16. Paragraph 390A provides that where paragraph 398 applies, the Secretary
    of State in assessing the application to  revoke  a  deportation  order
    will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies,  and  if  it  does
    not, it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation order  will  be  outweighed  by
    other factors.

17. Paragraph 398 provides as follows:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and...

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good because, in  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of
             State, their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law, the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by  other
             factors."

18. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that  when  one  considers  the
    terms of paragraph 390A, viz. "where paragraph 398 applies" it  can  be
    seen that paragraph  398(c)  in  particular  does  not  apply  to  this
    appellant.  The relevant subparagraph is the one quoted i.e. that  they
    are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.

19. The argument runs as follows.  The First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that
    the appellant was not at risk of  re-offending  and,  in  summary,  had
    turned her life  around.  Therefore,  she  is  not  (present  tense)  a
    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the  law.  She
    may have been found to have been a persistent offender by  the  earlier
    First-tier Tribunal and when the deportation order was made but such is
    certainly not the case now.  Thus, it  is  said  390A  does  not  apply
    because 398 does not apply.  Both  those  paragraphs  are  set  in  the
    present tense and the present situation is such that the  appellant  is
    not a persistent offender.

20. It is also submitted, in effect, that the arguments advanced  in  terms
    of deterrence are misconceived because this is not  a  'serious  crime'
    type case, that not being the basis on which the deportation order  was
    made.  In answer to the question posed by me in relation  to  at  least
    one of the offences committed by the appellant, namely possession  with
    intent to supply a class A drug, Mr Buley on behalf  of  the  appellant
    said that one has to take into account the sentence  that  was  imposed
    and here the sentence  was  a  non-custodial  one,  being  a  community
    rehabilitation order for one year.  It was submitted that in the  cases
    of persistent offenders, under paragraph 398  the  public  interest  in
    deterrence has much less a part to play, and the Tribunal was  entitled
    to find as it did on the basis of the evidence before it.

21. It was further submitted that paragraphs  390  and  390A  are  umbrella
    provisions that say nothing, or  virtually  nothing,  about  where  the
    public interest lies. The public interest considerations come into play
    when one looks at paragraph 398 which deals with the  circumstances  of
    those who have been convicted of offences which result in  imprisonment
    for either periods of at least four years or periods of less than  four
    years but at least twelve months.

22. So far as concerns this distinct  argument  in  relation  to  Paragraph
    390A, I reject the argument. Paragraph 390 in its own terms requires by
    implication, if not expressly, a recognition of  the  public  interest.
    One only has to look at the first  sentence  of  paragraph  390  to  be
    satisfied about  that.  Thus,  "an  application  for  revocation  of  a
    deportation  order  will  be  considered  in  the  light  of  all   the
    circumstances" then stating matters which are to  be  included  in  the
    consideration.

23. The circumstances in which the deportation order was made plainly would
    have included the public interest not only in preventing  a  particular
    individual from offending, and assessing their  risk  of  re-offending,
    but also the public interest in deterring others.  One sees further  at
    paragraph 390(iii) that the interests of the community are to be  taken
    into account. Many authorities over several years have  emphasised  the
    importance of the public interest being taken into account, that public
    interest including the need to deter others and that foreign  offenders
    must understand that the consequence of offending may be deportation.

24. Thus, I do not accept that in the case of  persistent  offenders  under
    paragraph 398(c) little or no regard needs to  be  had  to  the  public
    interest in deterrence. The public interest did need to be  taken  into
    account and I am  not  satisfied  that  the  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal here did reflect that aspect of the public interest.

25. It is true to say that at [39] for example, the Tribunal did  refer  to
    paragraph 398(c) including in  terms  of  an  individual's  deportation
    being conducive to the public good because their offending  has  caused
    serious harm or they are a persistent offender.  I also  note  that  at
    [45] it was stated that "it can no longer be said that her  deportation
    would be conducive to the public good". However,  those  references  to
    the public interest, general as  they  are  and  not  specific  to  any
    particular  aspects  of  the  public  interest,  in  my  judgment   are
    insufficient  to  reflect  what  should  have  been  reflected  in  the
    decision, for example the public interest in deterrence.

26. I do not consider that I need to go further and express a detailed view
    about the other aspect  of  deterrence,  or  the  same  aspect  but  in
    different colour, namely public revulsion at  the  seriousness  of  the
    offending.  There is something to be said for the argument on behalf of
    the  appellant  that  seriousness  of  offending  was  not   what   was
    contemplated by the Secretary of State, although one does have to  have
    regard to the offence of possession with intent to  supply.  As  I  say
    however, it is sufficient for present purposes  to  conclude  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did err in law in terms of its failure to recognise
    the public interest in the respects to which I have referred.  However,
    that issue does not seem to me to provide  a  complete  answer  to  the
    questions I need to decide today.

27. The questions are whether there is an error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and whether any such error of law requires  the
    decision to be set aside.  Having regard to the findings of  fact  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal in terms of paragraph 399, I do not consider
    that the error of law made by the First-tier Tribunal does require  the
    decision to be set aside.

28. Paragraph 399(a) refers to circumstances where a person has  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a child under the age  of  18
    years who is in the UK and (i) the child is a British citizen and  (for
    present purposes) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK.  The First-tier Tribunal did come to  the  view  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK  albeit
    that that conclusion  could  have  been  more  explicitly  articulated.
    There was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of  the  relationship
    that those children have with their father.  He  provided  two  written
    statements in which he indicated the extent to  which  he  has  contact
    with the children and  his  views  about  separation  from  them.   The
    evidence was that he had close and regular contact with them.   He  has
    four children from another relationship and it was not  suggested,  and
    it has not been suggested before me, that he would be able to leave the
    UK in order to continue contact with his and the appellant's  children.
    Indeed, it does not appear that  he  is  in  a  relationship  with  the
    appellant any longer.

29. At [42]  of  the  determination  the  Tribunal  stated  that  that  the
    children's father, who I will identify as H, did not attend the hearing
    but  that  he  had  provided  two  witness  statements  confirming  his
    position. The reason I say that the Tribunal's conclusions in  relation
    to the issue of reasonableness of the children  leaving  the  UK  could
    have been better articulated is because it is only  implicit  that  the
    Tribunal  accepted  the  evidence  of  H  in  his  witness  statements.
    Nevertheless, I  consider  that  it  is  sufficiently  clear  from  the
    determination and strongly implicit, that his  evidence  was  accepted,
    albeit noting that  the  Tribunal  had  no  opportunity  to  hear  oral
    evidence  from  him,  particularly  with  regard  to   the   level   of
    responsibility he has assumed for his partner's children.

30. Being satisfied as I am that the Tribunal concluded that  there  was  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship between the appellant  and
    her two children who are British citizens, a  matter  uncontested,  and
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK,
    the Tribunal then had to decide whether there was another family member
    who was able to care for them in  the  UK.   The  conclusions  in  that
    respect were more explicit and in my judgement sustainable.

31. At [42] it was concluded that:

         "... in general terms we are satisfied  that  it  appears  unlikely
         that he would be in a position to care for [T] and [W] if the  need
         arose and in any event, that would not substitute for the  care  of
         their mother thus the alternative would be for them to  be  removed
         together with their mother to Vietnam.  We are satisfied  that  the
         children are young enough to  adapt  to  the  changes  which  would
         thereby be engendered and also find that it is highly  likely  that
         the children are exposed to the Vietnamese language at home..."

32. The Tribunal went on to state  however,  at  [43],  that  although  the
    children would be free in theory to return to the UK at any time:

         "... the practical possibility of this happening must be taken into
         account in order to reach a sensible decision and we are satisfied,
         that if the children returned to Vietnam with their mother that  is
         where they would have to be brought up and  where  they  would  not
         enjoy the same high level of facilities as would  be  available  to
         them in the UK."

33. So at [42] one finds the conclusion that  it  is  unlikely  that  their
    father would be in a position to care for them. I am satisfied that the
    Tribunal found that there is no other family member who is able to care
    for the children  in  the  UK,  no  other  family  member  having  been
    suggested other than their father.

34. In those circumstances, where the Tribunal was entitled  to  find  that
    the terms of paragraph 399 applied to the circumstances of this appeal.
    Notwithstanding the error of law that I have identified, it is  not  an
    error of law that requires the decision to be set aside, it  not  being
    material to the outcome of the appeal. The decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  therefore
    stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  the  children  T  and  W.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      14/04/15

