
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00180/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th January 2019                 |On 7th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD BECKETT
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          ERIC (aka JAYJAY) GNAKPA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett instructed by Turpin and Miller LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Mr Gnapka, a French national date of birth 23rd September 1992, was
         served with a decision to deport on 9th January 2018 following  his
         conviction on 24th January 2017 of 2 counts of assault  occasioning
         actual bodily harm and assault by beating for which he  received  2
         years imprisonment.

      2. Between 17th January 2014 and 10 February, he received a conviction
         for three offences against the person. He  is  also  subject  to  a
         restraining order for five years expiring on 23rd January 2022.

      3. Mr Gnapka's appeal against the decision was allowed  by  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge  Rowlands  for  reasons  set  out  in  a   decision
         promulgated on 2nd August 2018.

      4. The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal
         on the grounds, essentially, that the First-tier Tribunal judge had
         failed to take relevant  evidence  into  account,  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for the finding that Mr Gnapka did not represent a
         serious  threat  to  public  policy  and  security,  and  that  the
         assessment of future risk in  determining  proportionality  was  in
         error.

         Mr Gnapka's immigration and criminal history.

      5. Mr Gnapka claims to have been resident  since  2006.  Although  his
         actual date of entry is not acknowledged  by  the  SSHD,  the  SSHD
         accepts that Mr Gnapka has permanent residence  and  has  therefore
         acquired the 'second-level' of protection  from  expulsion,  namely
         serious grounds of public policy or security are required.

      6. Mr Gnapka has three children who live with his ex-partner  and  her
         three children from  an  earlier  relationship.  He  claims  to  be
         reconciled with her and to see his children.

      7. According to this witness  statement,  after  separating  from  the
         mother of  his  children,  his  new  partner  was  jealous  of  his
         relationship with his children and this led to him  losing  control
         of his emotions and assaulting her.

      8. In January 2014 he was convicted of three separate assaults on  the
         mother of his children involving  slapping,  knocking  her  to  the
         floor and punching her; he received a community order sentence.

      9. On 24th January 2017, he was sentenced to serious offences  against
         a new partner: in September 2016 an assault  with  a  wooden  stick
         against her right thigh, knocking her  down,  pulling  her  up  and
         assaulting her again; in October 2016 punching her in the face;  in
         November 2016 kicking her on the ankle  and  shin.  He  received  a
         total sentence of 24 months imprisonment, taking  full  account  of
         his guilty plea. Two other counts (to  which  he  has  pleaded  not
         guilty) remain on file

     10. The sentencing judge said that he took  the  view  that  the  first
         offence

             "was an extremely serious offence committed only a  couple  of
             years after the  magistrates  had  given  you  a  chance,  the
             previous, less serious, but similar offending" ([sic])

     11. The judge went on to say

             "...It is quite plain that  you  must  not  have  any  further
             contact with ... in any way at all. And you must not go to her
             address or within 200m of her. And it seems  to  me  that  she
             should be subjected to the protection of that court order  for
             the next five years.."







         Error of law

     12. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  incorporated  Mr  Gnapka's  witness
         statement into his decision and set out the cross examination.  The
         judge did not make findings on all the assertions in  that  witness
         statement, including that Mr Gnapka  is  now  reconciled  with  the
         mother of his children (his first victim) or that he sees them.

     13. The First-tier Tribunal judge found:

           . He first had to consider the principles in regulation 21(5) of
             the 2006 EEA Regulations.

           . The previous assault matters, although of similar nature,  did
             not make him a prolific offender.

           .  Mr  Gnapka  had  shown  "quite  strong  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom".

           . "he is clearly not somebody who  I  would  consider  to  be  a
             persistent and regular offender"

           . "his deportation would not need to be in the best interests of
             the United Kingdom and  that  the  fact  that  he  is  totally
             integrated into society here" [sic]

           . "he  does  not  represent  a  proportionate  and  sufficiently
             serious threat to the public in the United Kingdom".

     14. The judge said [16] that there was no need  to  consider  right  to
         family or private life because of  his  decision  that  deportation
         would not be in accordance with the Regulations but that if he  had
         to  he  "would  have  found  that  his  deportation  would  not  be
         proportionate and would amount to an unlawful interference with his
         family life".

     15. Evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal  judge  but  which
         the judge has  not  taken  account  of  in  reaching  his  decision
         included:

           . There is a restraining order that does not expire  until  23rd
             January 2022;

           . That the sentencing judge described the offences  against  the
             two women as being of similar nature and the later offences as
             being extremely serious.

           . The OASYS Report states that Mr Gnapka is not able  to  manage
             his emotions appropriately, which led to violence for which he
             partially blames his victim.

     16.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  the   appeal   under
         regulation 21(5) of the 2006 Regulations,  not  regulation  27  and
         Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         failed to identify, on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  him,
         whether there were serious grounds of public  policy  and  security
         for the making of the decision; he moved  straight  to  considering
         the proportionality of the decision. The judge failed to take  into
         account the restraining order, the OASYs  report,  the  nature  and
         similarity of  the  offending  behaviour  against  each  victim  as
         referred to by the sentencing judge, the  steps  taken  by  him  to
         address  his  behaviour  and  whether  he  expressed   remorse   or
         rehabilitation. There was no finding in connection with the contact
         he has with his children, if any. There was no reasoned finding why
         he could be considered to be  socially  and  culturally  integrated
         into UK society in the context of the evidence before the judge and
         the offences  he  has  committed  against  two  partners.  Although
         obiter, he gives no adequate reasons, for finding that Mr  Gnapka's
         deportation would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
         family and private life given that there are no findings as to  his
         family life.

     17. The judge has failed to address the evidence before him in reaching
         his decision; his reasons for reaching the conclusions he  did  are
         lacking in substance and, because of the failure  to  identify  and
         take account of relevant evidence, lacking in adequacy.

     18. The judge has erred in law such that the decision is set  aside  to
         be remade.

     19. In this case, Mr Gnapka's evidence has  not  resulted  in  findings
         being made that would enable a sustainable decision to be made.  It
         is not the role of the Upper Tribunal to make primary  findings  of
         fact, which will be required in this appeal. For these  reasons  we
         remit the appeal to be heard afresh, no findings - such as they are
         - retained.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be heard  afresh;  no
    findings preserved.


     Date 1st February 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
