
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
DA/00226/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision Promulgated          |
|On 22nd May 2017                           | On 6th June 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                          CHARLES KANEBI BIACHI + 2
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr G. Lee, Counsel instructed by Liberty & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr J. McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of birth 15th  March  1958.
    His dependants are his minor children, born in August 2010 and  October
    2011.  He has permission[1] to appeal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Cassel) to dismiss his human  rights  appeal.  The
    determination was promulgated on the 4th January 2017.
    Background


 2. The Appellant has a long and complex immigration history,  not  all  of
    which is relevant to this decision. It suffices to say that the  First-
    tier Tribunal has accepted that he arrived in the UK in October 1991 as
    a visitor. The Secretary of State thereafter  varied  his  leave  until
    August 1992 but once this date had passed he became an  overstayer.  He
    married a British citizen in 1993 and made an application to remain  as
    her spouse. That was refused and on the 7th November 1997 the Secretary
    of State made a decision to deport him. It  should  be  noted  that  in
    November 1997 deportation  was  not  a  procedure  reserved  for  those
    persons now defined as 'foreign criminals' or those whose removal would
    otherwise be conducive to the  public  good.   As  MacDonald  puts  it:
    "Anyone...could be deported for overstaying or breaching conditions  of
    leave"[2].


 3. The Appellant was granted  an  in-country  right  of  appeal  which  he
    exercised. In a shocking reminder of the state of  the  system  in  the
    1990s it took four and half years for the appeal  to  be  listed.   The
    appeal was dismissed by a 'Special Adjudicator' Mr PV Ievins on the 8th
    February 2002.   For reasons unknown the Appellant did not attend  that
    appeal.  Mr Ievins noted that the case before him was what was known as
    a 'limited deport'.   The decision under appeal  had  been  made  under
    s3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971  as  qualified  by  s5  of  the
    Immigration Act 1988. The effect of this legislative framework was that
    persons who had been in the country for less  than  seven  years  could
    only successfully appeal such  a  decision  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Secretary of State did not have the power in law to  make  it.    Since
    the Appellant had failed to establish  that  this  was  the  case,  the
    appeal fell  to  be  dismissed.  The  Secretary  of  State  signed  the
    deportation order on the 14th May 2002.

 4. Nothing happened.  The Appellant remained in the country  and  in  2006
    attempted to regularise his position by making an application under the
    then operative provision on  '14  years  long  residence'.    This  was
    refused on the 11th April 2008. A number of applications, refusals  and
    appeals ensued.

 5. The Appellant remained in  the  UK  throughout.  His  marriage  to  the
    British citizen long since dissolved he  met  his  current  partner  (a
    Jamaican national) and had children.  He worked, and studied, achieving
    a BSc in Pharmacology and an MSc in Bio-medical Immunology.

 6. This was the factual and legal  background  in  the  appeal  that  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal in December of last year.  The  decision
    under appeal was a decision dated 24th October 2014 to refuse to  grant
    leave on human rights grounds.





    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The First-tier Tribunal reviewed the  Appellant's  immigration  history
    and the reasons for refusal. The Respondent had  found  that  Appellant
    could not qualify for leave to remain under  Appendix  FM  because  his
    claimed  partner  was  not  settled.  Nor  could  he  comply  with  the
    'suitability requirements' because he had a deportation  order  against
    him: S-LTR.1.2.  He could not be granted leave to remain  as  a  parent
    because neither child was either British or settled; at the date of the
    application nor had either been in the UK for more  than  seven  years.
    In respect of his private life the Appellant could not rely on  his  20
    years continuous residence in accordance with paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii),
    because the outstanding deportation order precluded  him  from  meeting
    the  aforementioned 'suitability' requirements.


 8. The First-tier Tribunal began its deliberations by looking at paragraph
    390 of the Immigration Rules, the provision relating to  revocation  of
    deportation orders. The Tribunal found that this provision  had  to  be
    read in light of the 'public interest' factors set out at s117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This included  the  fact
    that the Appellant's stay in this country had always  been  precarious.
    The Tribunal then directed  itself  to  consider  the  decision  in  IT
    (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ
    932  as  follows:  "Although  much  of  the  judgement  refers  to  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal, which  the  Appellant  is  not,  the
    guidance is one which I follow,  so  far  as  it  is  relevant  to  the
    Appellant" [at 25].  The determination then sets out  the  guidance  in
    IT.  It  refers  to  negative  findings  made  about  the   Appellant's
    immigration status by a Tribunal in 2009 (the determination itself  was
    not available but the excerpt had been set out in the refusal  letter).
    Having reviewed the facts the final conclusion is reached at  paragraph
    40:

         "In considering the immigration rules, I find  there  are  no  very
         compelling circumstances which would outweigh the  public  interest
         in the Appellant's deportation".


    The appeal was accordingly dismissed.






    The Appeal


 9. The grounds of appeal are twofold.

10. First, it is submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
    application of a "very compelling circumstances" test. The Appellant is
    not a foreign criminal, and his 'deportation order'  was  in  effect  a
    mechanism for his administrative removal only.

11. Second, the Tribunal erred in discounting the very  long  residence  of
    the Appellant on the basis that his stay was at all times "precarious".
    The fact that it was precarious did not mean it  was  irrelevant:  this
    much is recognised by the 'twenty year  long  residence'  provision  at
    276ADE(1)(iii).



    The Response

12. For the Respondent Mr McGirr conceded that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    erred in its approach. The Appellant was not a foreign criminal and the
    Tribunal was not required to find "very  compelling  circumstances"  to
    allow his appeal. Mr McGirr further agreed that the long residence  was
    plainly a factor pertinent to any Article 8 assessment outside  of  the
    Rules.  He invited me to set the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    aside and remake the decision myself.




    Error of Law


13.  The  decision   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   contains   material
    misdirection's  as  set  out  in  the  grounds  of   appeal   and   the
    determination is set aside by consent.


14. The parties invited me to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  on  the
    material before me.




    Discussion and Findings


15.  The  operative  provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is   paragraph
    276ADE(1):
            276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
            to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at
            the date of application, the applicant:
            (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
            Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in
            Appendix FM; and
            (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
            grounds of private life in the UK; and
            (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
            (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
            (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
            the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
            imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
            applicant to leave the UK; or
            (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
            at least half of his life living continuously in the UK
            (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
            (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
            has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
            (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
            significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
            country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
            UK.

16. As I note above it  is  the  unchallenged  finding  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant has lived in this country  since  1991.  At
    the date of this decision he has therefore been living  in  the  United
    Kingdom for approaching 26 years.   He has never been to prison and  so
    meets the requirements at sub-paragraph (iii).


17. The only matter in issue is  whether  he  can  meet  those  suitability
    requirements in Appendix FM that are imported into 267ADE(1) by  virtue
    of sub-paragraph (i). The only one of these requirements that has  been
    put in issue is S-LRT.1.2:

         S-LTR.1.2. The applicant is currently the subject of a  deportation
         order.

18. Before me Mr Lee submitted that this provision should be held  only  to
    apply to a deportation order "within the current meaning of the Rules".
    The Appellant was not a criminal and nor had  it  been  said  that  his
    deportation was conducive to the public good.    The  order  should  be
    interpreted in light of the circumstances prevailing at the time it was
    made: it was in  effect  a  decision  to  administratively  remove  the
    Appellant and should be read in that way.


19. Mr McGirr agreed that the deportation order against the  Appellant  was
    not of the species that we are familiar with today.  It  was  simply  a
    decision to remove and to that extent was something of  a  nullity.  It
    had not however been revoked and in the plain language of the rules, S-
    LTR.1.2 did apply.

20. Although Mr Lee's argument was logically  attractive,  I  can  find  no
    basis in law for supposing that the deportation order made on the  14th
    May 2002 could be ignored. I find that the proper course  would  be  to
    consider first whether the  order  should  be  revoked,  and  then  the
    Appellant's claim that he should be given leave to remain on grounds of
    long residence.

21. The current provisions relating to the revocation of deportation orders
    are set out  at  paras  390-391A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  I  have
    highlighted the pertinent parts:
         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
         considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
         following:
           (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance
           of an effective immigration control;
           (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
           circumstances.
         390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.
         391. In the case of a person who has been deported following
         conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation of a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:
           (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
           person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4
           years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the
           deportation order when, if an application for revocation is
           received, consideration will be given on a case by case basis to
           whether the deportation order should be maintained, or
           (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
           person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
           years, at any time,
         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to
         the Status of Refugees, or there are other exceptional
         circumstances that mean the continuation is outweighed by
         compelling factors.
         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
         authorized unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
         information coming to light which was not before the appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of time since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.


22. I have highlighted paragraph 390 because it would appear  to  apply  to
    any application. Paragraph 390A is of no relevance, since this is not a
    case to which paragraph 398 applies. Similarly 391  is  not  applicable
    since the Appellant is not someone who has been convicted of a criminal
    offence. Since this would appear to be  an  appeal  falling  under  the
    rubric of "other cases", I apply  paragraph  391A.  I  note  that  this
    contains a presumption that the deportation order will remain in  place
    unless the situation has materially  altered.    The  passage  of  time
    itself may amount to a change in circumstances.


23. The chronology in the Respondent's bundle informs me that the Appellant
    has previously applied  to  have  the  deportation  order  against  him
    revoked and for leave to remain  to  be  granted  on  grounds  of  long
    residence. I am told that on the 28th May 2009 the First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed an appeal against the Secretary of State's rejection of those
    applications. I use those  words  because  neither  side  was  able  to
    provide me with a copy of that determination,  nor  even  identify  the
    Judge(s) who wrote it. The refusal letter contains  an  extract,  which
    indicates  that  the  Tribunal  made  a  damning  assessment   of   the
    Appellant's character:

         "In reaching this decision we have noted that the Appellant entered
         the UK approximately 18 years previously in October 1991.  We  also
         noted that most of his presence in the  UK  has  been  illegal  and
         without proper leave to remain. We come to the clear view  that  we
         find it hard to consider a more clear case of an Appellant who  has
         employed a catalogue of deceit and failed applications in order  to
         maintain his presence within the UK. Such deception has extended to
         lying about his children in Nigeria, lying about the deaths of  his
         parents and entering into a marriage of convenience in the  UK.  He
         has in addition illegally obtained a National Insurance number  and
         has worked and studied within the UK without any formal  permission
         to do so. Whilst we accept  that  the  Appellant  is  clearly  well
         thought of by those who worship with and know him and that  he  may
         well be a man of exemplary character, we come to the view that none
         of his supporting witnesses  and  still  not  those  attending  the
         hearing before us had knowledge or provided any  information  about
         the Appellant's appalling immigration history within the UK. As  we
         indicated, we find the Appellant to be  a  person  who  is  largely
         without credibility and who  has  employed  outright  deception  in
         order to seek to  prolong  his  illegal  presence  within  the  UK.
         Indeed, as a result of any of the various  misrepresentations  that
         he  has  made  he  is  fortunate  not  to   have   faced   criminal
         prosecution".

24. Mr McGirr recognised that he was in some difficulty  in  asking  me  to
    take a Devaseelan approach to this extract, but  ask  me  he  did.  The
    difficulty arose from the absence of the determination itself, and from
    ignorance on the part of the Respondent as to what the deception  found
    by the Tribunal might have been. Mr McGirr did have a file with him but
    it contained no  clues  as  to  what  in  particular,  other  than  the
    Appellant's  appalling  immigration  history,  might  have  caused  the
    Tribunal to make such robust comments.


25. I take these comments, insofar as I am able, as a starting point.

26. The relevant considerations are those  set  out  in  paragraph  390.  I
    remind myself that  in  accordance  with  paragraph  391A  there  is  a
    presumption that the order shall be maintained.

27. I look first to the grounds on which the order was made.  There  is  no
    dispute before me that in 1997 the Secretary of State decided  to  make
    an order for the Appellant's deportation because he had overstayed  his
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom by what was, at that point,  some
    five years.

28. The representations made in support of revocation are summarised in the
    letter that covered the Appellant's application for leave to remain  on
    human rights grounds dated 8th July 2014, and further  in  the  various
    items of evidence upon which  the  Appellant  relies.  These  arguments
    represent  the  interest  of  the  Appellant,  including  compassionate
    circumstances. It is submitted that the Appellant has lived in  the  UK
    for  a  continuous  period  of  26  years.  During  that  time  he  has
    established a strong private  life,  including  working,  studying  (to
    Masters level) and  worshipping.   He  is  active  in  the  church  and
    contributes to  society  by  doing  voluntary  work  for  a  number  of
    charities.  The Appellant has a developed family life in the UK. He has
    three children who have been born here and have lived here continuously
    since birth. The eldest will be seven  in  August  of  this  year.  The
    Appellant has never been convicted of a criminal offence.


29. The factors weighing against revocation are the matters set out in  the
    extract from the 2009 determination of the First-tier Tribunal set  out
    above, and the fact that the Appellant has lived in this country all of
    this time with absolutely no lawful right to  do  so.  He  was  worked,
    studied and obtained a national insurance number.  These  matters  must
    attract a substantial weight in the balancing exercise.  The order  was
    made because he was an overstayer, and he remains an overstayer today.


30. The Appellant has not produced any fresh information  relevant  to  the
    making of the order.   I bear in mind however that in  accordance  with
    paragraph 391A the passage of time since the  decision  to  deport  may
    also in itself amount to such a change of circumstances as  to  warrant
    revocation. It has been twenty  years  since  the  Secretary  of  State
    signed a deportation order. It has been eight years  since  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal.   The passage of time has, in  this
    case, yielded two significant changes in circumstance.

31. First, the law and rules have changed.   As I have  already  noted  the
    substantive meaning of the term 'deportation' has altered. At the  date
    that the deportation order was made, it was the procedure by which  the
    Secretary of State removed persons who had overstayed  their  leave  or
    otherwise breached conditions; today it is confined to the  removal  of
    other classes of non-nationals, notably criminals.  The  law  has  also
    changed since the First-tier Tribunal considered the  Appellant's  long
    residence appeal in 2009. At that time  the  applicable  provision  was
    paragraph 276B:


         276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the United
         Kingdom are that:


         (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in
         the United Kingdom; or


         (b) he has had at least 14 years continuous residence in the United
         Kingdom, excluding any period spent in the United Kingdom following
         service of notice of liability to removal or notice of a decision
         to remove by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10A, or 12 to
         14, of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 or section 10 of the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 Act, or of a notice of intention to
         deport him from the United Kingdom; and


         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why
         it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to
         remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:


              (a) age; and
              (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
              (c) personal history, including character, conduct,
              associations and employment record; and
              (d) domestic circumstances; and
              (e) previous criminal record and the nature of any offence of
              which the person has been convicted; and
              (f) compassionate circumstances; and
              (g) any representations received on the person's behalf; and


         (iii) the applicant has sufficient knowledge of the English
         language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United Kingdom,
         unless he is under the age of 18 or aged 65 or over at the time he
         makes his application.


    This was the legal framework being applied when the First-tier Tribunal
    made the comments that they did (set out above). The  current  rule  on
    long residence/private  life  does  not  contain  any  'clock-stopping'
    provisions. Nor does it require the decision maker to conduct  a  wide-
    ranging assessment of whether it would be undesirable for the applicant
    to remain. Those matters are now dealt  with  under  the  'suitability'
    requirements in Appendix FM, and as I note above the only one of  these
    to have been invoked by the Secretary of State is  the  fact  that  the
    deportation order itself still stands.


32. Secondly the Appellant's own circumstances have  changed  considerably.
    He is now in a stable relationship with a Jamaican  national  and  they
    have three children together.    Those  children  have  been  born  and
    brought  up  here.  The  Appellant's   private   life,   already   well
    established, has now  therefore  been  supplemented  by  a  substantial
    family life, and although neither partner nor children  have  leave  to
    remain the position of the family as a whole remains a consideration.


33. I remind myself that there is  a  presumption  that  the  order  should
    stand, and that the selected extracts I have been given from  the  2009
    determination should be treated as authoritative as of  the  date  that
    those findings were made.  Having considered all of  those  factors  in
    the round I am satisfied that  the  deportation  order  should  now  be
    revoked. The matter must be considered in the context  of  the  current
    rules, which recognise that continuous long residence of  twenty  years
    is a matter that tips the balance  in  the  favour  of  the  applicant.
    Paragraph 276ADE(1) illustrates how the Secretary of State  finds  that
    the balance should be struck. The nature of the rule is that after such
    a period of residence a failure to comply with immigration laws will be
    overlooked: that is implicit in a provision to regularise the  position
    of overstayers. That is what the Appellant is, and that is why  he  was
    served with the 'deportation order'.  Having had regard to all  of  the
    circumstances, to the  Appellant's  very  well  established  Article  8
    rights and to the exceedingly long passage of time since the order  was
    made, I am satisfied that it would no longer be appropriate to bar  his
    regularisation with reference to what was, in essence,  a  decision  to
    administratively remove him 20 years ago.

34. I find that the deportation order  should  be  revoked,  and  that  the
    Appellant should  be  given  leave  to  remain  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the Rules.


      Decisions


35. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


36. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


37. There is no order for anonymity.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                 31st May 2017




                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on the 5th April
2017

[2] Immigration Law and Practice MacDonald and Toal (8th ed) at 15.3

