

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00174/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons                |
|6 July 2016                            |29 July 2016                        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                            EMIL ADAM WADOLKOWSKI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, instructed by Wilson Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            NOTICE AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal before the Tribunal is against a decision of Judge Onoufriou
    in the First-tier Tribunal.   The  judge  dismissed,  or  purported  to
    dismiss, an appeal by the  appellant  against  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order against him on 23 April 2015.

 2. The decisions made by the Secretary of State against the appellant  had
    been the subject  of  judicial  review  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    substantive application for judicial review  was  successful,  and  the
    Tribunal quashed what it described as "the impugned  decisions".    The
    Secretary of State's position is that that left the decision to make  a
    deportation order unimpaired, as it had not been  the  subject  of  the
    judicial review proceedings.

 3. Before us, Mr Deller, with his customary persuasive elegance, explained
    that point to us, and, on it being drawn to his  attention  that  there
    appeared to be some defects in the notice of decision, reminded us that
    it was open to the appellant to waive any such defects by putting in  a
    notice of appeal against the decision.  As  we  said  at  the  hearing,
    however, it is difficult to see that that happened in this  case.   For
    the unrepresented appellant, invited to attach to his notice of  appeal
    the decision against which he was appealing, attached  not  a  decision
    which was capable of being  appealed,  but,  instead,  the  deportation
    order signed against him on 23 April 2015.  It did and does not  appear
    to us that it would be proper to regard the appellant as having  waived
    his right to be notified, in accordance with the  regulations,  of  the
    decision against which he had a right of appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State's  decision-making  process  in  this  case  has
    already been the subject of criticism by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    judicial review proceedings, the President referring to "a  public  law
    misdemeanour of some gravity".  As we indicated  at  the  hearing,  the
    present appeal falls in our judgement to be allowed and will be allowed
    unless the Secretary of State  withdraws  the  decision  against  which
    Judge Onoufriou purported to  hear  an  appeal.    That  will  not,  of
    course, prevent her from making an appropriately-motivated decision  in
    the future.

 5. In the circumstances, we directed orally that the  Secretary  of  State
    notify the Tribunal within 21 days of the date  of  this  determination
    whether she has withdrawn the decision in question.   By  letter  dated
    22 July Mr Deller has indicated that the decision is withdrawn.

 6. The appellant's appeal is now allowed on the ground that  there  is  no
    decision against which to appeal.











                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 25 July 2016
