
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00059/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Crown Square       |Decision and Reasons promulgated    |
|On 6 January 2016                      |On 22 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

                                   Between

                                     AN
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Ms Patel, Counsel
Respondent:   Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 1. The origins of this appeal are traceable to a decision made  on  behalf
    of the SSHD dated 16 December 2013, to deport the appellant, a national
    of Jamaica from the United  Kingdom  ('UK').   I  have  anonymised  the
    appellant because this decision refers to sensitive medical information
    concerning him.

 2. On 9 October 2014, the appellant's appeal against the  SSHD's  decision
    was dismissed by a panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT').   The
    appellant has appealed against this decision in  wide-ranging  grounds.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  FTT  arguably
    erred in law in: (i) its approach to section  72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and its assessment of the asylum claim;
    (ii) failing to engage with the medical evidence and Article 3  of  the
    ECHR; (iii) failing to apply the relevant paragraphs in the Immigration
    Rules.

 3. In a rule 24 notice dated 20 March 2015 the SSHD invited  the  Tribunal
    to dismiss the appeal.

Hearing

4.   Ms Patel relied upon the grounds of appeal she had  drafted  on  behalf
    of the appellant.  Having heard fully from Ms Patel I indicated that  I
    did not need to hear from Mr McVeety and announced that I was satisfied
    that the FTT had not made a material error of  law  that  required  the
    decision to be set aside.

5.   I now provide my written reasons for this decision.

Error of law discussion

Asylum

 4. I accept that the FTT has provided  brief  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim to fear serious harm in Jamaica following  the  death
    of his brother [67].  I am however  satisfied  that  the  reasoning  is
    adequate to inform the appellant why his claim has been dismissed.  The
    FTT accepted that the appellant's brother had been killed but  provided
    three reasons for  concluding  that  there  is  no  real  risk  of  the
    appellant being seriously  harmed  if  returned  to  Jamaica:  (i)  the
    brother was killed in a random act of violence;  (ii)  the  appellant's
    family members in  Jamaica  have  not  come  to  any  harm  in  Jamaica
    (notwithstanding the passage of time  since  the  killing  in  December
    2011); (iii) there is a sufficiency of protection in Jamaica given  the
    nature of the crime and the fact that the family have a police  officer
    contact.


 5. The FTT made these findings having taking into account all the relevant
    evidence  [9]  and  having   considered   the   submissions   of   both
    representatives, which referred to the relevant evidence [39-66].

 6. Ms Patel submitted that these findings fail to take  into  account  the
    available country background evidence on Jamaica.  Whilst  findings  on
    prospective  risk  should  generally  take  into  account  the   likely
    conditions in the country of origin, the FTT has not  materially  erred
    in law in failing to specifically refer to country evidence when making
    its findings.  It is clear that the FTT had such evidence in mind  [9].
    In any event, Ms Patel was unable to take me to  any  country  evidence
    available to the FTT that called  into  question  any  of  the  reasons
    provided by the FTT.  Reason (i) was a finding of fact open to the  FTT
    and is consistent with the evidence provided by  the  appellant  during
    his interview and the evidence  contained  in  his  witness  statement.
    Reason (ii) is another factual finding  entirely  consistent  with  the
    evidence, and indeed accepted by the appellant, who has numerous  close
    family  members  in  Jamaica:  parents,  a  brother,  two  sisters  and
    children.

 7. As the FTT found no real risk of serious harm  to  the  appellant  upon
    return it  did  not  need  to  address  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
    protection.  Ms Patel nevertheless  submitted  that  the  finding  that
    there would be a sufficiency of protection  is  inconsistent  with  the
    country evidence.  The only evidence that she took me to related to the
    prevalence of generalised gang violence  in  Jamaica.   That  does  not
    address the situation here,  where  the  appellant  has  no  direct  or
    indirect relationship with any gang.

 8. Ms Patel did not seek to impugn the findings on the  asylum  claim  for
    any other reason and I  am  satisfied  they  are  sustainable  and  not
    infected by any material error of law.

 9. Ms Patel accepted that if I was against her in relation  to  the  FTT's
    asylum findings then the  errors  regarding  the  approach  adopted  in
    relation to the section 72 certificate are  immaterial,  and  there  is
    therefore no need for me to address this issue.

Immigration Rules Article 3 / Article 8 / medical evidence

10. Ms Patel accepted at my invitation that the  appellant  was  unable  to
    meet paragraphs 399 or 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  these
    circumstances the FTT was obliged to consider whether "there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A" pursuant to paragraph 398.  Ms  Patel  correctly  pointed
    out that the FTT did not direct  itself  to  the  relevant  wording  of
    paragraph 398 and applied a different test at [74].  Ms  Patel  however
    accepted that the test under the  Immigration  Rules  as  well  as  the
    applicable tests to be applied under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR could
    not be met if the FTT's findings regarding the medical evidence and the
    appellant's circumstances upon return to Jamaica  are  sustainable.   I
    therefore turn to these.


11. I entirely accept that the FTT has dealt with the medical evidence  and
    the appellant's likely circumstances upon  return  to  Jamaica  briefly
    [70] and in a case such as this it would have  been  more  helpful  for
    this evidence to have been addressed in greater detail.  The  FTT  said
    this, inter alia:

         "No evidence has been produced to suggest [the appellant] is not in
         contact with his family  in  Jamaica  nor  has  any  evidence  been
         produced to suggest that they cannot assist him to receive the day-
         to-day medical care he requires."

12. Ms Patel submitted that this wholly fails to engage with  the  detailed
    medical evidence concerning the appellant.  The appellant suffers as  a
    result of a serious head injury sustained in an assault in 2009.   This
    has caused or contributed to a  number  of  other  conditions  such  as
    panhypopituitarism,  microcytic  anaemia  and  visuospatial   problems.
    These conditions have an impact on the appellant's memory  and  day-to-
    day functioning.  He requires support  in  taking  his  medication  and
    dealing with daily routines.  He requires assistance in  accessing  on-
    going medical treatment and must take particular care.   The  appellant
    suffers from serious medical conditions and requires day-to-day support
    to access medical and other assistance.


13. The FTT decision must be read as a whole.  The FTT  was  taken  to  the
    detailed medical evidence during the course of  submissions.   This  is
    briefly but adequately set out within the decision [54 and 55].  It  is
    clear from this that the FTT was aware of and  took  into  account  the
    medical evidence.  The FTT accepted that the appellant requires medical
    care and was entitled to focus its  attention  on  whether  his  family
    would be able to assist him to receive that care.

14. The  key  issue  in  the  appeal  was  therefore  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's family members  in  Jamaica  could  provide  the  necessary
    support to ensure he accesses medical care.   The  FTT  concluded  that
    they could.  This is a finding open to the FTT given the limited nature
    of the evidence before  it.   The  appellant's  interview  and  witness
    statement confirmed that he was still in contact with his parents  (who
    continued to work in the market - Qs 42 and 46), his  brother  and  two
    sisters.  When I took Ms Patel to  this  evidence,  she  accepted  that
    there was no evidence, apart from his parents being elderly, adduced on
    behalf of the appellant to support a submission that his various family
    members in Jamaica were unable to assist in looking after him  or  that
    he would not get the treatment he requires in Jamaica.  The appellant's
    elderly parents continued to work in the  market.   Ms  Patel  accepted
    that the fact that the appellant's siblings  have  their  own  families
    does not obviate  an  ability  and  /  or  willingness  to  assist  the
    appellant.


15. Ms Patel was  only  able  to  take  me  to  very  generalised  evidence
    regarding healthcare in Jamaica.   No  specific  evidence  was  adduced
    before the FTT regarding the  non-availability  of  the  treatment  the
    appellant requires, in Jamaica.  I note  that  healthcare  is  free  of
    charge in Jamaica, albeit problems in accessing  non-urgent  healthcare
    remain.  The burden rested upon the appellant, who was  represented  by
    experienced legal representatives, to adduce the  evidence  to  support
    his claim that he would not receive the support necessary to cope  with
    his day-to-day activities or access the medical treatment  he  requires
    in Jamaica.  The evidence that went to that  issue  was  very  limited.
    Give the nature and extent of that evidence, the FTT  was  entitled  to
    find that he would  be  sufficiently  assisted  by  family  members  he
    continued to  have  contact  with.   Such  a  finding  meant  that  the
    appellant could not meet  the  high  threshold  required  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules, Article 8 or Article 3.

16. It follows that whilst the FTT has not properly directed itself to  the
    appropriate test under the relevant legal framework, such an  error  is
    immaterial because on the  FTT's  findings  the  appellant's  claim  to
    remain under  the  Immigration  Rules,  Article  8  or  Article  3  was
    incapable of success.

Decision

17. The decision of the FTT does not contain a material error of law and is
    not set aside.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Dated: 7 January 2016

