
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00486/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2020                 |On 28 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MANUEL DIAS MESTRE DA SILVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the appellant as the  Secretary
    of State and to the respondent as Mr Da Silva.

 2. The hearing in this matter  was  conducted  remotely  using  Skype  for
    Business, with the Upper Tribunal sitting at Field House.  Aside from a
    couple of minor technical glitches during the course  of  the  hearing,
    the proceedings ran smoothly, and I was satisfied that  both  Ms  Cunha
    and Mr Da Silva were able to follow what was  being  said  and  present
    their own submissions clearly.

 3. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilding  ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on  19
    December 2019, in which he dismissed Mr Da Silva's appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to make a deportation order under the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016, as amended.

 4. Mr Da Silva is a citizen of Portugal, born in 1995.   He  came  to  the
    United Kingdom with his mother at the age of 15 and  has  resided  here
    ever since.   In  the  period  2016  and  2017,  Mr  Da  Silva  accrued
    convictions connected to the supply and possession of Class A, Class B,
    and Class C drugs.  In March 2018, he was sentenced for a total  of  43
    months' imprisonment.

 5. In making her decision, the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  Mr  Da
    Silva had acquired a permanent right of residence  in  United  Kingdom.
    She went on to conclude that the  nature  of  the  offending  disclosed
    serious grounds of public policy for Mr  Da  Silva's  deportation,  and
    that, having regard to all relevant  circumstances,  he  represented  a
    genuine, present, and sufficiently serious threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of society, and that deportation would be proportionate.

The judge's decision

 6. In what is a concise decision, the judge made the  following  essential
    findings:

              i. the evidence of Mr Da Silva, his brother  and  mother,  was
                 all entirely credible;

             ii. the Secretary of State had been able  to  show  that  there
                 were "serious" grounds of public policy in this case;

            iii. whilst weight was placed on the OASys report, the  evidence
                 from Mr Da Silva, his  brother  and  mother,  and  a  drugs
                 rehabilitation organisation called Arch, showed  there  was
                 no genuine risk that Mr Da Silva would re-offend;

             iv.  as  a  result,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
                 demonstrate  that  there  was  a  genuine,   present,   and
                 sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of
                 society;

              v. in light of that finding, the judge  did  not  consider  it
                 necessary to go on and  undertake  a  full  proportionality
                 exercise.  The absence of a  genuine  risk  of  reoffending
                 rendered the Secretary of State's decision disproportionate
                 in any event.

 7. The appeal was duly allowed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed
    to provide adequate reasons and  failed  to  have  regard  to  relevant
    considerations.  He had failed to take  proper  account  of  the  OASys
    report, which classed Mr Da Silva as posing a medium  risk  of  serious
    harm to the public were he to re-offend.  He had failed to take account
    of the sentencing  remarks  and  any  issues  relating  to  a  lack  of
    employment when considering the risk of re-offending.   In  relying  on
    the evidence from Mr Da Silva and his family members, the judge  failed
    to take into account the apparent fact that they have  been  unable  to
    prevent  the  previous  offending,  that  there  was  no  corroborative
    evidence about Mr Da Silva  being  drug-free,  and  that  the  evidence
    presented was "self-serving" and partial.  Finally, it is said that the
    judge failed to take account of the short time  period  between  Mr  Da
    Silva being released from immigration detention and the hearing.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Appleyard
    on 20 January 2020.

The hearing before me

10. Ms Cunha withdrew a particular aspect of the grounds of appeal  at  the
    outset.  In respect of Mr Da Silva being drug-free,  it  was  wrong  to
    have asserted that the judge failed to make any reference  to  evidence
    on this point: such evidence had come from Mr Da Silva himself and  the
    Arch organisation, and this had  been  referred  to  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 16 of his decision.

11. Ms Cunha relied on the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Vasconcelos  (risk-
    rehabilitation) [2013]  UKUT  00378  (IAC),  at  paragraphs  39-40,  in
    respect of the issue of the risk of re-offending and serious harm.  The
    judge had  failed  to  deal  with  what  level  the  OASys  report  had
    classified Mr Da Silva as presenting.  The judge  had  also  failed  to
    deal with the motivation lying  behind  the  previous  offending.   She
    submitted that the judge had failed to explain what had changed between
    the family members being  unable  to  prevent  the  offending  and  the
    situation now.  There are  no  reasons  as  to  why  the  family  could
    "guarantee" that Mr Da Silva would not re-offend.

12. I was entirely satisfied that Mr Da Silva understood precisely what was
    being said by the Secretary  of  State.   He  told  me  that  the  risk
    assessment in the OASys report had been conducted some months before he
    was actually released.  He had in fact been entirely drug-free since he
    was sentenced in March 2018.  He told me that  he  had  never  offended
    whilst living at the family home; he had in fact been living away  with
    a girlfriend at the relevant time.  He  had  been  distanced  from  his
    family then, but since his release from immigration detention has  been
    living with his brother.  The brother provides him with  all  forms  of
    support.  Whilst Mr Da Silva did not have a job  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the judge, he told me that he has been working full-time
    since mid-September of this year.

13. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

14. I have concluded that there are no errors in the judge's decision  such
    that it should be set aside.

15. I have already mentioned the conciseness of the  decision.   Whilst  it
    might have been advisable to provide a little more detail,  brevity  is
    often commendable and, in the circumstances of this case, it  does  not
    of itself disclose any error of law.

16. The judge heard evidence from Mr Da Silva and his family  members.   It
    was plainly open to him to consider that evidence to  be  credible  (it
    was  variously  described  as  "impressive"  and  "persuasive").    The
    reference in the grounds  of  appeal  to  this  evidence  being  "self-
    serving" adds nothing to the Secretary of State's challenge.  It  could
    of course be said that any evidence emanating from an individual and/or
    family members would always be "self-serving" and thus  undeserving  of
    material (or indeed any) weight.  That is plainly not the case.

17. It is clear that the judge had regard  to  the  OASys  report  and  the
    assessment  of  the  risk  of  re-offending  contained   therein   (see
    paragraphs 4 and 15 of his decision and page 7  of  46  of  the  report
    itself.  The risk was stated as  being  "low").   The  judge  expressly
    stated that he was placing weight on the report.  As a simple matter of
    fact, the judge was entitled to state  that  the  risk  assessment  was
    expressed as "a percentage chance on a sliding  scale".   Although  the
    categorisation of Mr Da Silva posing a "medium" risk of serious harm if
    he were to re-offend is not specifically referred to by the judge, this
    particular issue fell to be assessed in light of the  analysis  of  the
    likelihood of Mr Da Silva re-offending in the first place.

18. This analysis was, I conclude, adequately undertaken by the judge.  The
    credible evidence before him provided by Mr Da  Silva  and  his  family
    members satisfied the judge that: genuine remorse  and  self-reflection
    had occurred; there had been a reuniting of the family unit,  with  the
    support that that entailed;  that  previous  problematic  relationships
    with others, had been "cut off"; and that Mr De Silva had  expressed  a
    genuine resolve to  remain  drug-free.   In  paragraph  23,  the  judge
    recognised that the percentage scores set out in the OASys report  were
    not at the lowest end  of  the  sliding  scale.   They  were,  however,
    "tempered" by what was described as the "clear evidence" of Mr Da Silva
    and his family members in respect of the matters I have  just  referred
    to.  All of these factors were relevant to the issue of the risk of re-
    offending, which in turn had an impact on the likelihood of Mr Da Silva
    posing a medium risk of serious harm to the public.  In this regard,  I
    note the definition of "medium risk of serious harm"  set  out  in  the
    OASys report at page 36 of 46. It is said that there are  "identifiable
    indicators of risk of serious harm", with  the  individual  having  the
    "potential" to cause such harm.   However,  this  would  be  "unlikely"
    unless there was a change of circumstances, which might include loss of
    accommodation, relationship breakdown, or drug misuse.  In the  present
    case, the judge had accepted the evidence that Mr Da  Silva  was  drug-
    free, was committed to  remaining  so,  and  was  living  in  a  stable
    environment with a close  family  member  who  was  providing  material
    support.

19. Ms Cunha did not suggest that Mr Da Silva had not in fact been residing
    with his brother since release from immigration  detention  in  October
    2019, nor did she refer me to any evidence showing that Mr Da Silva had
    been offending whilst living with other family members.

20. The judge did not specifically refer to the prospects of  Mr  Da  Silva
    obtaining employment.  However, this does not  disclose  any  error  in
    light of the judge's favourable credibility findings as to the  support
    being provided by the brother at the material time.  Whilst it forms no
    basis for my reasoning, it is of some note that  Mr  Da  Silva  has,  I
    accept, now obtained full-time employment.

21. It is plain that the judge was aware of the fairly short period between
    Mr Da Silva being released from immigration detention and the  hearing.
    It is simply not tenable to suggest that he had entirely left this  out
    of his mind when assessing the relevant factors.

22. As regards the case of Vasconcelos, I note, paragraph 1 of the judicial
    headnote, which states:

           "In assessing whether and  EEA  national  represents  a  current
           threat to public policy by reason of a  risk  of  resumption  of
           opportunistic  offending,  the  Tribunal  should  consider   any
           statistical assessment of re-offending provided by NOMS  but  is
           not bound by such  data.   If  the  overall  assessment  of  the
           evidence supports the conclusion of continued risk."

23. The judge did consider the statistical assessment of  re-offending,  as
    contained in the OASys report.  He also took account of other  evidence
    before him, as he was fully entitled to do.

24. In summary, the judge was entitled to make the findings that he did and
    to draw the stated conclusions therefrom.  His decision stands.

Anonymity


25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and there
    is no reason for me to do so.  I do not make one.

Notice of Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


27. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 23 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
