
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(First Tier Tribunal and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: DA/00799/2013


                        THE FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 May 2014                                 |On 13 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GHA
                         (Anonymity direction made)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Offei-Kwatia of Counsel (direct public
representation)







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The respondent to this Appeal by the Secretary of  State,  to  whom  we
    shall refer as "GHA," is a citizen of Ghana born on 11 August 1980. She
    initially entered the UK on a student visa on 2 September 2000, and her
    leave as a student  was  extended  on  subsequent  occasions  until  30
    January 2006. She then was given leave  to  remain  as  a  work  permit
    holder until 28 July 2011. She is a qualified nurse.  On  14  September
    2010 she made an application for Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  ("ILR")
    having completed 10 years' lawful residence in the United Kingdom.  But
    for the tragic events which unfolded before that application came to be
    considered by the Secretary of State, GHA would have had  every  reason
    to believe that it was likely to be successful.

 2.  However,  on  11  November  2011  GHA  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment for three years following her  conviction  of  causing  or
    allowing the death of a child in her care (her infant  daughter)  under
    Section 5 of the Domestic Violence  Crime  and  Victims  Act  2004,  in
    circumstances which we shall go on to describe. On  9  April  2013  the
    Secretary of State made a deportation order against her  by  virtue  of
    s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007  Act").  Her  application
    for ILR was refused in the same decision.

 3. GHA appealed against the decision to make a deportation  order  on  the
    basis that she fell within the exception to s.32(5) of the 2007 Act  by
    virtue of s.33(2)(a) and/or that any deportation would be a  breach  of
    her human rights. She also sought leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The
    substantive hearing of GHA's appeal was  conducted  at  the  FTT  on  3
    February 2014. By way of Determination promulgated on 11 February  2014
    by First Tier Tribunal Judge Woodhouse and Mrs AJF Cross  De  Chavannes
    ("the Panel") the appeal was allowed. An anonymity direction  was  made
    in these proceedings by the Panel and in related appeals involving  AFG
    and the children, in order to protect the children.  We  are  satisfied
    that it is appropriate to maintain that direction.

 4. The Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal against
    that Determination on 4 March 2014. We heard the appeal on 1  May  2014
    and indicated at the conclusion of oral submissions that we proposed to
    dismiss the appeal, but that we would reserve our reasons for a written
    determination. Those reasons are set out herein.

 5. GHA has been in a relationship with her partner, "AFG", also a  Ghanian
    citizen, since 2001. It is accepted by the Secretary of State that  the
    relationship is a genuine and  subsisting  one.  The  couple  had  four
    children together, all of whom were born in the UK.  The  eldest  child
    PAPA was born on 5 July 2002. The second child, DAA,  was  born  on  14
    July 2004 and the third, NANA, was born on 10 November  2005.  GHA  and
    AFG split up for a time in October 2004. AFG believed that NANA was the
    child of someone else, but following paternity tests  it  became  clear
    that she was his child. The couple were later reconciled.

 6. All three of the older children went back to Ghana to live  with  GHA's
    mother for periods during their infancy. PAPA returned to the UK on  19
    December 2005, and he has remained in the UK ever since.  DAA  went  to
    live with his maternal grandmother in Ghana on 21 December  2004,  when
    he was five months old, and stayed there for a total of 22 months. NANA
    went to Ghana to live with her grandmother when she was six months old.
    Both DAA and NANA returned to the UK with their  mother  on  1  October
    2006, but on that occasion they stayed for only  six  months  and  went
    back to Ghana on 20 February  2007.  DAA  returned  to  the  UK  on  28
    December 2007 and remained here ever since. NANA returned on  22  March
    2009. Their parents went on to have a further daughter, D, who was born
    on 1 April 2009. Immediately after the birth GHA underwent an operation
    which prevented her from having any more children.

 7. All of the children had leave to remain as  their  mother's  dependents
    until 28 July  2011.  In  November  2009  her  partner,  AFG,  obtained
    discretionary leave to remain until the same date, in line  with  GHA's
    leave as a work permit holder.

 8. Tragically, on 3 March 2010 GHA's youngest daughter  D,  then  aged  10
    months, died of respiratory pneumonia. It transpired that this was  the
    result of force-feeding, which had caused her to breathe food into  her
    lungs. The death of D gave rise to GHA's  prosecution,  conviction  and
    sentence of three years' imprisonment. As a result  of  the  conviction
    she was disqualified from working with children for life. She was  also
    notified that she was liable  to  be  deported  on  completion  of  her
    sentence.

 9. The three surviving children became the subject of care proceedings and
    child in need plans in April 2010. A report to the  Family  Court  from
    the children's senior social worker  reported  positively  on  the  co-
    operation by both parents with social services in the period leading up
    to GHA's imprisonment. It  stated  that  they  had  engaged  well  with
    Children Services and taken on board advice and guidance given  by  the
    School Nurse and other professionals. The children were given telephone
    contact with their mother in December 2011 and were able to  visit  her
    in prison.

10. In consequence of the social  worker's  recommendations,  the  children
    were placed under a supervision order issued on 18  April  2012,  which
    expired on 7 April 2013. On 18 April 2012, with  the  full  support  of
    social services, they were also made the subject of a  residence  order
    in favour of their father. The residence order automatically  gave  AFG
    parental  responsibility  for  the  three  children.  The  court  order
    stipulates that unless it was revoked or the  children  were  16,  they
    could not be removed from the jurisdiction  for  more  than  one  month
    without the consent of the father or the leave of the court.

11. AFG's leave to remain was due to expire on 28 July 2011 along with that
    of the children. He made an application for further leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom  on  22  July  2011.  Unfortunately  the  children's
    CAFCASS guardian, who was responsible  for  extending  their  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, failed to discharge her obligations. When
    this was discovered, their father  applied  for  the  three  children's
    leave to remain on 20 November 2012. Since, through no fault  of  their
    own, the children's application was out of time under  the  Immigration
    Rules, the Respondent was only able to  consider  it  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

12. GHA was released from prison on licence and granted immigration bail on
    23 April 2013, and was reunited with  her  family.  She,  AFG  and  the
    children have been living together  in  a  three  bedroom  property  in
    London ever since. A report from social services dated 19 May 2013  was
    positive in all respects. It observed that the children had a close and
    positive bond with both parents and that there was no significant  risk
    of harm, and described them as a "close,  committed  family  unit  with
    strong cultural and religious beliefs and  a  huge  supportive  network
    around them". The report stated:

    "If [GHA] is deported, the whole family will feel  the  stress  of  the
    separation. This type of  stress  can  have  a  detrimental  effect  on
    children,  causing  anxieties  and  affecting  childhood   development.
    Deporting [GHA] will have an impact on her children's future successes,
    including things such as  their  school  achievements  and  earning  as
    adults".

13. A report from GHA's probation officer dated 19 August 2013 stated  that
    she had  displayed  "exemplary  behaviour  and  commitment"  whilst  on
    licence.

14. Initially the applications made by AFG  and  the  three  children  were
    refused by the  Secretary  of  State.  The  refusal  was  based  almost
    entirely on the decision to  deport  GHA.  Following  GHA's  successful
    appeal, the appeals of the Appellant's partner and three children  were
    heard by a different constitution of the FTT (First Tier Tribunal Judge
    Shamash) on 7 and 14 February 2014, and by a Determination  promulgated
    on 7 March 2014 those appeals were allowed.

15. The First Tier Tribunal Judge considered  the  supervision  order,  the
    residence order, a letter from the local authority Children's Services,
    the GCID  case  record  dealing  with  the  grant  of  leave,  and  the
    children's school reports. She also heard oral evidence from AFG. In  a
    cogently reasoned decision the Judge rightly  started  on  the  premise
    that removal of the appellants together would be an  interference  with
    the family life that they enjoy together in the  United  Kingdom.   She
    then examined whether that interference was proportionate. Although the
    Secretary of State was fully aware of the  fact  that  Social  Services
    were involved and that AFG was caring for the children, the  caseworker
    did not consider this fact or address it in  the  refusal  letter.  The
    Judge noted that the Secretary of State's decision was not in line with
    her own memos in the GCID case record, including a note from  a  senior
    caseworker to the effect that the argument for refusing leave was  weak
    under ZH (Tanzania) and that in considering the best interests  of  the
    children the UKBA needed to consider their welfare and  stability.  The
    caseworker had stated:

    "Given the above consideration I think a judge would look at this  very
    harshly if we were to refuse either the applicant or the children..."

16. After carefully considering all the relevant authorities and  statutory
    provisions  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shamash  concurred   in   the
    description by  the  Panel  (in  the  decision  under  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal) of the failure of the Secretary of State to address the  fact
    that  the  minor  children  were  subject  to  a  residence  order   as
    "incomprehensible". She found that there had  been  a  failure  by  the
    Secretary of State to  make  adequate  enquiries  in  relation  to  the
    children before reaching the decision to refuse their applications. She
    pointed out that the decision under appeal in their case (just like the
    decision in GHA's case) failed to attach any weight  to  the  residence
    order, and failed to have regard to s.55 of the UK Borders  Act  or  to
    their  best  interests.  On  carrying  out  the  appropriate  balancing
    exercise under Article 8, the Judge concluded  that  the  decision  was
    disproportionate. She allowed AFG's appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    on the basis that he has been in the UK for 12 �  years,  and  in  case
    that was wrong, allowed it in the alternative under Article 8 ECHR.  He
    allowed the three children's appeals under Article 8.

17. It is of significance that the Secretary of State  has  not  sought  to
    appeal against that Determination. Therefore,  GHA's  partner  and  her
    three surviving children, with whom she has been living as  part  of  a
    close-knit family unit before and after her imprisonment,  will  remain
    in the United Kingdom if she is deported to  Ghana.  It  is  perhaps  a
    little surprising that the Secretary of State has not reconsidered  her
    position in the light of the positive  Determination  in  the  case  of
    GHA's partner and children. However, she has not done so  and  thus  we
    proceed to determine the appeal on its merits. The Determination in the
    other appeals is of no relevance to the question whether there  was  an
    error of law in  the  Panel's  Determination  in  GHA's  case,  and  we
    disregard it completely in our consideration of that issue. The outcome
    of AFG's and the children's appeals is only of relevance in  the  event
    that we have to consider the matter afresh.

18. The grounds of appeal against the Determination in the present case are
    that the Panel failed to have regard  to  the  Immigration  Rules  when
    making its assessment under Article 8  ECHR,  and  that  the  residence
    order in favour of AFG was wrongly treated as determinative. The  judge
    granting permission  took  the  view  that  it  was  unclear  from  the
    determination whether  or  not  the  Panel  had  adopted  the  approach
    outlined by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192
    or,  indeed,  whether  proper  consideration  was  ever  given  to  the
    Immigration  Rules.  There  was  no   adequate   explanation   in   the
    Determination of why the Appellant came within paragraphs 399  or  399A
    of  the  Immigration  Rules   or   failing   that,   what   exceptional
    circumstances outweighed the public interest in her deportation.

19. The relationship between the 2012 Immigration Rules and the common  law
    principles governing Article 8 claims has been considered by the courts
    and by this Tribunal in a number of  recent  cases.  Although  the  new
    rules aim to reflect the jurisprudence on Article 8  both  domestically
    and in Strasbourg, it is clear that they are not comprehensive.  Indeed
    the new Guidance recognises the existence  of  a  discretion  to  grant
    leave to remain outside the Rules.

20. In MF (Nigeria) the Court of Appeal held  that  where  the  case  falls
    within Para 398(b) of the Immigration Rules, i.e. where  a  person  has
    been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months:

         1) The first step under the new rules is to decide whether  one  or
            more of the conditions set out in Para 399(a)  or  (b)  or  Para
            399A applies. If Para 399 or 399A applies  then  the  new  rules
            implicitly provide that deportation would be contrary to Article
            8.

         2) The question whether Para 399 or  399A  applies  may  involve  a
            question of evaluation, such as whether it would  be  reasonable
            to expect the child to leave the UK, as  well  as  questions  of
            fact.

         3) If paras  399  and  399A  do  not  apply  the  test  is  one  of
            "exceptional circumstances". The new rules  are  not  a  perfect
            mirror of Strasbourg jurisprudence but they must be  interpreted
            consistently with it. Thus in evaluating the public interest  in
            deportation against  other  factors,  all  factors  relevant  to
            proportionality must be taken into account.

         4)  The  decision  maker  should  normally  undertake  a  two-stage
            process, unless satisfied that the requirements of paras 399  or
            399A are met.

         5) Whether the proportionality test is undertaken inside or outside
            the rules, the end result should be the same.

21. In R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)  Sales  J  considered  the
    meaning of "exceptional circumstances" and concluded that in order  for
    the discretion to be exercised outside the rules, there  needed  to  be
    particular features of the case of a  compelling  nature  demonstrating
    that removal would be unjustifiably harsh. In MF (Nigeria) the Court of
    Appeal endorsed his approach whilst stressing that this  did  not  mean
    that a test of exceptionality was being applied, but  rather,  that  in
    cases falling outside the rules, the scales are weighed very heavily in
    favour of deportation and something  very  compelling  is  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in removal.

22. The Panel set out the approach that the Secretary of State took to  the
    evaluation of  whether  GHA  fell  within  Paragraph  399  or  399A  in
    paragraphs 41 to 58 of the Determination. They briefly referred to  the
    decision that there were no "exceptional  circumstances"  in  paragraph
    59, before making their decision  that  there  would  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8 if GHA were to be removed, and setting out their reasons  for
    holding that she fell within exception 1 of section 22 of the 2007 Act.



23. Although perhaps the matter could have been more clearly  expressed  in
    the Determination, it seems reasonably clear to us that the Panel  were
    only considering the  question  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    correctly taken into account all relevant factors when concluding  that
    there  were  no  "exceptional  circumstances"  making   GHA's   removal
    disproportionate, and that they did not address the first stage of  the
    two-stage analysis because they (rightly) accepted  that  she  did  not
    meet the requirements of  Paragraphs 399 and 399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

24. This is not only because there is no specific criticism of the decision-
    maker's approach to Paragraphs 399 and 399A,  but  because  the  entire
    focus  of  the  Panel's  reasoning  is   upon   factors   relevant   to
    proportionality which do not appear in Paragraphs 399 or 399A and which
    the authorities on Article 8 make very clear that the decision maker is
    nevertheless required  to  take  into  account  in  evaluating  whether
    deportation would be a disproportionate interference with GHA's Article
    8 rights (and those of her partner and children). The factors which the
    Panel rightly criticised the Secretary of State  for  failing  to  take
    into account are not set out in Paragraph 399 or 399A.

25. The only one of those  paragraphs  that  GHA  arguably  came  close  to
    fulfilling was Paragraph 399(a).  This provides as follows:


    "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with a child
         under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
             (i) the child is a British citizen; or
             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
         the 7 years
             immediately preceding the date of the First Tier Tribunal
             decision; and in either case
             (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
         the UK; and
             (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for
         the child in the
             UK."

26. Since the eldest child had lived continuously in  the  UK  for  over  7
    years prior to the date  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  decision,  the
    original decision maker had proceeded on a factually incorrect  premise
    in refuting the claim under paragraph 399(a) on that basis. It  plainly
    would not be reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.  However,
    GHA could not fulfil requirement (ii)(b) of  Paragraph  399(a)  because
    there was another family member able to care for the child in  the  UK,
    namely, his father. Nevertheless, an  applicant's  failure  to  qualify
    under the Rules is the starting point for consideration of  Article  8,
    not the end, as the Supreme Court made clear in Patel and Others [2013]
    UKSC 72 at [54].

27. In Ogundimu (Article 8) - New  Rules,  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  60,  this
    Tribunal pointed out that the requirements of Paragraph 399(a) make  no
    provision for a consideration of where the best  interest  of  a  child
    lies, and that this conflicts with  the  Secretary  of  State's  duties
    under Article 3 of the UN Convention on the Rights of  the  Child  1989
    and section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and First Tier Tribunal  Act
    2009, both of which make the best  interests  of  a  child  a  primary,
    though not a paramount, consideration.

28. In  LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010]  UKUT  278
    (AC) Lord Kerr stated that:

         "Although questions exist about the status of the UN Convention  on
         the Rights of the Child in domestic law,  we  take  the  view  that
         there can be little reason to doubt that the interests of the child
         should be a primary consideration in First Tier Tribunal  cases.  A
         failure to  treat  them  as  such  will  violate  Article  8(2)  as
         incorporated directly into domestic law.... [28]

         Where the best interests of the  child  clearly  favour  a  certain
         course,  that  course  should  be  followed  unless  countervailing
         considerations of considerable force displace them ... the  primacy
         of this consideration needs to be made clear  in  emphatic  terms."
         [34]

29. Moreover Article 9(1) of the UN Convention on the Rights of  the  Child
    stipulates that

     "parties shall ensure that a child should not be separated from his  or
    her parents against their will except where competent authority subject
    to judicial review determines in accordance  with  applicable  law  and
    procedures that such a separation is necessary for the  best  interests
    of the child."

30. Thus in Ogundimu it was held  that  if  a  parent  fails  to  meet  the
    requirements of Rule 399(a), little weight should be attached  to  this
    when consideration is being given to the assessment of  proportionality
    of his or her removal under Article 8 ECHR. It was  not  in  a  child's
    best interests to lose contact and support with a  caring  and  devoted
    parent because someone else could be found to care for them [93]-[96].

31. The Panel made the observation in paragraph 63(ii) of the Determination
    that it must be disproportionate to remove  the  Appellant  in  a  case
    where her children have a right to remain  in  the  UK  and  where  the
    inference to be drawn from the Residence Order is  that  they  want  to
    express that right because none of these children  wish  to  return  to
    Ghana. That observation is consistent with the correct approach to  the
    best interests of the children, as set out in Ogundimu.

32. In our judgment, there was no material error  of  law  in  the  Panel's
    approach. There was no point in their making further reference  to  the
    question whether GHA met the requirements  of  s.399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules, when she  plainly  did  not  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision in that regard was plainly correct, even though in one
    respect it was subject to factual error.  We do not consider it  to  be
    an error of law, let alone a material one, for an appellate tribunal to
    omit to state that the decision maker has correctly applied the  Rules,
    and to concentrate instead on the areas of his or her decision that are
    flawed.

33. The Immigration Rules do not address the situation  where  there  is  a
    Residence Order in place.  When  evaluating  Article  8  considerations
    outside the Rules, the Panel's criticism of the Secretary of State  for
    failing to take into account the Residence  Order  was  sound.  As  the
    Panel pointed out, the omission of that highly  relevant  factor  meant
    that the decision maker did not take into consideration the  rights  of
    the family members in accordance with Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39.   The
    Panel was also entitled  to  take  into  account  the  failure  of  the
    decision maker to follow the guidance given to  criminal  case  workers
    which required a decision maker considering the removal or  deportation
    of a child who is subject to a Residence Order to discuss the case with
    a senior case worker and the Officers of Children's Champion ("OCC") to
    find out what is appropriate on a case by case  basis.   That  did  not
    happen.

34. As to the criticism of the Panel for regarding the Residence Order as a
    decisive factor, it is highly relevant to bear in mind that counsel for
    GHA had submitted that it was UK policy that when a Residence Order was
    in force, leave should be granted, and  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    failed  to  address  her  own  policy  (see   paragraph   24   of   the
    Determination).  The  presenting  officer  does  not  appear  to   have
    challenged that description of the policy. In those  circumstances  the
    Panel's focus on the absence of  any  consideration  of  the  Residence
    Order by the Secretary of State is entirely understandable.

35. The Panel plainly did address what exceptional circumstances outweighed
    the public interest in deportation of GHA, even though they did not use
    the  phrase  "exceptional  circumstances".  After  carrying   out   the
    balancing exercise they  concluded  that  it  was  disproportionate  to
    remove GHA because the consequence of the Secretary of State's decision
    was to separate the family members who see themselves as a family unit.



36. It was contended in the Grounds of Appeal  that  the  Panel  failed  to
    consider the option that the family could  return  to  Ghana  together,
    given that they had no lawful status to remain  in  the  UK,  and  that
    there was no explanation in the  Determination  of  why  the  Residence
    Order precluded this. We reject that criticism. Whilst it is true  that
    there is no express reference to that "option" in the Determination, it
    is obvious from the terms  of  the  Residence  Order  itself  that  the
    children could not be lawfully removed from the  UK  unless  and  until
    that Order was lifted or varied,  as  the  Panel  stated  in  paragraph
    63(i). Thus before the children could  be  removed,  the  Family  Court
    would have had to have been informed and given its approval.  Moreover,
    as the Panel also pointed out in the same paragraph,  even  before  any
    steps could be taken in that regard, the OCC would have  to  have  been
    consulted, but no such consultation had taken place. It is obvious that
    any discussion of the matter with the OCC  and  with  a  Judge  of  the
    Family Court is likely to have  taken  into  account  the  age  of  the
    children, the safety implications of their  removal,  the  strength  of
    their connections with the  UK  and  the  impact  on  them  of  further
    disruption by removal, as well as their own wishes.

37. The Panel very properly refused to speculate  as  to  what  might  have
    happened had those steps been taken. The fact is that those steps  were
    not taken. The Secretary of State was not entitled to the benefit of an
    assumption that if those steps had been taken, the OCC and  the  Family
    Court would have given their blessing to the lifting of  the  Residence
    Order, any more than GHA was entitled to an assumption to the contrary.
    The only thing the Panel could do was consider the position as it stood
    on the date on which the appeal fell for determination.  The  Residence
    Order was in force and nothing had been done to lift it. Therefore  the
    Panel was entitled to take the view on  the  evidence  before  it  that
    there was, at the very least, no immediate prospect of the family being
    removed as a unit to Ghana. That being so, there was no  obligation  on
    the Panel to do more than point out that the Residence Order  precluded
    the children from leaving the UK without a further court order and that
    none of the appropriate steps had been taken by the Secretary of  State
    towards achieving that goal, which is what they did in Paragraph 63(i).



38. Even if there was an error of law in the Panel's approach because  they
    failed to expressly address the "option"  of  the  whole  family  being
    removed to Ghana, it was not material, because  consideration  of  that
    "option" on the evidence before them would have led  to  precisely  the
    same result.

39. Even if we are wrong, and there was a material  error  of  law  in  the
    Panel's approach, leading to the setting  aside  of  the  Determination
    under appeal this is plainly a case in which it  would  be  appropriate
    for the Upper Tribunal to consider the matter on the evidence before it
    instead of remitting it to the First-Tier Tribunal. After  taking  into
    account all the relevant factors we would have reached exactly the same
    decision as the Panel did, particularly in the light of the  fact  that
    the related appeals have been allowed and the Secretary  of  State  has
    not sought to challenge the Determination of First Tier Tribunal  Judge
    Shamash. Whatever the position may have been at the time of the Panel's
    Determination, it is undeniable that GHA's partner and the children now
    have the right to remain in the  UK  and  therefore  there  can  be  no
    question of the entire family unit being removed to Ghana.  That  being
    so, it would not be in  the  best  interests  of  the  children  to  be
    deprived of contact with and the support of a loving mother, especially
    as there is no danger that she would pose any threat to their wellbeing
    and there is no significant risk of her reoffending.

CONCLUSION

40. Although perhaps  it  might  have  been  better  had  they  given  some
    explanation of why they were not considering  whether  the  Immigration
    Rules applied, the Panel were entitled to go  straight  to  the  second
    stage of the two-stage process adverted to in MF (Nigeria)  given  that
    it was obvious that GHA did not meet the requirements of  Rule  399  or
    399A. In considering exceptional circumstances, the Panel did  properly
    evaluate all the relevant factors in assessing whether the  deportation
    of GHA would be a disproportionate interference  with  her  rights  and
    those of her partner and children under Article 8 ECHR,  and  correctly
    reached the conclusion that it would. This is an even stronger case  on
    its facts than Ogundimu. Even if we are wrong and there was a  material
    error of law, the application of the appropriate  legal  tests  to  the
    facts of this case inexorably leads to exactly  the  same  result.   We
    therefore dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

The Appellant, her partner and their children have  been  granted  anonymity
throughout these proceedings. No report of these proceedings shall  directly
or indirectly identify them or any other member of their family. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to proceedings for Contempt of Court.



Signed                                  Date 7th May 2014


Mrs Justice Andrews
