


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00180/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On : 9 March 2016                        |On 21 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |



                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            salome roxanne green
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Ms Green's  appeal  against
the decision to deport her from the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  Regulation
19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the
EEA Regulations").

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State  as  the  respondent  and  Ms  Green  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of France, born on 11 November 1989.  She  claims
to have arrived in the United Kingdom in October 1995.  She  first  came  to
the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities  here  in  January  2006  when
reprimanded for shop-lifting. Between April 2006 and October  2014  she  was
convicted 23 times for 42 offences including an offence against the  person,
theft  and  kindred  offences,  offences  relating  to  police,  courts  and
prisons, drugs offences and a  miscellaneous  offence.  She  received  short
sentences of imprisonment  or  detention  as  a  result  of  some  of  those
convictions.

On 25 July 2014 the appellant was convicted of  one  count  of  supplying  a
Class A controlled drug, cocaine, and two counts of  breach  of  conditional
discharge. On 2 October 2014 she was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

On  26  January  2015  the  appellant  was  informed  of  her  liability  to
deportation. On 6 May 2015 the appellant was served with a decision to  make
a deportation order dated 29  April  2015  and  she  appealed  against  that
decision.

In the reasons for deportation  letter,  the  respondent  accepted,  on  the
basis of the appellant's evidence of  school  attendance  between  1996  and
2004, that she had acquired the right to permanent  residence.  It  was  not
accepted that she had been continuously resident in the UK  for  ten  years.
Consideration was therefore given to whether her deportation  was  justified
on serious grounds of public  policy  or  public  security.  The  respondent
considered that deportation was justified, noting that the OASys report  had
assessed her as posing a high risk of re-offending and concluding  that  she
posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the public.  The
respondent  considered  that  the  decision  to  deport  the  appellant  was
proportionate and in accordance with the EEA Regulations. It was  considered
further that her deportation would not breach her  Article  8  rights  under
the ECHR.

The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was heard on  12
June 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mayall.  The  appellant  appeared  in
person and was not represented. The judge noted the respondent's  concession
as regards the acquisition of permanent residence and found, with  the  Home
Office Presenting Officer's agreement, that the appellant  fell  within  the
provisions of Regulation 21(4) of the EEA  Regulations,  having  resided  in
the UK for a continuous period of at least ten years prior to  the  relevant
decision. The judge was satisfied that  there  were  no  imperative  grounds
justifying a decision to deport and found that the decision did  not  comply
with the principle of proportionality. Accordingly  he  allowed  the  appeal
under the EEA Regulations.


  The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the judge's acceptance that the appellant was entitled  to  the
higher level of protection on the basis of ten years'  continuous  residence
in the UK did not take account of the relevant  jurisprudence  in  Secretary
of State for the Home Department v MG (Judgment of the Court)  [2014]  EUECJ
C-400/12.  The grounds asserted further that  the  judge's  decision  lacked
clear findings on the appellant's risk of re-offending, given  the  evidence
that she posed a high risk of re-offending.

Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently granted  by
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 14 October 2015.


At the hearing before me, there was no appearance by the  appellant.  I  was
concerned as to whether she was aware of the  grant  of  permission  to  the
respondent and of the hearing, or even of the outcome of her  appeal  before
the First-tier Tribunal, as the decision was sent to her  at  her  place  of
imprisonment, HMP Send, but the Tribunal's records showed that she had  been
transferred to Yarlswood  detention  centre  at  some  stage  and  had  been
released from there on 28 August 2015. Nevertheless, the notice  of  hearing
for today's hearing  had  been  sent  to  the  last  known  address  on  the
Tribunal's system, which I  note  from  the  papers  was  her  grandparents'
address where she  had  lived  previously  and  it  had  not  been  returned
undelivered. Mr Jarvis made some enquiries himself and  confirmed  that  the
Home Office database showed the same  address,  although  it  also  recorded
that she reported as homeless to Wembley police in October 2015.


In such  circumstances  it  seemed  that  no  purpose  would  be  served  by
adjourning the proceedings and, since  this  was  the  respondent's  appeal,
there was no option other than to proceed.


Mr Jarvis relied on his very detailed skeleton argument. He  submitted  that
the judge had erred in law by taking the view that ten years'  residence  in
itself was sufficient to benefit from the higher test and  the  Home  Office
Presenting Officer seemed to have simply agreed with his view. In so far  as
there was a concession by the Presenting Officer, Mr Jarvis  asked  that  it
be withdrawn as such a view was not correct in law and had  failed  to  take
account of the jurisprudence  confirming  that  the  ten  years  had  to  be
counted back from the deportation decision and that prison time  interrupted
the ten years, or that alternatively there had to be a continuous  ten  year
period prior  to  the  term  of  imprisonment  which  could  not  have  been
demonstrated by the appellant  as  a  result  of  her  previous  periods  of
imprisonment. Mr Jarvis relied in particular on  the  cases  of  MG,  Nnamdi
Onuekwere v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]  EUECJ  C-
378/12 and Warsame v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
EWCA Civ 16. With regard to  the  withdrawal  of  the  Presenting  Officer's
concession, he relied upon the case of NR (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 856.

Mr  Jarvis  submitted  further  that  the  respondent's  acceptance  of  the
appellant's acquisition of permanent residence was also wrong in law, as  it
was unlikely that she had comprehensive  sickness  insurance,  which  was  a
prerequisite for the exercise of treaty rights as  a  student.  Furthermore,
the  appellant's  circumstances  were  similar  to  those  in  the  case  of
Secretary of State for the Home Department v Vassallo [2016]  EWCA  Civ  13,
according to which it  was  unlikely  that  she  had  acquired  a  right  to
permanent residence on 30 April 2006. He  requested  that  the  respondent's
concession in regard to the  acquisition  of  permanent  residence  also  be
withdrawn.


Conclusions on the Error of Law


For the reasons given by Mr Jarvis, it seems to me that the decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is unsustainable and must be set aside. In so  far
as  the  Presenting  Officer's  agreement  with  the  judge's  view  can  be
considered as a concession, I  accept  the  withdrawal  of  that  concession
since it was based upon a misapplication of the law.

The jurisprudence addressing the relevant ten year period for  the  purposes
of Regulation 21(4) is prolific and the issues  are  complex.  It  is  clear
from that jurisprudence, as relied upon by Mr Jarvis and referred to  above,
that the ten year period is not simply calculated as ten  years'  continuous
residence without more. It is  to  be  counted  back  from  the  deportation
decision and is to take account of periods of imprisonment which are  likely
to interrupt that period  of  continuous  residence.  The  question  of  the
relevant ten year period having been established,  counting  back  from  the
period of imprisonment is also a relevant consideration, as is the  question
of integration. All of these matters have  to  be  carefully  considered  in
reaching a view as to the acquisition of the qualifying period  and  whether
or not the higher threshold in Regulation 21(4)  applies.  However  none  of
these matters were considered by the judge. Accordingly, his  decision  that
the appellant had the benefit  of  the  higher  threshold  under  Regulation
21(4) cannot be sustained.

I also agree with Mr Jarvis that  the  respondent's  concession  as  to  the
acquisition of permanent residence, on the  basis  that  it  was  made,  was
wrong in law in that it failed  to  take  account  of  the  requirement  for
comprehensive sickness insurance and appeared also to be  inconsistent  with
the findings now made in the recent case of Vassallo, or at least failed  to
take account of the considerations in that case.  I  therefore  also  accept
that that concession is withdrawn.


Accordingly I set  aside  Judge  Mayall's  decision.  The  decision  in  the
appellant's appeal must be re-made on the basis that all  matters  are  open
for consideration. It is for the judge re-making the  decision  to  consider
which level of protection the appellant is entitled to rely upon within  the
EEA Regulations, and to  consider  whether  the  appellant  has  acquired  a
permanent right of residence and whether she has acquired the  relevant  ten
year qualifying period to entitle her to the  higher  level  of  protection,
with reference to the relevant jurisprudence.


I would agree  with  Mr  Jarvis  that,  since  the  effect  of  the  judge's
preliminary observation was that there was virtually no evidence taken  from
the appellant and no proper assessment of  relevant  matters,  it  would  be
appropriate for the case to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
considered afresh. I considered whether there was,  however,  any  point  in
remitting the case given the appellant's absence and  the  possibility  that
there was no longer any contact with her. Mr Jarvis advised  me  that  there
was the possibility of a more detailed  search  being  conducted  of  linked
databases, such as through the  police,  to  ascertain  if  an  address  for
contact could be found. Therefore,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  is  in  the
interests of justice to afford the appellant an opportunity  of  being  able
to attend her appeal and provide further evidence.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be dealt with afresh, before any judge  aside  from  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Mayall.

    DIRECTIONS

    The respondent is to keep the Tribunal informed of any contact  details
    available for the appellant, further to any searches being conducted or
    enquiries being made.










                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede






















