
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00368/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2015                             |On 28 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     mm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett
For the Respondent:    Mr E Nicholson of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of reference the parties are hereafter  referred  to  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal so that MM is the appellant and the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department is the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and  Tobago.   He  appealed  the
    decision of the respondent to make a deportation  order  by  virtue  of
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge hearing the appeal allowed the  appeal  against  the  deportation
    order.  He dismissed the appeal against the refusal of indefinite leave
    under the Immigration Rules but allowed it under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision.   Summarising
    the grounds seeking permission the respondent submitted as follows:-

      a) The appellant is a  foreign  criminal  and  a  persistent  offender
         (paragraph 50 of the determination).   The  appellant  has  a  long
         history of convictions and in 2010 was only granted entry clearance
         on appeal.  He then  received  a  further  conviction  for  another
         motoring offence.  No evidence has been provided to show  that  his
         repeated  pattern  of  criminal  activity  will  stop.   The   only
         qualified opinion available to the Tribunal was  the  OASys  Report
         which shows that there was a continuing risk of  reoffending.   The
         Tribunal has made scant findings on this point  and  has,  instead,
         "made a conscious  effort  to  minimise  the  significance  of  the
         appellant's criminal profile" (paragraph 68).  The appellant  is  a
         person who has committed a serious crime and  who  is  at  risk  of
         committing further  serious  crimes.   It  is  irrelevant  for  the
         Tribunal to get distracted by making  findings  on  the  degree  of
         seriousness of the appellant's offences.

      b) The determination is  irredeemably  flawed  given  the  absence  of
         findings on future risk.

      c) There is an absence of any expert evidence to show  the  impact  of
         deportation on the appellant, whether accompanied by his family  or
         not and this renders the findings speculative and  not  sustainable
         in  the  absence  of  a  suitable  assessment  of  risk  of  future
         offending.

      d) As to the Article 8 decision this is subject to the same  flaws  as
         set  out  above.   The  judge's  findings  in  paragraph   96   are
         speculative and based upon assertions  of  the  appellant  and  his
         family who are necessarily partial.

 4. The judge granting  permission  to  appeal  refers  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge confirming that the OASys Report confirmed that the risk
    of the appellant committing further serious  offences  was  "imminent".
    That  view  contrasted  with  an  independent  risk  assessment  report
    prepared for the purpose of the appeal which  appeared  to  assess  the
    level of future risk as minimal.  The judge granting  permission  found
    it arguable that the First-tier judge had not demonstrated that he  had
    given sufficient consideration to the competing views in order to reach
    sustainable, evidence based findings.

 5. As to Article 8 there was no expert evidence available for the judge to
    consider. The judge  granting  permission  was  satisfied  that  it  is
    arguable that the findings of the  judge  were  speculative  and  based
    solely on the views of the appellant and his close family  members  who
    could not be expected to have any sort of  independent  perspective  on
    the situation.

 6. At the hearing Mr Nicholson, on behalf of the appellant,  sought  leave
    to file a Rule 24 response out-of-time.  The extension  was  sought  on
    the basis that the appellant was not represented at the hearing of  his
    appeal and had only instructed his representatives on 12 December 2014.
     Ms Everett indicated that she did not find herself  in  difficulty  in
    replying to matters set out in the Rule 24 response and on that basis I
    granted an extension of time and allowed the response to be  filed  and
    served.  There would clearly be no prejudice to the  respondent  by  so
    doing.

 7. Although the judge granting permission to appeal refers to  the  First-
    tier Judge confirming that the OASys Report confirmed that the risk  of
    the appellant committing further serious offences was  "imminent"  this
    is not in fact the case.  The document referred to (at page 110 of  the
    appellant's bundle) is not an OASys Report.  It appears that  none  was
    available and that the comments made were in relation to a request  for
    Offender Management Information and based  upon  previous  pre-sentence
    reports.  The comments were as follows:-

         "Since resident in the UK, Mr M has accrued five offences which are
         driving related.  Three of these offences are  for  drink  driving.
         The PSR (Pre Sentence Report) dated 13.2.09 assesses  risk  to  the
         public as high and the PSR  dated  20.5.13  assesses  risk  to  the
         public as medium.  It will be reasonable to  assume  that  he  will
         continue to drive disqualified/or under the  influence  of  alcohol
         and therefore it is my assessment that the risk is imminent!"

 8. The OASys Report is dated 15 November 2013 and is re-produced at  pages
    74 to 106 of the appellant's bundle.  The  respondent  refers  to  this
    report in her grounds as the only qualified opinion  available  to  the
    Tribunal. No particular section of the document is referred to  in  the
    grounds it being said only that it "showed that there was a  continuing
    risk of reoffending".  However, nothing is said about any imminent risk
    posed by the appellant in any category.  On the contrary with regard to
    the likelihood  of  serious  harm  to  others  the  report  scores  the
    respondent as posing a low risk both in custody and in the community in
    respect of every category of person (appellant's bundle page 106;  page
    33 of the OASys Report).  Similarly the report scores the appellant  as
    posing a "low" probability of reoffending (appellant's bundle page  74;
    page 32 of the OASys Report).

 9. The importance of this is that the respondent submits  that  the  judge
    made scant findings regarding a continuing risk of reoffending and  has
    made a conscious effort to minimise the significance of the appellant's
    criminal  profile.   Although  it  is  apparent  that  the   respondent
    disagrees with  the  judge  paragraph  68  of  the  determination  does
    evaluate  the  convictions.   The  judge  finds   that   although   the
    circumstances of the dangerous  driving  were  undeniably  serious  the
    judge (in the criminal proceedings) indicated in his sentencing remarks
    that  it  would  have  attracted  a  sentence   of   eighteen   months'
    imprisonment on conviction after  trial  and  this  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge indicated that it was not the most  serious  offence  of
    dangerous driving for which a sentence of two years' imprisonment would
    have been available on conviction after trial.  He summarised his  view
    that the offences committed are not of the most  serious  character,  a
    finding that he was entitled to make  on  the  facts  for  the  reasons
    given.

10. The judge was aware of and made reference  to  the  appellant  being  a
    persistent offender because he has committed five offences  of  driving
    whilst disqualified between 2003 and 2013.  The judge set against those
    findings the undisputed facts  that  the  appellant  has  a  subsisting
    relationship with  a  qualifying  partner  and  with  three  qualifying
    children.  Between  paragraphs  62  and  70  of  the  determination  he
    provided  full  reasons  as  to  why  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
    deportation both on his wife and children would be  unduly  harsh.   He
    directed himself correctly as to the law and for good reasons concluded
    that the adverse consequences for the appellant's children outweigh the
    public interest in the appellant's deportation and that the  effect  on
    them would be unduly harsh, that is to say excessively severe.  He came
    to the same conclusion in paragraph 70 of the effect of his deportation
    upon his partner.  His partner and children are all UK citizens.

11. I add that the judge had before him also an Article 8  report  dated  1
    January 2014 (paragraph 30) and an independent Risk Assessment and Risk
    Management Plan prepared by a qualified Probation Officer (page  37  of
    the appellant's bundle  and  following)  which  concluded  that  it  is
    extremely unlikely that  the  appellant  will  commit  further  driving
    offences in the future because he is facing deportation; his  wife  and
    children could not relocate to Trinidad with him; he has shown  remorse
    for his offences and an understanding of the reasons why  he  committed
    the offences and their impact upon his family and  himself;  if  he  is
    given one  last  chance  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  was
    considered extremely unlikely that he will  ever  knowingly  jeopardise
    his and his family's future together again.

12. I agree with  the  appellant's  submission  that  the  judge  carefully
    considered all of the  evidence  before  him  and  took  note  of  that
    relating to the appellant's rehabilitation (see paras 5, 7, 8 and 96 of
    the determination).  Given the absence of qualified evidence indicative
    of anything other than a low risk of reoffending it is difficult to see
    what else the judge could have  been  expected  to  do.   The  evidence
    itself indicated that the risk was  low.   The  respondent  should  not
    succeed in her submission that the judge should have reached a  finding
    of the appellant's propensity  to  reoffend  when  the  respondent  has
    failed to demonstrate that such a propensity exists.  The OASys  Report
    was dated more than one  year  earlier  than  the  hearing  before  the
    Tribunal.  The judge was both entitled  and  obliged  to  consider  the
    evidence of rehabilitation since it  went  to  the  issue  of  risk  of
    reoffending. His subsequent  conclusions  are  neither  irrational  nor
    perverse.

13. As to  the  findings  set  out  at  paragraph  96  being  "speculative"
    according to the respondent, on the evidence before him the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude as he did.   It  hardly  needs  to  be  said  that
    although friends and family may be partial  the  fact  that  they  have
    given evidence in one form or another is to be  accorded  some  weight.
    Indeed the absence of the provision of any such evidence often leads to
    adverse comments being made in submissions.

14. In any event the judge did not  rely  solely  upon  evidence  that  was
    provided by the respondent and members of the family.  There were  many
    other matters that the judge took into account listed at paragraphs  8,
    30-32 and 33.

Decision

15. For the reasons set out above the judge has not erred and his  decision
    which  was  promulgated  on  23  October  2014  stands.  Therefore  the
    appellant succeeds in his appeal.

16. I was not addressed in relation to the matter of anonymity but  such  a
    direction has been given previously to protect the  children  it  would
    appear and that direction is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton




