
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00081/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     EA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Loughran, Counsel instructed on behalf of Wilson
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Tribunal makes an anonymity direction pursuant to Rule  14  of  the
    Upper Tribunal (Procedure Rules) 2008  (as  amended)  in  view  of  the
    Appellant's mental health.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court orders
    otherwise, no report of any proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.   This
    prohibition  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties   and   their
    representatives.

The background:

 2. In a determination promulgated on the 16th September 2015 I  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for the reasons set out.

 3. It was not possible to continue  to  remake  the  decision  as  Mr  Lay
    informed the Tribunal that there were a number of  outstanding  matters
    in relation to the Appellant.  There were no  further  instructions  at
    the present time and no updated medical evidence, however, there was  a
    letter making reference to him having been transferred from prison to a
    secure unit.  Furthermore, it appears that there were  further  charges
    outstanding against the Appellant but no  details  were  provided.   In
    those  circumstances,  the  case  was  set  down  for  a  further  case
    management hearing when further directions shall  be  given  concerning
    the remaking of the appeal.

 4. At the hearing today there was no further material available and  there
    were no further details of the pending criminal charges or any  medical
    evidence. That evidence would not be available until  the  5th  January
    2016. Mr Wilding accepted that the case facts were different  and  that
    the refusal  letter  even  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been
    overtaken by the medical circumstances of the applicant  and  that  the
    respondent would be likely to issue a supplementary refusal letter.

 5. Ms Loughran invited the Tribunal to determine the appeal with  a  fresh
    oral hearing by way of remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Due to the
    nature of the error of law, the Tribunal will be required  to  consider
    new evidence on a number of issues and for findings of fact to be  made
    on all the issues raised including the documentary evidence and medical
    evidence.  In that context, I am satisfied that the appropriate  course
    is for the appeal to be remitted as set out above and for there  to  be
    an assessment of the evidence.  There have been reasons given as to why
    this course should be adopted, and having given  particular  regard  to
    the overriding objective of  the  efficient  disposal  of  appeals  and
    taking into account that there are issues of fact that are  central  to
    this appeal that require determination, I have reached  the  conclusion
    that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall be  set  aside,
    none of the findings shall stand and the case is to be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing in accordance with  Section  12(2)(b)
    of the Tribunals, Court and Enforcement Act and paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

 7. There shall be Case Management Hearing  listed  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal after the 11th January 2016.

Notice of Decision

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and is set aside; none of the findings shall stand and the case  is  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing in accordance with
    Section 12(2)(b) of  the  Tribunals,  Court  and  Enforcement  Act  and
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice  Statement  of  10th  February  2010  (as
    amended).

Direction regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 30/10/2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

