
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00760/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 December 2014                           |On 15 December 2014          |
|Oral judgment                                 |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     BZ
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal  of  B  Z  against  a  decision  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss his appeal on asylum grounds.  This case has had an
    unfortunate  history.   His  appeal  was  originally  heard  against  a
    decision that was served on him on 6 October  2011.   That  appeal  was
    heard on 16 September 2013 and dismissed.   It  then  came  before  the
    Upper Tribunal on 21 January 2014 and, in a judgment  delivered  orally
    on 4 February 2014, an error of law was found such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and remitted to the First-tier to  be  heard  again
    with no findings preserved.  It was then heard again before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Judge Ross, on 14  July  2014  and  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 7 October 2014 his appeal on asylum  grounds  was  again
    dismissed.  He sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds that there had been material errors of fact as to the length of
    time that he had spent in Italy, that his credibility had been  wrongly
    impugned because of a lack of corroborative evidence,  that  the  judge
    had erred in  finding  that  the  appellant  had  only  challenged  the
    recording of his answers in September 2013 whereas his statement  of  9
    November 2011 addressed that issue and that having  accepted  that  the
    appellant was an ethnic Roma, the judge had ignored the expert evidence
    as to sufficiency of protection for Roma in Albania.

2.   Although Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State did  not  accept
    that there had been errors of fact in connection with the  travel  from
    Albania to Greece and from Greece to Italy and the  time  that  he  had
    spent in Italy, when considering the  original  Statement  of  Evidence
    Form in 2009 and from the Record of Proceedings where it was found that
    the appellant had been in Italy for some  six  months,  Mr  Walker  did
    accept that there had been a failure on  the  part  of  Judge  Ross  to
    consider the expert evidence as to sufficiency of protection  for  Roma
    in Albania.  On that basis I am satisfied that in these  circumstances,
    yet again, this appeal will have to go back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision to be taken.

3.   The findings to be retained are  that  the  appellant  is  an  Albanian
    citizen of Roma ethnicity which is to be found in paragraph 12  of  the
    determination of Judge Ross.  I therefore set aside  the  decision  and
    remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 15th December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker


