
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00799/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 22 May 2013                                |On 10 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                         mr barrington laxy thompson

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Andrew Duncan, Solicitor, Duncan Moghal
Solicitors &  Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr Kelvin Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, has permission to  appeal  against
    the determination of a First-tier Tribunal (FtT) (Judge Troup and Ms  V
    S Street) who in a determination sent on 31 December 2012 dismissed the
    appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 17  October  2012
    that he is a foreign criminal subject to  automatic  deportation  under
    s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The principal ground on which the appellant relies is  that  the  panel
    failed to give consideration  to  whether  it  would  be  in  the  best
    interests of the  appellant's  children  to  be  separated  from  their
    father.  Linked to this, the  grounds  submit  the  panel  defined  the
    appellant's family life ties too narrowly so as to exclude  those  with
    Sachon, Jahquarn and Teshi.

3.   Taking the latter submission first, I do not consider that the  panel's
    assessment of the appellant's ties with these children was flawed.   Mr
    Duncan has argued that since the panel  had  accepted  the  appellant's
    partner, Miss Esson, as credible and her evidence was the appellant was
    the natural father of these children, it was not entitled to  find  his
    paternity unproven.  I cannot agree.  The onus was on the appellant  to
    prove paternity.  Given that (i) the only relevant documentary evidence
    he relied on were birth certificates which did  not  name  him  as  the
    father; (ii) there  were  no  statements  from  the  mothers  of  these
    children supporting his claim, I do not consider  the  panel  erred  in
    concluding as it did.  But in any event, the panel's  material  finding
    did not focus on paternity but the factual context of  the  appellant's
    ties.  Its findings were:

         "41. Even if he is the father of those three children, we find that
             he has provided little or no financial support  for  them  and
             his conduct has made family life tenuous in the  extreme.   We
             note that the Appellant was  unable  to  identify  any  school
             which the children attend, he was  unable  to  name  a  single
             class teacher and his claim  to  collect  and/or  deliver  the
             children to and from school is less than credible,  given  the
             Appellant's admission that has been a Class A drug addict  for
             the last ten years."

4.   These findings were open to the panel on the evidence and their  effect
    was that his ties to these children had little factual content  and  as
    such could not add significant weight to his Article 8 claim.

5.   As regards the appellant's ties with Miss  Esson's  two  children,  her
    unchallenged evidence was that he was the father  of  Barrianne  (which
    was confirmed by the birth certificate) and that he had a  family  life
    tie with her son from an earlier relationship, Raekwarn.  On the  basis
    of her evidence the panel accepted family life did exist  between  Miss
    Esson, these two children on the one hand, and  the  appellant  on  the
    other.

6.   Insofar as concerns the panel's consideration of the best interests  of
    these  two  children,  Mr  Duncan  accepts  that  there   was   partial
    consideration.  At paragraph 51 the panel stated:

         "51. As for the best interests and wellbeing of  the  children,  we
             find that Miss Esson's view coincides with that  expressed  in
             ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, namely that the  children's  best
             interests are a primary consideration and that  the  intrinsic
             importance of citizenship should not be played down  and  that
             in all the circumstances it would not be in  the  interest  of
             the children to remove to Jamaica."

7.   I would observe that this passage shows that the panel  understood  and
    applied the principle set out in Sanade and Others  [2012]  UKUT  00046
    that in the case of a British citizen child (as each of these  children
    is), it is not reasonable to expect them to leave the territory of  the
    Union and relocate with the appellant in Jamaica, as  this  would  deny
    them the substantial enjoyment of their rights as Union citizens.   The
    panel did not phrase matters thus  but  that  is  the  plan  effect  of
    paragraph 51 (see also paragraph 48).

8.   Mr Duncan argues, however, that such  consideration  fails  to  address
    the question of  whether  the  best  interests  of  the  children  were
    vitiated by the appellant's prospective removal.  I cannot accept  that
    argument.  Albeit the panel's treatment of the matter is  brief  it  is
    quite apparent that the appellant's relationships with Miss  Esson  and
    her children were seen as central  to  the  assessment  the  panel  saw
    itself as undertaking.  The panel's determination  records  at  31  the
    respondent's submissions that interference with their family life would
    be proportionate bearing in mind that they have never  lived  with  the
    appellant full-time and Barrianne has only  seen  the  appellant  in  a
    prison environment since she was 9  months  old  and  was  nevertheless
    progressing and was well looked after (31).

9.    At  paragraphs  32-37  the  panel  notes  submissions  made   on   the
    appellant's behalf that Marion is involved in an A level course and has
    a continuing relationship with his own  father.  At  paragraph  50  the
    panel notes that Miss Esson had confirmed the appellant had been unable
    to provide financially for the children and  also  that  she  had  gone
    ahead with having  a  child  with  him  although  fully  aware  of  his
    problematic immigration status and the fact of his drug  addiction.   I
    consider that it was apparent from the panel's assessment that they did
    not consider that the removal of the appellant would impact  on  either
    of these children in a way that would significantly impair  their  best
    interests.  Given their other finding that there was a medium risk that
    he would reoffend  ("his  criminal  history  gives  little  ground  for
    optimism"), it was clearly also a factor in the mix that just as he had
    denied himself and these children a proper family  life  by  committing
    offences and being imprisoned in the past, it was likely the same might
    happen again.  I would also  observe  that  the  evidence  produced  in
    support of the appellant's case as to the strength and quality  of  his
    ties with these two children was  limited  and  there  was  nothing  to
    demonstrate that they had been or would be psychologically impaired  by
    his physical absence from their lives.  It is also significant that the
    panel's  analysis  of  the  appellants  Harrison  and   Walker   (whose
    circumstances the panel saw as being "closely akin"  to  those  of  the
    appellant) in Sanade makes clear that visits to Jamaica and other forms
    of communication appear possible (paragraph 54) and there was no reason
    why all contact would be lost.  The grounds dispute the efficacy of the
    panel's reliance on these case comparisons but I see no  factual  basis
    for considering that the observations made about Walker at paragraph 54
    were not equally applicable to the appellant.

10.  The grounds also relied on  two other matters.  One,  relating  to  the
    importance of the appellant's relationship with  his  own  mother,  was
    formally abandoned before me by Mr Duncan and I would add that I  think
    it was realistic of him to do so, not least because even  in  the  2009
    representations made about the importance of this relationship  it  was
    accepted  that  the  appellant's  family  life  "revolved  around"  his
    partner(s) and his children not around that  matter.   Although  living
    with his mother it was also plain he spent a great deal  of  time  away
    from home  and  that  he  did  not  financially  support,  nor  was  he
    financially supported in any consistent way, by his mother.

11.  The only other  ground  pursued  before  me  concerns  the  appellant's
    dyslexia and the alleged failure of the panel to make proper allowances
    for the difficulties this condition  (together  with  his  drug  abuse)
    caused to the appellant's ability to recollect matters  and  to  acquit
    himself properly when  giving  evidence.   The  short  answer  to  this
    contention is (i) that the appellant's representatives have  known  for
    some considerable time about these difficulties and are  clearly  in  a
    position to have ensured they obtained evidence from third  parties  to
    support his various  contentions  (e.g.  statements  from  the  various
    mothers of  his  other  children);  in  such  circumstances  they  were
    entitled to count against the appellant shortcomings  in  his  evidence
    relating to his inability to give details.  At paragraph 41  the  panel
    stated:

         "41. Even ...  We note that the Appellant was  unable  to  identify
             any school which the children attend, he was unable to name  a
             single class teacher and his claim to collect  and/or  deliver
             the children to and from school is less than  credible,  given
             the Appellant's admission that has been a Class A drug  addict
             for the last ten years."

12.  There were no documents or witness statements from others  accompanying
    the grounds of appeal evidencing that the appellant had  collected  and
    delivered the children as claimed.   I consider it was entirely open to
    the panel as a fact-finding Tribunal to disbelieve the  claim  made  by
    the appellant about regularly picking up children from school.

13.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT did  not  materially  err
    in law and accordingly its decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    must stand.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
