
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00741/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Tyneside                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th October, 2014                         |On 24th November, 2014       |
|Signed 21st November, 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N A
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Kingham, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Rebecca Pickering, Counsel, instructed by David
Gray& Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction pursuant  to  Rule
44(4)(1) of the Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal or court orders otherwise no report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent or any  member  of  her
family.  This direction applies both to the claimant and the  respondent  as
well as to other parties.  I have not been asked  to  alter  or  amend  this
anonymity direction and see no good reason to do so.

1.   In this appeal the appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion, I refer to her as "the claimant".

2.   The respondent, N A, is a citizen of  Portugal  who  was  born  on  6th
    June, 1978.


Respondent's Immigration History

3.   The respondent claims to have arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  9th
    April, 2004.  On 24th August,  2009  she  made  an  application  for  a
    Certificate of Approval of Marriage which was issued  to  her  on  13th
    May, 2010.  On 15th July, 2010 the respondent was married  at  Bury  St
    Edmunds Register Office to M S, a Pakistani national.  On 10th  August,
    2010 she submitted an application for an EEA  registration  certificate
    which was issued to her on 14th January, 2011.

Criminal Conviction

4.   On 26th March, 2013, at Peterborough Crown Court,  the  respondent  was
    convicted  of  two  counts   of   assault/ill-treat/neglect/abandon   a
    child/young person likely to  cause  unnecessary  suffering/injury  for
    which she was sentenced on 29th April, 2013, to a total  of  two  years
    and four months' imprisonment.  She did not appeal against  either  the
    conviction or the sentence.

Deportation

5.   On 21st May, 2013, the respondent was notified that  the  Secretary  of
    State was now considering her liability to deportation on  the  grounds
    of public policy.   A  completed  questionnaire  was  received  by  the
    claimant on 10th June, 2013.

6.   In the light of the respondent's claim  to  have  been  living  in  the
    United Kingdom since 9th April, 2004, in a letter dated 10th  December,
    2013 and served on her on  12th  December,  2013,  the  respondent  was
    requested to provide evidence that she had resided continuously and had
    exercised her treaty rights in the United Kingdom since that date.  She
    responded on 17th December, 2013 requesting more time  to  provide  the
    evidence and on 19th December, 2013 she was granted a further period of
    ten working days in which to provide the requested information. On  2nd
    January, 2014 a response was received.

7.   The respondent  was  served  with  a  notice  of  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order on 11th March, 2014.

Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

8.   The respondent appealed against the decision of  the  claimant  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and her appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cope sitting at North Tyneside Magistrate's Court on  30th  July,
    2014.  He  found  that  the  claimant  had  failed  to  show  that  the
    respondent, by her personal conduct does present a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  prevention  of  mistreatment  of
    children and allowed the respondent's appeal.

The Hearing Before Me

9.   The claimant was granted permission to appeal on  5th  September,  2014
    and  the  appeal  came  for  hearing  before  me  at   North   Tyneside
    Magistrate's Court on 30th October, 2014.

10.  For  the  respondent,  Miss  Pickering  confirmed  that  there  was  no
    challenge to the finding made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
    paragraph 53 of his determination where he found that the claimant  was
    correct not to treat the respondent as having established that she  has
    a  permanent  right  of  residence  under  Regulation  15  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and that as a consequence the claimant  only  has  to  show
    that there are grounds of public  policy  justifying  the  respondent's
    removal.

11.  Criticism was made  by  the  claimant  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  of
    paragraph 92 of the determination.   In  it,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge makes reference to the claimant's decision letter and a reference
    in it to the respondent being  capable  of  causing  psychological  and
    physical harm to children, especially under the influence  of  alcohol.
    The judge says at paragraph 93 that he regards this as being completely
    wrong, because there is nothing  in  any  presentence,  OASys  or  NOMS
    Reports giving any indication whatsoever that the  respondent  has  had
    any problems with alcohol.

12.  I pointed out to the  representatives  that  for  some  unknown  reason
    there appeared to be a copy  of  the  claimant's  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter in respect of the respondent's sister which makes  reference  to
    the respondent's sister having an alcohol problem.   It  appeared  that
    the judge had been given this letter for  some  reason  and  it  simply
    assumed that it related to this respondent.  Mr Kingham suggested  that
    that was an error of law because  the  judge  has  examined  the  wrong
    letter and therefore failed to take account of the Secretary of State's
    view of the current risks posed by the respondent.

13.  Mr Kingham addressed me at some length and  very  helpfully  identified
    four clear challenges to the  judge's  decision  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The  first  refers  to  what  the  judge  said  at
    paragraphs 74, 75, 76 and 77 of his determination.  The judge said:

         "74.     It seems to me that this degree  and  context  of  contact
             with the [respondent], as well as  the  statutory  and  policy
             framework within which the probation officer have to  work  in
             addition to their training and experience, means  that  I  can
             and should give considerable weight to what they have  to  say
             about her.


         75.  There is one caveat that I would mention here.  This  is  that
             there is reference for instance  in  section  2  of  the  pre-
             sentence report and section R7.1 of the OASys  Report  to  the
             effect that the [respondent's] daughters had to give  evidence
             in court and that thus has further damaged them.


         76.  I have to say that I do not understand these  remarks.  It  is
             quite apparent not only from the  sentencing  remarks  of  the
             judge but also from the trial record  sheet  included  in  the
             [claimant's] bundle of documents that the [respondent] pleaded
             guilty to two charges of ill-treatment of the child. The judge
             sentenced the [respondent] on  the  basis  of  having  pleaded
             guilty and explicitly stated that he had given her credit  for
             having avoided the trial and the need for the children to give
             evidence; and trial record sheet shows that no jury was sworn.


         77.  I have proceeded therefore on the basis that the comments made
             in the probation reports about the  children  having  to  give
             evidence in court are incorrect for whatever reason."

14.  Mr Kingham said that that was entirely incorrect, because the  children
    had given evidence.  They  were  required  to  give  evidence  in  care
    proceedings as is apparent from page 42 of the respondent's bundle.  At
    paragraph R7.1 the OASys assessment says this:-

             "[the respondent] clearly presents a  risk  to  her  children.
             However they are currently in long term foster  care  and  had
             been  in  the  care  of  the  local  authorities   since   the
             investigation  began  in  August  2012.   The  social   worker
             involved reports that the children were  very  frightened  and
             had suffered abuse for a long time.  They  were  all  in  poor
             health, requiring significant dental work and  that  they  had
             been expected to do a lot in the  family  home  that  was  not
             appropriate to their age.  The children were  further  damaged
             by them having to give evidence in court and being  told  that
             they liars by their mothers.  The ongoing case meant that they
             could not start therapy and counselling as it  was  felt  that
             they may have tainted the evidence.


             In relation to other children [the respondent's]  co-defendant
             is  her  twin  sister,  the  social  worker  states  that  the
             documentation reports the sisters  each  holding  each  others
             children down for the  other  one  to  physically  abuse  them
             further - escalating the  seriousness  and  illustrating  more
             planning and calculation than they have acknowledged."

15.  Mr Kingham  suggested  that  the  second  error  was  to  be  found  in
    paragraph 120 of the determination.  The judge has found  that  because
    of the licence conditions which will be attached  to  the  respondent's
    licence once she is released from prison and the findings of the Family
    Court, that the respondent is of no risk whatsoever.

16.  The judge examined the licence at paragraph 107  of  the  determination
    and noted that there were quite specific conditions that the respondent
    should not approach  or  communicate  with  her  daughter  without  the
    approval  of  the  Probation  Service  or   Cambridgeshire   Children's
    Services; that she was not allowed to stay in the same  household  with
    any child under the age of 18 except with the approval of the Probation
    Service; that she was to notify her probation officer of any developing
    personal relationships with any children under the age of 18;  and  she
    was not permitted to  work or organise any activity with someone  under
    the age of 18 either on a paid or unpaid basis without prior  approval.
    The judge believed that  those  stringent  conditions  were  likely  to
    reduce the degree of risk that the respondent may pose to children  and
    at paragraph 20 the judge said:

         "So far as the particular risk is concerned I am satisfied for  the
         reasons that I have set out above that the respondent poses no risk
         whatsoever to her daughters."

17.  That, Mr King said, represented a further error  on  the  part  of  the
    judge. The judge went on to say at paragraph 121:

         "121. In relation to a more generalised  risk  to  other  children,
             then again I consider that there is no risk to  such  children
             in general - that is children that the [respondent]  may  come
             into contact with during the normal course of  the  day  in  a
             social situation or through employment  that  she  may  obtain
             following release from custody. There is nothing in any of the
             probation documents to suggest  that  she  presents  any  such
             risk."

18.   Next  Mr  Kingham,  asked  me  to  consider  paragraph  100   of   the
    determination.  The OASys Report makes reference to the respondent  and
    her sister assisting each other in holding the children down whilst the
    other abuses the child.  Mr Kingham suggested this may  not  have  been
    the basis of her plea of guilty, but the judge was wrong  at  paragraph
    in ignoring the OASys Report in assessing the risk.  The judge said:-

         "100. There is an indication in the pre-sentence  report  that  the
             [respondent] may have been involved in some way  in  abuse  of
             the children  of  [her  twin  sister]  with  them  all  living
             together in the same house - I note the comments attributed to
             apparently Miss Forrester at Section 4  of  the  OASys  Report
             about the respondent  and  her  sister  holding  each  other's
             children down for them to be beaten.  However the [respondent]
             was not sentenced on this  basis,  and  apparently  the  pleas
             accepted by the Crown were also not on that basis."

19.  Mr Kingham said that since reference to the  respondent  and  her  twin
    sister assisting each other in the abuse of each other's  children  was
    contained within the OASys Report. It was wrong and therefore an  error
    for the judge to say what he did at paragraph 100.

20.  Lastly Mr Kingham refereed me to the judge's finding of  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 112 and 113 of the determination.  Here, the judge said:-

         "112.    So far as the [respondent] herself is  concerned  she  has
             said at paragraphs 12-13 that she knows what she did was wrong
             and that she apologised for her actions; she was  ashamed  and
             upset about what she did; and that she deeply  regretted  what
             she did to her children.


         113. I consider that this is an indicator, albeit  far  from  being
             determinative, of  recognition  by  the  [respondent]  of  the
             unacceptability of her behaviour and her being aware that such
             offending should not occur in the future. As such it does need
             to be given some weight in the overall assessment of risk."

21.  It was for the judge to assess the respondent's remorse, but the  facts
    which led to the respondent's behaviour, namely  learnt  behaviour  and
    poor thinking skills, without evidence that  the  respondent  had  been
    addressing the facts which had led to  the  behaviour,  the  judge  was
    wrong in focusing solely on remorse as an indication of the  likelihood
    of the respondent's future offending.

22.  Having heard Mr Kingham's submissions  I  adjourned  briefly  for  Miss
    Pickering to take instructions from  her  client.  The  respondent  had
    arrived late and  following  an  altercation  in  the  cells  involving
    another detainee it had not been possible for Miss Pickering to have  a
    conference with  the  respondent.   On  resuming  the  hearing  Counsel
    confirmed that she had been given sufficient time to consult  with  the
    respondent.

23.  Miss Pickering invited me to uphold  the  determination.   She  pointed
    out that it was a detailed and thorough determination.

24.  Counsel then addressed me on each of the four challenges identified  by
    Mr Kingham, starting first with the last one.

25.  At paragraph 113 the judge believed that the respondent's  remorse  was
    an indicator of recognition by the respondent of the unacceptability of
    her behaviour and was right to identify that it did need  to  be  given
    some weight in the overall assessment of risk.  The weight to be  given
    was a matter entirely for him.  Linked in with the respondent's remorse
    is the fact that the respondent has learned to address  her  behaviour.
    Counsel drew my attention to  the  letter  of  17th  April,  2014  from
    Christopher Langthorne, offender supervisor at HM Prison  Long  Newton.
    This was at pages 53 and 54 of the  respondent's  bundle.   The  letter
    points out that the respondent is on G wing which  provides  a  relaxed
    environment with low security,

             "To allow the trusted prisoners to  take  more  responsibility
             for themselves. [The respondent] has not  presented  with  any
             management problems during the course of  her  sentence  since
             her arrival at  HMP  Long  Newton.   [The  respondent]  is  an
             enhanced IEP status and her wing records are wholly  positive.
             [The respondent] works in the education department  where  she
             attends the English for foreign nationals class."


26.  In the last paragraph on the first page of that  letter  Mr  Langthorne
    writes:-

             "[The  respondent]  is  demonstrating   through   her   prison
             behaviour and the way that she is dealing with her immigration
             position that she can deal with challenging  situations.   She
             is working with the education department to both  improve  her
             English and then step on to improve her vocational skills  and
             her employability.  It is likely that if/when she is  released
             to her home area the Probation  Service  will  work  with  her
             individually to address her offending behaviour  and  increase
             her victim empathy.  Her scheduled release date is 28th  June,
             2014.  She will not be eligible for HDC as  her  offences  are
             against children."


27.  Counsel pointed out that the respondent is  clearly  dealing  with  her
    behaviour issues.  Miss Pickering drew my attention to  paragraph  2.11
    of the OASys Report which states:

             "Although [the respondent] has admitted her behaviour and  she
             acknowledges that it took some time for her to accept that the
             way  in  which  she  had  behaved   was   inappropriate   [the
             respondent] did  state  that  she  felt  very  sad  about  the
             situation and the way she acted.  She said that she behaved in
             the wrong way in an attempt to gain control of the  situation.
             She acknowledged that she had hurt her children and  that  she
             should  have  asked  for  help.   It  did  appear  during  the
             interview that [the respondent's] remorse was focused  on  her
             own losses, rather than the  impact  of  her  actions  on  her
             children.


             [The respondent] stated that she did not feel  she  was  doing
             anything wrong at the time as it was the only way she knew  to
             discipline her children yet she  said  that  on  occasion  she
             regretted her actions immediately  afterwards,  felt  ashamed,
             was upset and apologised to them for causing them pain.   When
             asked how she thought others disciplined their  children,  she
             said that on occasions she had observed others smacking  their
             children, but had never seen anyone use a weapon on a child."


28.  Miss Pickering also  drew  my  attention  to  what  appeared  to  be  a
    contradiction at paragraph 2.7 of the OASys Report, where  it  suggests
    that there was no evidence to suggest that the respondent and her  twin
    sister had  acted  together  in  abusing  their  children,  "but  their
    behaviour stems from the same belief and  experiences  that  they  have
    had.  It appears to be based on their own  upbringing,  they  have  the
    same ideas about disciplining children but there is nothing to  suggest
    that they were influencing each other."

29.  In making his findings, Miss Pickering suggested  that  the  judge  had
    been able to assess the  respondent's  oral  evidence  at  the  hearing
    before him and she had earlier expressed remorse.  Her  behaviour  also
    supports the assertion that she is remorseful and an understanding that
    it was wrong.  She  stated  that  there  was  nothing  unreasonable  or
    perverse about the judge having attached some  weight  to  the  remorse
    expressed.

30.  As to the third challenge, it is clear  that  the  judge  did  consider
    carefully the OASys Report, but that in itself is contradictory.  There
    was a basis of plea and her pleas were  on  the  basis  of  her  having
    assaulted her two children.  Her plea was found to be acceptable to the
    Crown.  The judge attached weight  to  a  number  of  documents  as  is
    evident from paragraph 70 where he refers not only to the  pre-sentence
    report but also the OASys assessment and NOMS report, the  letter  from
    Christopher  Langthorne  and  an  email  from  Mr  Langthorne  to   the
    respondent's solicitors. The judge attached particular  weight  to  the
    probation officer's reports as is apparent from  paragraph  73  of  the
    determination.

         "73. I have placed particular weight on the five documents from the
             probation officers. If nothing else  they  have  been  working
             with  the  respondent  as  well  as  making  criminal  justice
             assessments on the degree of risk that she poses both prior to
             her conviction and subsequently while she has been serving her
             sentence of imprisonment."

31.  And at 74 he said:-

         "74.     It seems to me that this degree  and  context  of  contact
             with [the respondent], as well as  the  statutory  and  policy
             framework within which the probation officers have to work  in
             addition to their training and experience, means  that  I  can
             and should give considerable weight to what they have  to  say
             about her."

32.  The judge did not make an assessment  in  a  vacuum.   He  has  clearly
    considered all the relevant evidence and weighed upon  what  he  should
    do. He reached conclusions based on this evidence which  were  open  to
    him.

33.  Turning now to the first challenge  made  by  Mr  Kingham,  namely  the
    issue of the children having to give evidence in care proceedings, this
    is not something that was material to his decision.  He considered  the
    reports and thought that they were mistaken but he did  consider  them.
    He considered the overall assessment which of course was  made  on  the
    basis that the children had been required to give  evidence  in  court.
    This may have been an error on his part but it  is  certainly  not  one
    which is capable of having any effect on the eventual  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

34.  So far as the second challenge  is  concerned,  paragraph  120  of  the
    determination must be read in the context of  the  determination  as  a
    whole.  There is a risk but there are conditions in place which address
    them which means that for all practical purposes the children  are  not
    at risk from their mother.  Paragraph R10.3  of  the  OASys  assessment
    says:-

             "The risk is not currently imminent due to [the  respondent's]
             children being in long term foster care.   This  is  the  long
             term plan and there is currently nothing in place to  consider
             any reconciliation.  The risk will remain  at  this  level  as
             [the respondent] will not have unsupervised contact  with  her
             children and will not be responsible for their care. She  will
             need  to  have  completed  significant  work  to  address  her
             offending behaviour, before CSC  will  even  consider  working
             with her on parenting courses. If she was to  be  involved  in
             the care of other children, then the risk she poses  would  of
             course be escalated."


35.  The judge's comments need therefore to be considered in the context  of
    the whole determination and in the context of  the  licence  conditions
    which were imposed until August of next year.

36.  It is unfortunate that the judge had, for  some  unknown  reason,  been
    given a copy of the respondent's sister's refusal letter  and  confused
    the two of them.  However the only  confusion  is  in  respect  of  his
    reference at paragraphs 92, 93, and 94. Elsewhere it is clear  that  he
    has referred to the respondent's refusal letter and thus this is not  a
    material factor in how he reached  his  decision.   It  is  clear  from
    paragraph 11 that the judge did examine the correct letter.

37.  Mr Kingham had no further comments to make. He  did,  however,  confirm
    that what the judge said at paragraphs 30, 31 and 32 in relation to the
    Immigration Act 2014 was correct.  It does not apply.

38.  I reserved my decision.

39.  I am grateful to Mr Kingham for the very careful  and  concise  way  in
    which he identified the challenges to the determination.  Unfortunately
    the grounds of appeal were not as helpful, suggesting as it  does  that
    the judge  appears  to  disparage  the  contents  of  the  reasons  for
    deportation  letter,  without  given  sufficient  reasons  and  without
    adequate analysis.  It suggests that the judge  appears  to  have  been
    looking for reasons to allow the appeal, but gives no examples.

40.  The judge was clearly wrong in what he said at paragraphs  75  and  76.
    He has very clearly overlooked the fact that the respondent's  children
    were required to give evidence in care proceedings.   However, I  agree
    with Miss Pickering; the judge has simply said that he has proceeded on
    the basis that the comments made in the  probation  reports  about  the
    children having to give evidence in court are incorrect,  but  he  does
    nonetheless fully consider the reports and  takes  into  account  their
    contents.  He assumes that the comments about the  children  having  to
    give evidence against their mother are incorrect and put their comments
    to one side.  Nonetheless he did consider the remainder of the  reports
    and I agree that this error on his  part   is  simply  not  capable  of
    having affected the outcome of the appeal.

41.  So far as the last challenge is concerned, Mr  Kingham  suggested  that
    in focussing solely on remorse as an indication of  the  likelihood  of
    the respondent's future offending, the  judge  had  erred  because  the
    facts which led  to  the  respondent's  behaviour,  namely  her  learnt
    behaviour and  her  lack  of  thinking  skills,  have  still  not  been
    addressed by the respondent.

42.  I do not believe that the judge did err.   He  said  at  paragraph  113
    that he thought that her expression of remorse was an indicator of  the
    recognition by the respondent of the unacceptability of  her  behaviour
    but he did make it clear that it was far from being  determinative  and
    he was right to suggest that it did need to be given some weight in the
    overall assessment of risk.  I believe that the finding he made was one
    which was open to him.

43.   Turning  now  to  the  third  challenge  and  paragraph  100  of   the
    determination,  there  is,  as  I  have  indicated   above,   a   clear
    contradiction in the OASys Report.  There is a  reference  to  comments
    attributed to Miss Foster at Section 4 of the OASys  Report  about  the
    respondent and her sister holding each other's children down  for  them
    to be beaten, but this is contradicted elsewhere  in  the  report.   As
    Counsel pointed out, there was a basis of plea and the plea made by the
    respondent was found to be acceptable by the  Crown.   The  judge  very
    clearly did consider and attach  particular  weight  to  the  probation
    officer's report.  I believe therefore that the judge was  entitled  to
    deal with the respondent on  the  basis  that  her  own  offending  was
    confined to physical and psychological abuse of her own children.

44.  I then turn to the second challenge. It is clear  from  the  safeguards
    put in place that the respondent's children are not at  any  risk  from
    her, because they are in foster care and the  respondent  will  not  be
    permitted access to them at the moment, and if and when she ever is, it
    will be in a controlled environment.

45.  The judge starts his  assessment  of  whether  or  not  the  respondent
    represents a genuine and present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  at
    paragraph 97 of his determination and at paragraph 98 he makes it clear
    that from his examination of the probation reports and  the  sentencing
    remarks of the judge  that  there  is  no  generalised  risk  from  the
    respondent to the children as a group as  a  whole.   The  respondent's
    offending related to the physical and psychological abuse  of  her  own
    children.  As he points out, the pre-sentence report, OASys report  and
    NOMS report assess the risk as being confined to the  respondent's  own
    children and any other children who may be placed in her care.  He  was
    entitled to find as he did at paragraph 104.  Here he said:-

         "104.    A further significant  factor  to  take  into  account  in
             assessment of risk of reoffending  against  the  two  children
             concerned is that it seems highly unlikely to  say  the  least
             that the respondent will be allowed any further  contact  with
             them, or indeed that this would happen - there are the  orders
             of  the Family Court proceedings which as I understand it have
             placed the children in  long-term  foster  care  and  with  no
             provision for at least personal or telephone contact with  the
             [respondent]; and there is the information from Miss Forrester
             in her letter and email that [the respondent's' children] have
             said that they do not currently wish to have any contact  with
             the [respondent]."

46.  He pointed out that the actual lack  of  contact  that  the  respondent
    would have, the children's express wishes and the orders of the  Family
    Court, not only reduces any  risk  offered  to  them  by  her,  but  in
    practice eliminates it entirely.  The judge then considered the licence
    conditions and at paragraph 108 regarded those conditions as likely  to
    greatly reduce the degree of risk the respondent may pose  to  children
    given that the conditions effectively minimise the possibility  of  her
    having care of children.

47.  The First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  say  that  he  believed,
    therefore. that the respondent poses no  risk  whatsoever  to  her  own
    daughters.  I believe that by doing so, the judge has materially  erred
    in law.

48.  I believe that the lack of contact which the respondent will have  with
    her children, the children's express wishes at not having contact  with
    the respondent, the orders of the Family Court and  the  conditions  of
    her licence mean that there will be no practical risk to  the  children
    of harm from the respondent, because she will not  be  allowed  to  see
    them or have any contact with them.  However, that is not the  same  as
    suggesting, as the  judge  did,  that  the  respondent  poses  no  risk
    whatsoever to her own daughters.

49.  It is precisely because she does pose a risk to her own daughters  that
    these stringent safeguards have been  put  in  place:  to  protect  the
    children.

50.  I believe that the judge has confused the  risk  which  the  respondent
    poses, with the risk to the children.  I believe that on  the  evidence
    before the judge he has erred in law and that the  respondent,  by  her
    personal conduct does  present  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the prevention of mistreatment of children.

51.  The fundamental interest of society that is threatened by the  personal
    conduct  of  the  respondent  is  the  prevention  of  mistreatment  to
    children.  Having carefully examined the evidence in  this  appeal  and
    carefully considered the oral evidence of the respondent together  with
    her unsigned, amended statement in her bundle,  the  probation  report,
    the letter from Ms Forrester, the OASys report the NOMS report and  the
    letter from Mr Langthorne,  I  have  concluded  that  the  respondent's
    removal would be an entirely proportionate response on the part of  the
    Claimant.

52.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  I set aside the previous  decision.   My  decision  is
    that  the  respondent's  appeal  on  European  Union  law  grounds   is
    dismissed.



Richard Chalkley

 Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
     21st November, 2014
