
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/00214/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2nd October 2017                      |    On 11th October 2017            |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  miss V L
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Chandran, instructed by Bail for Immigration
                    Detainees on a pro bono basis


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I refer to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, that is V L as the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The grounds on  which  the  Secretary  of  State  relied  was  that  at
    paragraph 56 of the determination the First-tier Tribunal Judge  states
    "I must make a decision in respect of this appellant's appeal.  I  find
    that a permanent right  of  residence  is  not  required  to  establish
    protection under Regulation 21(5) once lawful residence  of  ten  years
    has been established".  It was submitted that although the judge quotes
    paragraph 27 of SSHD and Franco Vomero Italy UKSC 49, at  paragraph  55
    of the First-tier Tribunal determination, the findings contained within
    that paragraph of Vomero were not taken into account.  Paragraph 27  of
    Vomero states the following

         "27.     A majority of the court favours the view  that  possession
             of a right of residence  is  not  needed  in  order  to  enjoy
             enhanced protection under Article 28(3)(a).   But  a  minority
             regards the position as at least unclear and so as requiring a
             reference  to  the  Court  of  Justice.   The  Supreme   Court
             accordingly refers to the Court of Justice the question:

             (1) whether enhanced protection under Article 28(3)(a) depends
                  upon the possession of  a  right  of  permanent  residence
                  within Article 16 and Article 28(2)".

 3. It was argued that the judge had materially erred  in  law  by  finding
    that the acquisition of enhanced protection resulting from  ten  years'
    residence did not require permanent residence.   This  matter  was  not
    settled  by  the  Supreme  Court,  was  referred   to   the   ECJ   for
    clarification.  As such the judge erred in applying the  highest  level
    of protection against deportation.

 4. At the  hearing  before  me,  further  submissions  were  made  by  the
    appellant's solicitors, such that the appellant had recently received a
    positive reasonable grounds decision as the victim of modern slavery on
    8th May 2017.  This was  followed  by  a  positive  conclusive  grounds
    decision issued on 17th August 2017  and  13th  September  2017.   This
    noted however that the appellant was still the subject  of  deportation
    proceedings  which  were  ongoing  because  she  was  convicted  of  an
    attempted robbery and sentenced to  two  years'  imprisonment  on  21st
    August 2015 .  The matters relating to the conclusive grounds  decision
    on slavery, nonetheless, post  date  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision.

    Conclusions

 5. The appellant is a national of Slovakia born on 14th March  1992.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom for a second time on  22nd  January  2002
    with her parents and siblings and were refused asylum.  On 18th October
    2006 the appellant's father completed an application  for  a  residence
    permit as an EEA citizen.  He stated that in his application he came to
    the UK with the appellant and her siblings and his wife  on  1st  April
    2004.  On 1st May 2004 Slovakia joined the EEA.  On 7th  December  2006
    the appellant was issued with a registration certificate as a result of
    the father's application.  The judge at paragraph  38  noted  that  the
    family had been living in the UK from 1st April 2004 and the  appellant
    was included within an application of 2006 as  a  family  member.   The
    applications referred to periods of employment of the father from  21st
    July 2004 in the UK and the judge concluded that the appellant's father
    was indeed exercising treaty rights as from at least 21st July 2004.

 6. At this point the appellant would have been a student  and  indeed  the
    evidence given to the judge and accepted at paragraph 40 by the  judge,
    was that the appellant when living in the United Kingdom went to school
    and went to college where she studied hairdressing level  1  until  she
    was 18 years old.  Mr Tufan although  arguing  that  there  was  little
    evidence of the appellant's  father's  working  history  and  that  the
    appellant herself had never done a day's work since  she  arrived,  did
    not seek to argue before me that she had not been entitled to remain in
    the UK as a pupil and indeed the judge had accepted that she  had  been
    at school and college.  In July 2004 the appellant was 12 years old and
    on the evidence as appeared accepted  by  the  judge  and  the  factual
    findings, it would appear that (although she could  not  have  obtained
    permanent residence prior to 2006), the appellant had in fact  acquired
    a permanent right of residence although no express finding was made  on
    that point.  The findings at paragraphs 47  and  48  the  determination
    concluded that the appellant had in fact been  lawfully  resident  from
    1st May 2004 to June 2015 and that at  paragraph  38  that  she  was  a
    family member of EEA nationals exercising treaty rights.  By  May  2009
    she would have acquired a right of permanent residence at an age of  17
    as a family member under Regulation 7.

 7. I therefore reason that as a consequence any error of law  in  relation
    to whether the right of permanent residence  was  required  or  not  in
    order to benefit from the enhanced level of protection  is  immaterial.
    De factor the appellant would have, on the judge's findings,  permanent
    residence.

 8. Even if that is  not  correct,  as  pointed  out  by  Ms  Chandran  the
    Secretary of State was present  at  the  appeal  hearing  and  did  not
    request that this matter be stayed or adjourned and the judge took  the
    point of Vomero, citing it at paragraph 55  of the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision

    55.    The Supreme Court  considered  this  matter  in  SSHD  v  Vomero
         (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49, the Court stated at paragraph 27,

             A majority of the Court favours the view that possession of  a
             right of permanent residence is not needed in order  to  enjoy
             enhanced protection under article  28(3)(a).  But  a  minority
             regards the position  as  at  the  least  unclear  and  so  as
             requiring a reference to the Court  of  Justice.  The  Supreme
             Court accordingly refers to the Court of Justice the question:



             "(1)  whether  enhanced  protection  under  article   28(3)(a)
             depends upon the possession of a right of permanent  residence
             within article 16 and article 28(2)."

    56.    I must make a decision in respect of this Appellant's appeal.  I
         find that a  right  of  permanent  residence  is  not  required  to
         establish protection under Regulation 21(5) once  lawful  residence
         of ten years has been established.

    In essence the judge found that a right of permanent residence was  not
    required to establish protection under  Regulation  21(5)  once  lawful
    residence of ten years had been established. I am not persuaded that it
    is legally wrong to be legally guided by a the majority of the  Supreme
    Court.

 9. What was not highlighted by the Secretary of State in  her  application
    was that a majority of the Supreme  Court  favoured  the  view  that  a
    possession of a right of permanent residence was not needed in order to
    enjoy enhanced protection under Article 28(3)(a).

10. I can appreciate that Mr Tufan took issue with  whether  the  appellant
    had reached the imperative grounds and the  judge's  reference  to  the
    moderate nature of her conviction  which  was  in  fact  for  attempted
    robbery, but I find no error  in  the  judge's  decision  finding  that
    imperative grounds were the relevant test as to the protection that the
    appellant would have derived from the EEA Regulations.

11. As I state the judge was requested to make a decision at  the  date  of
    the hearing and his agreement with the majority of  the  Supreme  Court
    does not in my view reveal in the circumstances an error of law.

12. The grounds were  not  formulated  on  the  basis  of  a  challenge  to
    integration and Ms Chandran emphasised that the integrative links point
    could not be argued at this stage as there was no grant in  respect  of
    that matter.  She pointed out that the appellant took up  residence  in
    2004 in a lawful manner and was convicted in 2015.  I am not persuaded
    that the judge erred in his assessment in any  event  at  paragraph  53
    where he  stated  "in  the  light  of  all  of  my  findings,  and  the
    appellant's children living in the  UK,  I  cannot  conclude  that  the
    appellant's integrating links with the UK had been broken by her period
    of  imprisonment.".   The  judge  did  indeed  address  the  issue   of
    integration and bearing in mind  the  appellant  herself  had  been  to
    school in the UK and indeed her children are living in the UK, I am not
    persuaded that an error was made as far as the approach to  integration
    was concerned.

13. As such I find there is no error of law and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

Helen Rimington

Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 Rimington
                Date 10th October 2017





