
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00223/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Airidas Jurkus
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office
                             Presenting Officer
For the respondent, Mr Jurkus:  No appearance.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and immigration history

      1. Mr Airidas Jurkus is a citizen of Lithuania  who  was  born  on  15
         April 1980.

      2. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Povey who allowed Mr Jurkus' appeal against the
         decision to deport him to Lithuania under the provisions of reg. 19
         of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (2006
         No 1003), as amended.  For the sake of continuity I shall refer  to
         Mr Jurkus  as  the  appellant  as  he  was  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

      3. The facts can be briefly stated because so few  are  known  to  the
         respondent or to the Tribunal.

      4. The Treaty of Accession 2003 was signed on 16 April 2003 in  Athens
         and entered into force on 1 May 2004, resulting in the  enlargement
         of the European Union with 10  states,  including  Lithuania.   The
         appellant claims to have arrived lawfully in the United Kingdom  in
         January 2006 as an EEA citizen. There is no reason to  doubt  this.
         However, he left the United Kingdom at a time he does not  specify.
         Suffice it to say he was in Lithuania on 14 January  2011  when  he
         committed the offence for which he was subsequently sentenced to  2
         years imprisonment on 7 June 2011.  Since I would not infer that he
         returned to Lithuania and committed the offence within a  fortnight
         of his return and the appellant himself has not sought to establish
         the date of his return, it is not open to the Tribunal to find that
         the appellant acquired a permanent right of residence on the  basis
         of five years continuous residence in  the  United  Kingdom.  (That
         apart, he never claimed  to  have  been  exercising  Treaty  rights
         during that period.)

The conviction

      5. The evidence of the conviction is sparse indeed. It takes the  form
         of a printout from the Police National  Computer  extracted  on  15
         June 2015 confirming the appellant was born on  15  April  1980  at
         Siauliai in Lithuania and was convicted on 7 June 2011 of a  sexual
         offence at the Siauliai City District Court. The relevant entry  at
         [G3] of the respondent's bundle states:

             FOREIGN LEG[ISLATION]/RAPE OF FEMALE  IMPRISONMENT 2 YRS

             ON 14/01/11-15/01/11 (PLEA: NOT KNOWN)

             SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT 2003 s.1

      6. The reference to s.  1  of  the  Sexual  Offences  Act  2003  is  a
         reference to the offence  of  rape  found  in  the  United  Kingdom
         legislation. However, I would  exercise  a  degree  of  caution  in
         assuming that this was an offence  of  rape  bearing  in  mind  the
         sentence of two years imprisonment although, of course,  sentencing
         policy in relation to this type of offence in  Lithuania  might  be
         radically different from that in the United Kingdom.  Nevertheless,
         it is clear evidence that the appellant was convicted of some  form
         of sexual assault of  sufficient  gravity  to  merit  a  period  of
         imprisonment of two years. That is sufficient for the  purposes  of
         this appeal.

      7. The appellant returned to the United Kingdom on 10 May 2013, having
         presumably served his sentence. He did so  after  a  period  of  at
         least 2 � years absence.  His absence, including an absence due  to
         imprisonment, broke his continuity of residence.

The notice of liability

      8. On 17 December 2014, the respondent served  the  appellant  with  a
         notice that he was liable to deportation  in  accordance  with  the
         2006 EEA Regulations 2006.  He was given an opportunity  to  submit
         any reasons why he should not be deported from the United  Kingdom.
         He responded on 24 December 2014.  He gave an  address  in  Reading
         and asserted his claim that his girlfriend  and  daughter  live  in
         London and that he visits  his  daughter  at  weekends  fortnightly
         depending upon his work commitments. He said he contributed towards
         their maintenance.

The decision to make a deportation order and the EEA Regulations 2006

      9. On 18 May 2015, the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  deport
         the appellant on grounds of public policy in accordance  with  reg.
         19 (3) (b) and reg. 21 of the 2006 regulations.

     10. The regulations relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  where
         material, are as follows:

         'Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         19.  (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a person who  has  been
         admitted to, or acquired a right to reside in, the  United  Kingdom
         under these Regulations may be removed from the United Kingdom if-

             (b)  he would otherwise be entitled to reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom under these Regulations but the Secretary of State has
             decided that his removal is justified on the grounds of public
             policy, public security or public health  in  accordance  with
             regulation 21.

         Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
         grounds

         21.  (1) In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

             ...

             (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
             policy or public security it shall, in addition  to  complying
             with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken  in
             accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  ...

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

                  ...

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.'

     11. Since the appellant  failed  to  establish  the  relevant  5  years
         residence,  he  also  failed  to  acquire  the  enhanced  level  of
         protection set out in reg. 21 (3):

             'A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a  person
             with a permanent right of  residence  ...  except  on  serious
             grounds of public policy or public security.'

         Or the even greater protection afforded by reg. 21 (4):

             'A relevant decision may not be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA  national  who
             ... has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period
             of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision ...'

     12. Subject to the provisions of regulation 21, a person who commits an
         offence of this nature is capable of being excluded on  grounds  of
         public policy: society is the poorer for having within it those who
         commit serious sexual offences and there  is  a  public  policy  in
         excluding non-nationals who have been convicted of  such  offences.
         The public policy element does not evaporate when the  non-national
         offender is a fellow  Union  citizen  but  it  is  tempered  by  an
         acknowledgment of his special status and the  restrictions  imposed
         in the 2006 Regulations.  Crucially,  the  tests  are  whether  the
         personal conduct of the  person  concerned  represents  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests  of  society  and  whether  the  decision  is
         proportionate such that the offender's special status  as  a  Union
         citizen is balanced against the offending and the risk he poses.

The appellant's grounds of appeal

     13. The appellant appealed against the decision of the  respondent.  In
         his grounds of appeal [E29-34] he stated  that  his  removal  would
         violate his human rights because  deportation  to  Lithuania  would
         cause him to be homeless and unemployed, without any  prospects  of
         gaining  stable  employment  as  a  result  of  difficult  economic
         circumstances in Lithuania and that to be reduced to beggary  would
         pose a real threat to his health and life.

     14. He also relied upon the presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  his
         daughter, who was born on 13 May 2004.  She  is  now  aged  11.  He
         contended that it would be extremely disruptive and unreasonable to
         force either his partner or his daughter to move to Lithuania.  His
         daughter's primary language is English. He also described  how  his
         partner had lived and  worked  in  the  United  Kingdom  exercising
         Treaty rights for 'the last  five  years'  implying  that  she  had
         acquired a permanent right of residence.  He stated that the couple
         were planning to get married but there is nothing from his  partner
         to support this claim. At  [E31],  he  described  how  he  and  his
         partner had been in a 'sustainable and serious relationship' for  a
         period of 14 years. His partner Viktorija Seteenova, who  was  born
         on 9 May 1982, had made her  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         continuous period of five years. At [E33], the appellant  described
         how his daughter was living with her mother. Although she had  been
         in Lithuania from an early  age,  her  command  of  Lithuanian  was
         'rather bad than good'. In paragraph 36, [E 34] he  described  that
         it would be unduly harsh for her to go with him to  Poland.  It  is
         not clear whether this was a simple typographical error or  whether
         either Viktorija Seteenova or her daughter  have  some  links  with
         Poland.

     15. There is no suggestion that the  relationship  that  the  appellant
         allegedly maintains with Viktorija Seteenova  was  continuous  over
         the period of 14 years which could  potentially  cover  the  period
         2001 to 2014. The limited information provided by the applicant  is
         that he came into the United Kingdom in 2006 some two  years  after
         the birth of his daughter. He did not, however, state that  he  was
         accompanied by his daughter or her  mother.  He  was  obviously  in
         Lithuania when he committed the offence in January 2011  whilst  if
         his daughter and her mother were continuously in the United Kingdom
         for five years according to his submissions of December  2014,  the
         pair of them were not in Lithuania when  he  committed  the  sexual
         assault. The material before the Secretary of State fell  short  of
         establishing or indeed even asserting  that  the  couple  had  been
         living together for all or part of the period.

     16. Viktorija Seteenova did not give  evidence  or  provide  a  written
         witness statement. There was no material, therefore, either  before
         the decision maker or  the  Tribunal  that  provided  an  objective
         assessment of  the  wishes  of  Ms  Seteenova  or  where  the  best
         interests of his daughter might lie. Indeed, there was  no  written
         material to confirm their presence in the  United  Kingdom  or  the
         nature and extent of their rights as Union citizens in  the  United
         Kingdom.

No viable Article 8 claim

     17. This was a deportation decision where the appellant's  removal  was
         in contemplation.  No s. 120 notice had been served  requiring  the
         appellant to raise an Article 8 claim because  the  decision  maker
         had treated the circumstances as raising such a claim and had given
         express consideration to it.  The  respondent  had  approached  the
         decision on the express basis that the Immigration Rules  and  Part
         5A of the 2002 Act did not directly apply to  EEA  nationals.   The
         respondent conceded, however, that Article 8 applied  to  everyone,
         regardless of nationality and, in order to achieve  consistency  of
         approach and outcome, the decision maker applied paragraphs 398 and
         399A  and  s.117C  as  a  guide  before  considering  whether   the
         circumstances  required  an  exception  to  be  made  to  a  strict
         application of the Rules.  No argument was advanced as  to  whether
         this approach was correct in law but the decision was  directed  to
         ensure the appellant received no less favourable treatment than any
         other claimant.  For  the  purposes  of  this  appeal,  it  is  not
         necessary to determine the approach to be adopted save  that  I  am
         satisfied  that  an  EEA  national  should  not  be  treated   less
         favourably than a non-Union citizen.  In the circumstances of  this
         appeal, if there is a difference, it is not  material  because,  in
         the  absence  of  detailed  information   about   the   appellant's
         relationship with Ms  Seteenova  or  his  daughter,  there  was  no
         prospect of a successful claim under Article 8,  whatever  approach
         was adopted.

The Secretary of State's reasoning

     18. In her decision, the Secretary of  State  approached  her  task  by
         reference to whether the appellant's deportation was  warranted  on
         grounds of public policy.  The  Secretary  of  State  recorded  the
         impact both on the victim and the community as a whole of crimes of
         sexual violence. The decision maker also made reference to s. 97 of
         the  Sexual  Offences  Act  2003  and  the  requirement  that   the
         appellant, on return, is  to  remain  on  the  register  as  a  sex
         offender until  7  June  2021,  a  period  of  10  years  from  his
         conviction in Lithuania. Based upon this, the  Secretary  of  State
         concluded that the appellant posed a continuing risk to  vulnerable
         women.  The placing of his name on the register was  a  restriction
         upon his freedom designed to protect a vulnerable group in society.
         Further,  the  fact  that  the   appellant   had   been   convicted
         demonstrated that he was capable of  committing  criminal  offences
         and, indeed, acts of violence against women, such as to represent a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  public.
         This justified the decision to deport  him  on  grounds  of  public
         policy. On this basis, the Secretary of State  concluded  that  the
         decision to deport the appellant was  proportionate  and  satisfied
         the principles set out in reg. 21 (5), above.

     19. In reliance upon reg. 29, although the Secretary of State  conceded
         the appellant had a right of appeal, the exercise of the  right  of
         appeal  did  not  preclude  the  respondent  from   effecting   his
         deportation.  In reliance on reg.  24AA,  the  Secretary  of  State
         certified that despite the appeals process not having been begun or
         not having been finally determined, the appellant did  not  face  a
         real risk of serious irreversible harm if removed from  the  United
         Kingdom during the course of the appeal  process.  She,  therefore,
         certified the case under reg. 24AA and notified  the  appellant  of
         her intention to remove him. That process  was  a  lawful  process.
         Indeed, bearing in mind the fact that he had spent  some  years  in
         Lithuania, since at  least  2011,  the  plea  that  he  would  face
         economic hardship by reason of the poor economic  circumstances  in
         Lithuania did not bear scrutiny.  Nothing has since  transpired  to
         establish a real risk of serious irreversible  harm.  Nevertheless,
         the appellant was offered the opportunity to return to  the  United
         Kingdom on temporary admission in order to make submissions  at  an
         appeal hearing in person.  He  was  also  offered  the  opportunity
         within a 20 working day period of the notification to  this  effect
         that, if he had any reasons why he should not be expected to pursue
         an appeal outside the United Kingdom, he was to say so.  He did not
         respond to either suggestion.

     20. In  due  course,  the  appellant  was  deported.   His  appeal  was
         conducted in his absence.  He did not apply to  return  to  conduct
         his appeal in person; nor did he instruct a representative  to  act
         for him.

     21. Since the grounds of the Tribunal were submitted the appellant  has
         taken no further part in these proceedings

The determination in the First-tier Tribunal and the error  on  a  point  of
law.

     22. At the hearing of  his  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Povey
         allowed his appeal, notwithstanding the absence  of  material  from
         the appellant since the decision was made. He did so on  the  basis
         that  the  requirement  to  establish  a   genuine,   present   and
         sufficiently serious threat implied a propensity to act in some way
         in the future; that the propensity to re-offend was crucial and was
         a prerequisite for deportation.  This implied that the Secretary of
         State had the burden of establishing a real  risk  of  re-offending
         and that this required positive evidence that had  to  be  provided
         from some external source.  In doing so, I am satisfied the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  law  for  the  reasons  I  will  now
         develop.

'Public   policy'...'a   genuine,   present   and    sufficiently    serious
threat'...'criminal convictions do not in themselves justify the decision'

     23. As long ago as 1978 in  R.  v  Bouchereau  [1978]  1  QB  732,  the
         European Court of Justice considered provisions that acted  as  the
         precursor to reg. 21(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   One  of  the
         questions the  Court  of  Justice  asked  itself  was  whether  the
         expression 'previous criminal convictions shall not  in  themselves
         constitute grounds for the  taking  of  measures  based  on  public
         policy or public security' meant that previous criminal convictions
         were solely relevant insofar as they manifested a present or future
         propensity to act in a manner contrary to public policy  or  public
         security.  The defendant had maintained before the national  court,
         'previous criminal convictions are solely relevant  in  so  far  as
         they manifest a present or future intention  to  act  in  a  manner
         contrary to public policy or public security' whilst  the  national
         authorities maintained the State was entitled to take into  account
         the past conduct of the defendant which resulted  in  the  previous
         conviction.

     24.  The  Court  determined  that  the  expression  'previous  criminal
         convictions shall not in  themselves  constitute  grounds  for  the
         taking of such  measures'  must  be  understood  as  requiring  the
         national authorities to carry out a distinct and specific appraisal
         of the interests inherent in protecting the requirements of  public
         policy which might extend beyond the  criminal  conviction  itself.
         Although, in general, a finding that such a threat  exists  implied
         the existence in the individual concerned of a propensity to act in
         the same way in the future, it was possible that past conduct alone
         might constitute such  a  threat  to  the  requirements  of  public
         policy, [29]:

             "Although, in general, a finding that  such  a  threat  exists
             implies  the  existence  in  the  individual  concerned  of  a
             propensity to act in  the  same  way  in  the  future,  it  is
             possible that past conduct alone may constitute such a  threat
             to the requirements of public policy."

     25. The Court of Justice went on to consider whether the words  'public
         policy' were to be interpreted as including reasons of  state  even
         where no breach of  the  public  peace  or  order  was  threatened.
         Whilst acknowledging the importance of the fundamental principle of
         freedom of  movement  for  workers,  the  particular  circumstances
         justifying derogation from that  principle  on  grounds  of  public
         policy might vary  from  one  country  to  another.   The  national
         authorities were permitted an area of discretion within the  limits
         imposed by the treaty.

     26. In Tsakouridis (European citizenship)  [2010]  EUECJ  C-145/09  (23
         November 2010) the Court of Justice spoke  of  the  balance  to  be
         struck between the threat to public security as  a  result  of  the
         personal conduct of the person concerned by reference in particular
         to the possible penalties and the sentences imposed, the degree  of
         involvement in the criminal activity, and, if appropriate, the risk
         of reoffending (referring to Bouchereau) on the one  hand  and,  on
         the other hand, the risk of compromising the social  rehabilitation
         of the Union citizen in the State in which he has become  genuinely
         integrated.  In the present case, the principle  of  free  movement
         has to be seen  in  the  context  of  the  appellant  returning  to
         Lithuania where he  had  committed  the  offence,  having  provided
         little or no material to establish whether he had  been  exercising
         Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.   There was little or  nothing
         in  the  proportionality  balance  to   suggest   his   deportation
         prejudiced his social rehabilitation in the United Kingdom or  that
         he had become genuinely integrated here.

     27. The risk of re-offending was afforded  only  a  provisional  place,
         that is, 'if appropriate'.

     28. Cases such as Essa (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration)  [2013]  UKUT
         00316 (IAC) and  latterly  MC  (Essa  principles  recast)  Portugal
         [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC) which followed the decision of the Court of
         Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Dumliauskas
         & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 145 were concerned with whether the prospects
         of rehabilitation in the host state were prejudiced by  removal  to
         the country of the offender's nationality.  Assuming that  a  broad
         reference  to  rehabilitation  is  concerned  with  assessing   the
         reasonable prospect of a person ceasing to commit crime by  gauging
         the relative prospects of rehabilitation in the United Kingdom  and
         Lithuania, it cannot  be  assumed  that  prospects  are  materially
         different in either country in the  absence  of  evidence  to  that
         effect.   It is not suggested his rehabilitation (if such a process
         has occurred in Lithuania) will  be  prejudiced  by  returning  him
         there.  Nor is there evidence  that  rehabilitation  will  be  more
         effectively advanced by his presence in the United Kingdom.

     29. Although MG and VC (EEA Regulations 2006; "conducive"  deportation)
         Ireland [2006] UKAIT 00053 (Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President  of
         the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal;  Senior  Immigration  Judges
         Freeman and Jordan), appears on its face to have been heard  on  23
         May 2005, this is misdated as the decision refers to the  operation
         of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  which
         were made on 30 March 2006 and came  into  operation  on  30  April
         2006, three weeks before the date of the hearing.  It was the first
         occasion on which the Tribunal expressed  a  view  about  the  2006
         Regulations.  The appellant, a  convicted  robber,  fell  into  the
         second level of protection against  removal,  'serious  grounds  of
         public policy or public security'.  Once again, the panel  referred
         to R v Bouchereau (above) and the  passage  referred  to  above  in
         paragraph 24.

     30. The Immigration  Judge  had  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  2000
         Regulations and the IAT found he was permitted to do so because  of
         the Judge's express findings of fact as to there being no  risk  of
         re-offending and in relation to his intention  to  keep  away  from
         alcohol and the heightened threshold of 'serious' grounds.  Removal
         of an EEA national was not to be  based  on  past  conduct  but  on
         future risk about which express findings of fact had been made.  MG
         and VC (EEA Regulations 2006; "conducive" deportation) says nothing
         about how the Tribunal is to approach a case  where  the  appellant
         himself has not attempted to engage with the assessment of the risk
         of re-offending.  Reliance on the cases  cited  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge  in  paragraph  11  of  his  determination  do  not,
         therefore, address the circumstances  of  the  present  appeal  and
         place a restricted  gloss  on  what  is  required  to  establish  a
         'genuine present and sufficiently serious threat' by  reference  to
         evidence of the risk of re-offending.

     31. The offence itself cannot be determinative of removal both in logic
         and by reason of the words in reg. 21(5)(e).  It would, however, be
         perverse to construe the expression 'a person's  previous  criminal
         convictions do not in themselves justify the decision'  as  meaning
         they should have no part to play in the decision.  If that were the
         case, an appellant with numerous criminal convictions  would  stand
         in the same position  as  one  with  none.   The  meaning  of  reg.
         21(5)(e) is to be found in the words 'in themselves' as  indicating
         there can never be a lawful  removal decision if the decision-maker
         does no more than recite the past offence or offences as  a  mantra
         justifying removal.  It is axiomatic  that  all  deportation  cases
         have to assess the circumstances in the round.

     32. Since the hearing of this appeal but before it was promulgated, the
         Court of Appeal has given  its  decision  on  3  December  2015  in
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  v.  Straszewski  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 1245 (Moore-Bick, Davis and  Sharp  LJJ).   It  should  be
         noted that Straszewski was a case that concerned the second tier of
         the levels of protection against deportation.  The question  to  be
         decided was whether the Secretary of State's decision to remove Mr.
         Straszewski was justified on serious grounds of  public  policy  or
         public security. Having considered the nature of his offending  and
         various reports directed to the  risk  of  his  further  offending,
         including two from an independent psychiatrist, Dr. Joanna Dow, the
         Tribunal concluded that he did not pose a serious threat of harm to
         the public and that his removal was  not  permitted  by  regulation
         21(3).

     33. In Straszewski, counsel for the Secretary of  State  had  submitted
         that the scheme envisages that the person facing deportation  bears
         the burden of showing that his removal would not be  in  accordance
         with the law.  Moore-Bick, (with  whom  the  other  Lord  and  Lady
         Justices agreed) rejected that submission.

     34. The Court of Appeal then went on to consider Bouchereau (see above)
         and whether, on the evidence, the offences were of such gravity  to
         merit a finding that there was  such  a  sense  of  revulsion  that
         removal was justified without establishing a risk to the community.
           The Court accepted, by reason of the express terms  of  paragraph
         21 that deterrence, in the sense  of  measures  designed  to  deter
         others from committing similar offences, had no part to play  in  a
         decision to remove  the  individual  offender.  Similarly,  it  was
         difficult to see how a desire to reflect public  revulsion  at  the
         particular offence could properly have  any  part  to  play,  save,
         perhaps, in exceptionally serious cases.

     35.  The  propensity  to  re-offend  must  be  a  key  element  in  the
         consideration.  Moore-Bick LJ said at paragraph 25:

             "Public policy" for these purposes includes the  policy  which
             is reflected in the interest of the state  in  protecting  its
             citizens from violent crime and the theft of  their  property.
             These are fundamental  interests  of  society  and  therefore,
             although regulation 21(3) does not speak in terms of the  risk
             of causing harm by future offending, in a case  of  this  kind
             that is the risk which the Secretary of State is  called  upon
             to assess  when  considering  deportation.  That  requires  an
             evaluation to be  made  of  the  likelihood  that  the  person
             concerned will offend again  and  what  the  consequences  are
             likely to be if he does. In addition, the need for the conduct
             of the person concerned to represent a "sufficiently  serious"
             threat to one of the fundamental interests of society requires
             the decision-maker to balance the risk of future harm  against
             the need to give effect to the right of free movement. In  any
             given case an evaluative exercise of that kind  may  admit  of
             more than one answer. If so,  provided  that  all  appropriate
             factors have been taken into account, the decision  cannot  be
             impugned unless it is perverse or irrational, in the sense  of
             falling outside the range of permissible decisions.

     36. Following Straszewski, and as I set out  above,  the  burden  rests
         firmly with the Secretary of State and the enquiry is  directed  to
         whether the future risk that the  community  faces  is  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society by reason of the appellant's  past
         wrong-doing.   The  appellant's  conduct,   taken   as   a   whole,
         establishes  a  propensity   to   offend   which   has   not   been
         counterbalanced from anything from the appellant.  The respondent's
         burden does not require that  it  is  discharged  by  reference  to
         specific reports from the authorities which  are  directed  to  the
         issue of re-offending.  Rather, it is an evaluation  that  requires
         an holistic approach.   It  is  with  this  in  mind  that  I  have
         conducted the assessment.

     37. The error of the First-tier Tribunal in Mr Jurkus' appeal  is  that
         the Judge was looking for  the  type  of  material  which  directly
         addressed the risk of offending such as might be  found  in  appeal
         brought against a  deportation  appeal  when  a  Union  citizen  is
         convicted of an offence in the United Kingdom.  In the  case  of  a
         deportation order based on a conviction in a foreign country, it is
         not a requirement that such material, if it exists,  is  abstracted
         from the local prosecution, judicial or probation  authorities  and
         then translated.  Instead, the Tribunal has to apply the structured
         approach set out in the provisions of  reg.  21  and  to  make  its
         decision on the material before it.  I accept that, were it  to  be
         necessary as a matter of law, then the fact  that  the  process  is
         onerous (requiring corresponding with  the  local  court  or  local
         police in a language both parties might understand or communicating
         with the national authorities via the Embassy) would be no  excuse.



     38. In the context of the present appeal, there was ample  evidence  to
         support the public policy stance adopted by the Secretary of  State
         that the appellant represented a genuine, present and  sufficiently
         serious threat without thereby treating his criminal conviction  as
         in itself justifying the decision to deport the appellant.

Re-making the decision

     39. The offence was one of sexual assault.

     40. Its seriousness is reflected in the sentence imposed of 2 years.

     41. Though serious, there is not enough evidence to establish it is not
         of the type of offence identified in Bouchereau or  Straszewski  as
         creating by itself such a  sense  of  revulsion  that  removal  was
         justified without establishing a risk to the community.  The  Court
         in Straszewski stressed the limited role that public  revulsion  at
         the offence might play  save,  perhaps,  in  exceptionally  serious
         cases.  There is insufficient material to classify this  conviction
         as exceptionally serious.  (I leave open  what  the  outcome  would
         have been had I been satisfied that this was an offence of rape for
         which a sentence of, say, 7 years had been imposed.)

     42. No material was adduced  by  the  appellant  which  might  seek  to
         mitigate or undermine due weight  being  attached  to  the  offence
         itself, the circumstances of it or a claim that the sentence itself
         did not properly reflect its gravity.

     43. Whilst the nature of the offence speaks for itself, it is  not  the
         criminal conviction itself which is being relied  upon  to  justify
         removal but the underlying offence of serious sexual violence.

     44. The  fact  that  the  appellant  has  committed  a  sexual  assault
         demonstrates that he has overstepped the boundary that the majority
         of people accept should exist against wrong-doing of that type.  Ms
         Brocklesby-Weller described this as a  'propensity  to  offend',  a
         phrase taken up in the decision of Straszewski.  To that extent  he
         represents a threat to the well-being of  society  because  he  has
         acted against its interests in a  way  that  others  do  not.   The
         nature of the offence - sexual violence against women - must amount
         to a serious threat to the fundamental  values  of  society.   That
         threat is not fanciful: it  is  genuine.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge failed to recognise that threat, presumably  because  he  was
         looking  for  evidence  of  a  particular  type:   some   form   of
         opinion/statistical evidence from  an  evaluative  assessment  that
         there was a likelihood of re-offending, perhaps expressed as 'low',
         'medium' or 'high'.  In doing so, he simply overlooked the material
         that  was  before  him.   The  evidence  of  the  threat  might  be
         inferential but then it was not countered by anything at  all  from
         the appellant himself.

     45. The appellant's conduct resulted in a sentence of imprisonment of 2
         years.  This clearly falls within the range of offences capable  of
         meriting  his  exclusion.   Sometimes  such  offences  might  merit
         exclusion, sometimes not.  The one person who is  able  to  provide
         details of whether his case falls at one end of the spectrum or  at
         the other is the appellant himself.  Had he, for  example,  offered
         detailed, verifiable  evidence  about  the  offence,  his  attitude
         towards it, the court's  attitude  to  the  offending  as  well  as
         insightful evidence from the prosecutor or victim or the Lithuanian
         equivalent  of  the  probation  service   and   his   attempts   at
         rehabilitation whilst in prison or since his release, it  was  open
         to him to settle which place in the spectrum his case  fell  to  be
         decided.  This is what occurred in MG and VC (EEA Regulations 2006;
         "conducive" deportation).  The absence of any  attempt  to  provide
         this evidence or to engage with his offending or the assessment  of
         risk upon which the Tribunal was required to  embark  is  itself  a
         source  of  material  evidence  without  thereby   displacing   the
         evidential burden.  In the circumstances of this case, it  was  not
         sufficient to remain silent.  It cannot be right that an  appellant
         who fails to engage with the process is in a better  position  than
         the appellant who participates fully.

     46. In reaching this conclusion, I am not reversing the burden of proof
         but neither am I imposing the positive burden on the  Secretary  of
         State of approaching the Lithuanian authorities and  seeking,  from
         the relevant court, evidence  directed  towards  the  risk  of  re-
         offending which it is usual (though not essential) to have from the
         sentencing judge, the probation service  or  OASys  in  deportation
         cases where the  criminal  offending  takes  place  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  This approach is consistent with the  terms  of  reg.  21
         (5).  Above all, the Secretary of State's response is proportionate
         given the facts of this appeal, limited  as  they  are,  and  as  I
         understand them to be.  The position is simply that  the  appellant
         has done nothing to dispel the conclusion that any ordinary  person
         would draw from the material available.

The Sexual Offences Act, 2003, s.97

     47. In the context of this appeal, there is  a  further  element.   The
         respondent  contends  that  the  appellant  is   subject   to   the
         requirements of registration under the Sexual Offences  Act,  2003.
         Section 97 (1) of the Act provides that a chief officer  of  police
         may, by complaint to the magistrates'  court  for  a  'notification
         order' in respect of a person if the person takes up  residence  in
         his police area or the chief officer believes he is or  intends  to
         do so. Three conditions must be fulfilled:

               i) Under the law in force in a  country  outside  the  United
                  Kingdom, the individual must  have  been  convicted  of  a
                  sexual offence of a type described in section  99.   These
                  include rape (s.1 of the Act) but also  various  types  of
                  sexual assault including  offences  under  s.  14  (sexual
                  assault on a woman).

              ii)  The  conviction  must  have  occurred  on  or  after  1st
                  September 1997.

             iii) The notification period must not have  expired.   (As  the
                  appellant was sentenced to 2 years imprisonment  in  2011,
                  the notification period is likely to have been 10 years.)

     48. It is  of  course  far  from  clear  what  is  the  nature  of  the
         appellant's offending.  However, the structure of the 2003  Act  is
         clear: once the process is commenced, the burden of proof passes to
         the appellant in accordance with the express  statutory  provisions
         of s. 99 (3):

             '(3) Subject to  subsection  (4),  on  an  application  for  a
             notification order the condition  in  subsection  (1)(b)  [the
             foreign offence constituting an equivalent offence  in  United
             Kingdom law] is to be taken as  met  unless,  not  later  than
             rules of court  may  provide,  the  defendant  serves  on  the
             applicant a notice-

                  (a) stating that, on the facts as alleged with respect  to
                  the act concerned, the condition is  not  in  his  opinion
                  met,

                  (b) showing his grounds for that opinion, and

                  (c) requiring the applicant to prove that the condition is
                  met.'

     49. These provisions, to which the Secretary of State made reference in
         her decision letter, are to  protect  the  public  or  at  least  a
         section of the public thought to be  vulnerable  unless  protective
         measures are taken.  The need for protection implies risk.   Hence,
         the direct evidence of risk that the First-tier Tribunal considered
         was absent in this case was to be found, in addition to the matters
         I have referred to above, in the operation of  s.97.   It  is  true
         that the reverse burden set out in s.99(3) does not strictly  arise
         until the notification process is commenced by the actions  of  the
         chief officer of police but, in the context of a decision in  which
         the appellant's liability to be  made  subject  to  a  notification
         order was raised by the decision maker, it must follow that if  the
         appellant  is  to  say,  in  response  to  deportation,  that   the
         notification order is inappropriate, he has to say so in his appeal
         to the Tribunal.

     50. I am satisfied that the appellant's absence in this  case  has  not
         resulted  in  a  determination  which  has  extended  the  relevant
         principles beyond permissible  bounds.   This  is  the  appellant's
         appeal.  If he had sought to return and had given evidence he would
         have been cross-examined and he would  have  answered  the  matters
         which are presently left obscure.  If he had been  represented  but
         not attended  or  given  evidence,  his  counsel  would  have  been
         expected to have made submissions. In either event,  the  cloak  of
         obscurity over which the appellant's true circumstances  have  been
         shrouded would, to a greater or lesser extent, have been dispelled.
          This could not have been unfair because the acid test by which all
         such decisions are  made  is  one  of  proportionality.   The  more
         information available  to  a  decision  maker,  (administrative  or
         judicial), the more material goes into the balance on one  side  or
         the other and the better the proportionality assessment must be.

     51. I summarise my reasons in the following way:

         (1)  Where the nature of the offence speaks for itself, it  is  not
         the criminal conviction which  is  being  relied  upon  to  justify
         removal but the underlying nature of the offence.  Depending on the
         offence, a conviction is capable of establishing  a  propensity  to
         offend which represents a threat  to  the  well-being  of  society,
         capable of amounting to a 'genuine present and sufficiently serious
         threat'.

         (2)  Once the  evidence  establishes  such  a  threat,  it  is  not
         sufficient for the appellant to remain silent if he seeks to  avoid
         a finding that his removal  is  justified  under  reg.  21  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

         (3)  In an EEA case  involving  a  deportation  order  based  on  a
         conviction in a foreign country, it is not a requirement  that  the
         respondent has to produce  the  type  of  material  which  directly
         addresses the risk of offending such as usually found in an  appeal
         brought against a  deportation  appeal  when  a  Union  citizen  is
         convicted of an offence in the United Kingdom. The Tribunal has  to
         make its decision on the material before it.

DECISION

 1. The Judge made an error on a point  of  law  and  I  allow  the  appeal
    brought by the Secretary of State.

 2. I remake the decision dismissing Mr Jurkus' appeal on all  the  grounds
    advanced.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            17 November 2015
