

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: DA/00512/2014
           DA/00511/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Birmingham                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on    08.12.2014                              |On  28.01.2015               |

                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

                                  Between:

                           Gladys KUNAKA & another
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and



                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellants: Arnela Imamovi?  (counsel instructed by Genesis Law
                    Associates Ltd, Birmingham)
For the respondent: Mr Neville Smart

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Dorothy Thomas), sitting at Birmingham on 29 August, to
     on article 8 grounds an appeal against refusal to revoke a deportation
    order on 21 January 2014, by a citizen of Zimbabwe, born 12 June  1971.
    At the date of the decision, the Rules required no  more  of  a  person
    facing deportation for criminal offences in the circumstances  of  this
    case than that

         (a)        the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and
           (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

           (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
           7 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
           decision; and in either case

             (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             UK; and
             (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for the
             child in the UK

 2. The (main) appellant has been in this country since  1999  and  without
    any basis of stay since her student leave expired in 2000. On  10  July
    2003 she gave birth to B, who was granted British citizenship on 8  May
    2014; so, while he was included in the deportation order  against  her,
    and  her  appeal  against  that,  his  appeal  no  longer  arises   for
    consideration. The  appellant  herself  was  sentenced  to  12  months'
    imprisonment on 29 April 2008  for  working  for  about  a  year  on  a
    passport which did not belong to her. While she was away,  her  sister,
    now dead, looked after B.

 3. The judge dealt with the case in the first place on the basis that  the
    Rules applied as they stood at the date of the decision  under  appeal;
    however, she went on to find that, even if the  latest  Rules  (see  4)
    applied, the effect on B of the appellant's deportation would be unduly
    harsh. The findings of fact on which she based that are  challenged  in
    the grounds of appeal; but I shall deal with that if and  when  I  need
    to.

 4. The Home Office appealed the judge's decision on the basis that, by the
    date of the hearing before her, the new paragraph 399 (a) of the  Rules
    (in force as from 28 July 2014) applied, so as to permit an  appeal  by
    the parent of a child who is either a British citizen, or has been here
    for at least seven years to be allowed on that basis, only if it  would
    be unduly harsh for the child (a) to live in the country to  which  the
    [parent] is to be deported and (b) to remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    person who is to be deported.

 5. There is nothing in any part of the latest Rules to which Mr Smart  was
    able to refer me, either in the unnumbered 'Implementation' section, or
    in the changes themselves set out in  the  body  of  the  statement  of
    changes, to suggest that they could possibly  have  gone  further  than
    what the House of Lords approved in Odelola [2009] UKHL 25. The nearest
    the latest Rules come to Mr Smart's submissions is at paragraph A362:

       Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under Part 13
       of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed where the
       requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014 are met, regardless of
       when the notice of intention to deport or the deportation  order,  as
       appropriate, was served.

 6. However, unless some contrary intention is shown, Rules operate as they
    stand at the time the immigration decision in  question  is  made,  and
    there is nothing in the statement (in the implementation section)  that
    the changes "... take effect on 28 July 2014", or  the  words  used  in
    paragraph A362 to suggest otherwise. Rules may be changed from time  to
    time, and there is nothing retrospective  about  requiring  immigration
    decisions to be made on the basis of how they stand at the date of  the
    decision.

 7. On the other hand, if some change were to be made in the  Rules  to  be
    applied, when dealing with them on  appeal,  as  at  the  date  of  the
    decision, that would in my view be a genuinely retrospective provision,
    for which, in accordance with  general  principle,  nothing  less  than
    clear words in primary legislation would be required.  So  far  as  the
    Immigration Act 2014 is concerned,  there  is  nothing  in  either  the
    general transitional (s. 73) or commencement (s. 75)  provisions  which
    could possibly have been intended to  carry  the  retrospective  effect
    required in this case, or, so far as  I  can  see  from  the  table  of
    contents, at any other point in the Act.

 8. This general view of the legal position is  confirmed  by  YM  (Uganda)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1292. Neither side referred me to it; but my  attention
    was drawn to it after the hearing. The decision, given  on  10  October
    2014, involved a case where the Upper Tribunal re-heard the appellant's
    appeal after the 2012 Rules came into force; but before  the  2014  Act
    did so. The only fully reasoned judgment, by Aikens  LJ,  is  extremely
    learned and  quite  long:  however,  for  present  purposes,  the  only
    principles that need be extracted are these:

    (paragraph 36)  An error of law decision has to be made on the  law  as
                    it stood at the date  of  the  judicial  decision  under
                    appeal (and the relevant Rules are those in force at the
                    date of the immigration decision).

    (paragraph 37)  If on that basis the judicial decision has  to  be  set
                    aside and re-made, then the law in force at the date  of
                    the re-hearing applies, and the Rules in force  at  that
                    time may also be relevant.

 9. Mr Smart realistically agreed that, if  I  found  against  him  on  the
    question of what Rules the judge had to apply, there was no  basis  for
    interfering with her decision that  there  would  be  no  other  family
    member here to care for B, and it would not be reasonable to  expect  B
    to leave this country. I should go further, and say  that  the  judge's
    decision was a model of its kind.

Home Office appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



