
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 29 September 2016                |On: 30 September 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                abbas maqsood
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, instructed by AH Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr  Maqsood's
      appeal against the respondent's decision that section 32(5) of the  UK
      Borders Act 2007 applied.

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as the  respondent  and  Mr  Maqsood  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

   3. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, claims to have entered the UK at
      the age of ten years with his uncle,  using  a  fraudulently  obtained
      British passport in the name of Sajjad Arif.  He  obtained  subsequent
      replacement  passports  in  the  name  of  Shahzad  Anjam  Arif  after
      reporting the passport lost and in October  2008  was  issued  with  a
      replacement passport in the name of Abbas Maqsood  after  claiming  to
      have changed his name by deed poll. He  used  that  passport  to  take
      frequent flights between the UK, UAE, Saudi Arabia and  Pakistan,  but
      was eventually stopped at Luton  Airport,  on  17  March  2010,  after
      returning with his partner from Spain, when  the  immigration  officer
      was satisfied that the passport had  been  fraudulently  obtained  and
      that he was not a British citizen. On 4 June 2010 a decision was  made
      refusing him leave to enter and on 2 September 2010 his appeal against
      that decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. On 19 August 2010 the appellant was convicted of possession of  false/
      improperly obtained  identity  documents  and  obtaining  property  by
      deception and was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. On  6  January
      2011 a Deportation Order was signed against him  and  a  decision  was
      made on 18 December 2013  (following  the  withdrawal  of  a  previous
      decision) that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

   5. In the deportation decision, the respondent referred to the fact  that
      the appellant had two sons from a previous relationship with [NK]  but
      noted that there was no evidence of any contact  with  those  children
      and no evidence of a genuine and subsisting relationship. Likewise, he
      had a daughter from a subsequent relationship  with  [RT],  but  again
      there was no  evidence  of  contact  and  no  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship. The respondent accepted that the appellant had a genuine
      and subsisting relationship with his two sons and  his  daughter  from
      his current relationship with [AM], but considered  that  family  life
      could continue between them in Pakistan and that they  were  otherwise
      able to remain with their mother, their primary care giver, in the UK.
      The respondent also accepted that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with his partner [AM],  but  again  considered
      that  family  life  could  continue  between  them  in  Pakistan.  The
      respondent therefore concluded that the appellant could not  meet  the
      requirements in paragraph 399(a) and (b) of the immigration rules, and
      also considered that the requirements in paragraph 399A had  not  been
      met and that there were no exceptional circumstances  outweighing  the
      public interest in his deportation for the purposes of paragraph 398.

   6. The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was heard  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal on 9 July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam
      and Mr G F Sandall, a non-legal member, sitting as a panel.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

   7.  The  panel  made  various  adverse  credibility  findings  about  the
      appellant, rejecting his account of the timing  and  circumstances  of
      his entry into the UK and the circumstances in which he  had  obtained
      his British passports, and also placing weight upon a social  worker's
      report referring to incidents of domestic violence and  abuse  in  his
      past and current relationships. The panel accepted the findings  of  a
      subsequent social worker in regard to his contact  with  his  daughter
      from his second relationship.

   8. The evidence before the panel was that the appellant and  his  partner
      had three children together. His partner had given birth to twin girls
      after their first son was born, but one of the twins had since  passed
      away. His partner had then had a second son and was currently pregnant
      with their fourth child. The panel considered the immigration rules as
      they were at that time, finding  that,  whilst  the  appellant  had  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship with his daughter from his  second
      relationship, he did not have a parental role and  therefore  did  not
      meet the requirements of paragraph 399(a) in that respect. With regard
      to the  three  children  from  his  current  relationship,  the  panel
      accepted that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
      with those children and considered that, whilst his wife was expecting
      their fifth child, he was the main carer for the other  children.  The
      panel also considered that the appellant's family members could not be
      expected to relocate outside the EU. They found that the  requirements
      of paragraph 399(a) had therefore been  met  and  that  the  appellant
      succeeded under the immigration rules.  The  panel  further  concluded
      that there were exceptional factors weighing in the appellant's favour
      under Article 8. They allowed the appeal under the  immigration  rules
      and under the ECHR.

   9. The respondent sought, and was granted, permission to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal, on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had arguably
      erred  by  failing  to  consider  section  117  of  the   Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that the findings under  paragraph
      399(a) were arguably inadequately reasoned.

  10. The appeal came before me on 29 September 2016.

Consideration and Findings

  11. Having  heard  full  submissions  from  both  parties,  and  carefully
      considered those submissions, I conclude that there are fatal flaws in
      the panel's decision such that it cannot stand.

  12. It is not in dispute that legislative  changes  occurred  between  the
      panel hearing the appeal and their decision  being  promulgated,  with
      the coming into force of relevant parts of the Immigration Act 2014 on
      28 July 2014, which introduced amendments to the immigration rules and
      brought section 117 of  the  2002  Act  into  force.  Accordingly  the
      immigration rules considered by the panel were not those in  force  at
      the time of their decision and neither  was  there  any  consideration
      given to the public interest factors in  section  117.  In  accordance
      with the decision in YM (Uganda) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 the relevant date for consideration of
      those provisions would have been  the  date  of  promulgation  of  the
      decision, contrary to the assertion made in  the  appellant's  grounds
      seeking permission. It was Ms Daykin's submission  that  even  if  the
      panel ought to have considered  the  new  rules,  any  error  in  that
      respect was in any event immaterial since it would  have  led  to  the
      same result, and that section 117 had been considered in substance, if
      not in form.

  13. It seems to me that whatever version of the rules was considered,  the
      panel's decision was unsustainable.

  14. The panel's consideration of paragraph 399(a) is not clearly  set  out
      in their decision and is not clearly particularised,  as  the  grounds
      refer at [6], and there are no proper findings  on  the  two  separate
      requirements in paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a) and (b).  However  it  appears
      that the issue in paragraph 399(a)(ii)(a),  of  whether  it  would  be
      unreasonable to expect  the  children  to  leave  the  UK,  was  being
      addressed by the panel at [67] and [68] and that the panel  considered
      the criteria in paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) at [69].

  15. The panel's assessment of the requirements in paragraph  399(a)(ii)(a)
      at [67] and [68] is based almost  exclusively  on  the  principles  in
      Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) India  [2012]
      UKUT 48. I find myself entirely in agreement with Mr Kandola that  the
      panel erred in law in that respect. Firstly, they erred because  their
      conclusion (and also Ms Daykin's submission relying  on  the  case  of
      Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  CS  (Judgment   :
      Citizenship of the Union)  [2016]  EUECJ  C-304/14)  relied  upon  the
      appellant being the main carer for his wife  and  children,  with  the
      implication being that it would result in the British  family  members
      being compelled to leave the  UK  if  he  was  deported.  However  the
      panel's finding that the appellant was the main carer was inadequately
      reasoned and  unsustainable  on  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,
      particularly as it was based  upon  little  more  than  the  temporary
      situation of his  wife's  pregnancy.  Secondly,  as  the  respondent's
      grounds assert, the decision in  Sanade  has  been  overtaken  by  the
      introduction on 9 July  2012  of  the  provisions  of  the  Article  8
      compliant immigration rules. Thirdly, the  almost  exclusive  reliance
      upon the provisions in Sanade was contrary to  the  holistic  approach
      advocated in KMO (section 117 - unduly  harsh)  [2015]  UKUT  543  and
      upheld in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450.

  16. With regard to the second part of the rule, it appears that the panel,
      at [69], were addressing the requirement in  paragraph  399(a)(ii)(b).
      However, as stated above, their finding that there was no other family
      member able to care for the children in the  UK  seems  to  me  to  be
      simply unsustainable  on  the  evidence  before  them.  Accordingly  I
      consider that the panel's decision under  the  immigration  rules  was
      inadequately reasoned  and  was  based  upon  a  misunderstanding  and
      misapplication of the law and the rules.

  17. As regards the second ground, whilst reference was made  at  [61]  and
      [82] to MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the panel's consideration of Article  8  outside
      the immigration rules at [71] to [97] appears to have been  undertaken
      without any reference to paragraph 398 and on the basis of a Razgar, R
      (on the Application of) v. Sectretary of State for the Home Department
      [2004]  UKHL  27  proportionality  assessment  outside  the   relevant
      considerations  in  deportation  cases.  With  regard  to  the  public
      interest considerations in section 117B and C, which  were  introduced
      prior to the promulgation of the panel's decision, it was  Ms  Dakin's
      submission that the relevant factors had been considered in substance,
      if not in form. However I  do  not  agree.  I  find  little,  if  any,
      consideration given by the panel to the weighty  public  interests  in
      their findings at paragraphs [83] to [97], and I agree with Mr Kandola
      that the panel erred by overly focussing on the best interests of  the
      children, contrary to the guidance in MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R  (on  the
      application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  &
      Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

  18. For all of these reasons I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
      law and that the decision has to be set aside and re-made.

  19. Whilst Ms Daykin submitted that in the event of the decision being set
      aside the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr
      Kandola was undecided given that  there  were  findings  of  fact  and
      adverse credibility findings that were not infected by the  errors  of
      law.  However I see some force in Ms Daykin's  submission  that  there
      needs to be a revisiting of the evidence owing to the passage of  time
      and the expansion of the appellant's family. I therefore  accept  that
      the appropriate course would be for the case to  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh,  and  with  reference  to  the
      correct version of the immigration rules.



DECISION

  20. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

  21. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  pursuant  to  section
      12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
      Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be dealt with afresh, before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Lingam.




                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


