
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00410/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 April 2019                      |On 24 June 2019                      |
|And 24 May 2019                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                   MR M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, instructed by Rea Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
(04/04/19)
     Mr Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (24/05/19)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Poland born on 20 June 1982.  He  appeals
    against the decision of the respondent to deport him.

 2. The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2008  and  was
    employed.  There was a gap in employment between 2010 to  2012  but  as
    the appellant was in that  period  married  to  his  wife,  who  it  is
    accepted was working during this period, he was  resident  pursuant  to
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006.    He
    therefore acquired the right of permanent residence in October 2015.

 3. The Secretary of State's case is, subject to the  acceptance  that  the
    appellant  had  acquired  permanent  residence  before   his   previous
    imprisonment in the United Kingdom, is that he presents, on account  of
    his conviction and sentencing to twenty months' imprisonment for  being
    concerned in the supplying of a class A drug  and  his  convictions  in
    Poland on 27 February 2006 and 28  September  2009  on  two  counts  of
    theft, two counts of burglary and robbery, a high risk of harm  to  the
    public and that the criminal justice social work report indicated  that
    he posed a high risk of reoffending given his  previous  behaviour  and
    drug addiction.  It was noted that also that the statements he had made
    to the social worker were  untrue,  both  in  respect  of  his  claimed
    earnings (he claimed to earn approximately �700 a week as a welder) and
    that he had no previous experience of custody, which was untrue,  given
    that he had been sentenced to five periods of imprisonment in Poland.

 4. The respondent considered  that  the  appellant  had  a  propensity  to
    reoffend and that he represents a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the public to justify his deportation on the  grounds
    of public policy and that, even if he had gained a permanent  right  of
    residence, the nature of his offending and the risk  he  posed  to  the
    public would meet the serious grounds test.  It is considered also that
    any rehabilitation work could be continued in Poland.

 5. In addition, the respondent considered  that  the  appellant's  removal
    would be proportionate having had regard  to  Article  8  Human  Rights
    Convention, the appellant failing to show that paragraph 399A would  be
    applied.

 6. The respondent also certified the appeal pursuant to Regulation 24AA of
    the 2006 Regulations although the appellant was not  in  fact  removed.
    The respondent also certified the appeal pursuant to Section 94B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 7. The appeal against this  decision  first  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 18  October  2016  when  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  David
    Clapham allowed the appeal, concluding that, in the light of  the  High
    Court of Justiciary's decision that his deportation to Poland in  light
    of his Polish  convictions  would  be  oppressive,  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to deport him.

 8. The matter then came before the Upper Tribunal sitting in Glasgow on  3
    August 2017.  In a decision promulgated on 15  August  2017  the  Upper
    Tribunal set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  directing
    that none of its findings were to stand and that it should be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.  The appeal then came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal  on  26  January  2018  at  which  hearing  the
    Secretary of State was not represented and in respect of which  he  had
    sought an adjournment.   Although  Mr  Caskie,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant  below,  did  not  object  to  the  adjournment,  the   judge
    nonetheless proceeded to determine the appeal.  The  judge  noted  [18]
    that the burden of proving that a person represents a genuine,  present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society rests  on  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  judge
    concluded also that the appellant had acquired the right  of  permanent
    residence.

 9. The judge viewed the appellant's claim that he  was  now  reformed  and
    drug free with some scepticism [34] but "I have no  reason  to  believe
    that if he were not deported he would act as a lawful citizen.  Rather,
    I believe there is a real risk criminality will surface  again".   This
    was a  conclusion  reached  on  the  basis  of  the  previous  criminal
    behaviour and acknowledging that  there  was  no  evidence  of  further
    criminality since release although that was a relatively short  period.
    The judge concluded also at [38] that there may be situations in  which
    if the appellant's good fortune turned  against  him,  he  would  again
    engage in criminality although acknowledging that whilst in custody  he
    had attended courses aimed at addressing  reoffending  which  may  have
    been of some assistance but the judge then directed himself  [31]  that
    the issue of was whether the respondent has demonstrated  his  presence
    (sic) is justified on serious grounds  of  public  policy.   The  judge
    found that the appellant's criminality has been  significant  [32]  and
    that offences have consequences for individuals, being harmful  to  the
    wellbeing of the public.

10. The judge then went  on  to  consider  the  issues  of  rehabilitation,
    directing  himself  towards  Boultif  and  Maslov  at  [33]  and  [42],
    concluding:-

         "It is my conclusion the appellant's deportation is required in the
         interests of the public and does not breach any  of  his  protected
         rights".

11. The respondent sought permission to appeal against the decision on  the
    grounds that the judge had:-

      i) adopted an incorrect standard of proof with  respect  to  what  the
         Secretary of State needed to prove, in finding that there is a real
         risk if criminality will surface again (paragraph [35]);

     ii) failed properly to  address  whether  the  appellant  represents  a
         present risk to the one of the fundamental interests of society  as
         was required, failing to find a "present risk";

    iii)  failed  properly  to  address  the  issue   of   the   chance   of
         rehabilitation, leaving out in particular the long passage of  time
         since the appellant's offending in terms of burglary and robbery in
         Poland;

     iv) improperly speculated as  to  whether  there  was  a  risk  of  the
         appellant taking drugs again;

      v) improperly dealt with proportionality as though it was an Article 8
         case  and  failed  properly  to  take   into   account,   following
         Straszewski v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  1512  and  failed  to  notice  the
         difference between the EEA national and another person who  may  be
         deported.

12. I heard brief submissions from both parties.  I asked them initially to
    address me on the apparent error at paragraph [44] identified above.

13. Paragraph [44] discloses a clear error on two grounds.  First, that the
    decision is in the public interest is contrary to the  express  wording
    of Regulation 21(5)(b) and to the case law  concerning  deportation  of
    EEA nationals.  Second, the reference to "protected rights" has all the
    hallmarks for a decision pursuant to Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention rather than an assessment of proportionality under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

14. Whilst the finding that the appellant is entitled to a permanent  right
    of residence is clearly reasoned, the rest of the decision  insofar  as
    it  reaches  conclusions  about  the  appellant  cannot  be  sustained.
    Overall, as the grounds aver, there has been no proper engagement  with
    the correct test in this case,  which  is  whether  there  are  serious
    reasons to justify deportation.

15. It is to be noted from SSHD v Straszewski [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1245  that
    Moor-Bick LJ observed at [13]:

         "13. Given the fundamental difference between the  position  of  an
         alien  and  that  of  an  EEA  national,  one  would  expect   that
         interference with the permanent right of residence would be subject
         to  more  stringent  restrictions  than  those  which  govern   the
         deportation of nationals of other states. Moreover, since the right
         of free movement  is  regarded  as  a  fundamental  aspect  of  the
         European Union, it is not surprising that the Court of  Justice  of
         the European Union ("CJEU") has held that exceptions to that  right
         based on public policy are to be construed restrictively: see,  for
         example Van Duyn v Home Office (Case C-41/71)  [1975]  Ch  358  and
         Bonsignore v Oberstadirektor der Stadt Koln (Case  C-67/74)  [1975]
         ECR 297 ."

16. Commenting on that,  the  Inner  House  of  the  Court  of  Session  in
    Goralczyk [2018] CSIH 60 at [22]:

         "22. Moore-Bick LJ's expectation that  there  should  be  stringent
         restrictions on a Member State's ability to remove an EEA national,
         including a "foreign criminal",  who  has  acquired  the  right  to
         reside in the United Kingdom is borne out by the terms of the  2006
         Regulations. In particular, a decision to deport  an  EEA  national
         with a permanent right of residence may  not  be  taken  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy  or  public  security:  regulation
         21(3) . Regard has to be had to the word "serious", a point made by
         Mr Caskie when explaining the effect of  the  2006  Regulations  as
         being to establish three levels of rights and consequent degrees of
         protection against removal. A decision to remove a person  who  has
         resided in the United Kingdom for less than five years may be taken
         "on grounds of public policy" but a decision to remove a person who
         has resided in the United Kingdom for more than five  years  cannot
         be taken "except on serious grounds of public policy".  It  follows
         that  "serious  grounds"  of  public  policy  must  mean  something
         different from "grounds" of public policy, and it follows from that
         that the  decision-maker  must  identify  just  what  the  relevant
         grounds are  and  then  evaluate  them  as  to  their  seriousness.
         Moreover, a relevant decision must be taken in accordance with  the
         principles set out in regulation  21(5)  .  Finally,  in  terms  of
         regulation 21(6) , before taking such a decision the decision-maker
         must take into account considerations such as  the  age,  state  of
         health, family and economic situation of the person, his length  of
         residence in the United Kingdom and the extent of  his  links  with
         his country of origin."

17. Whilst the judge reflects at [32] on the appellant's past history, what
    he does not do is identify why there are grounds for believing that the
    appellant's personal  conduct  will  present  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat.   There  are  no  proper  findings  as  to
    whether the appellant is in fact drug free or  how  long  it  has  been
    since he has refrained from drugs given the evidence of  his  attending
    at workshops and a negative urine test.  Insofar as there are  findings
    at [35], these are couched in terms of real risk rather than a  finding
    of a present and sufficiently serious threat to a public interest.

18. For all of these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of  law  and  I  set  it
    aside.  The hearing was adjourned to allow for any further evidence  to
    be adduced.

    Remaking the decision

19. I heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  his  wife.   The  appellant
    adopted his witness statement adding that he had stopped taking cocaine
    and is currently taking antidepressants for his depression.  He said he
    was aware that if he reoffended that  the  whole  process  would  start
    again and that his wife had said that she would leave him.

20. In response in cross-examination, the appellant accepted  that  he  had
    served time in prison in Poland but did not recall that when  he  spoke
    to a criminal justice social worker on 4 December 2015 that he  had  no
    experience of custody.  He said it was a long time ago and he confirmed
    that he had actually spent time in prison  in  Poland.   The  appellant
    appeared to have some difficulty in understanding the questions put  to
    him but was happy to proceed without the assistance of an  interpreter.
    His representative made objection.

21. The appellant said that he had been to  Narcotics  Anonymous  and  they
    were helping him.  He had been going for three years.  He had  not  had
    any rehabilitation treatment in  prison  because  he  was  taken  to  a
    detention centre.

22. It was put to him that the extradition treaty  proceedings  were  quite
    traumatic for him.  He accepted that,  but  it  was  put  to  him  that
    nonetheless three years later he was in court for  serious  charges  of
    supplying class A drugs, to which  he  said  he  that  he  had  made  a
    mistake.  He said that something had happened to his life and  that  he
    was not really the same person at the time.  He said he had  not  taken
    any legal advice about his situation in Poland.

23. In re-examination the appellant said he need not remember  whether  the
    Criminal Justice social worker had asked him if he had been  prison  in
    Scotland or what he would have said if that had been the question.   He
    said he had not been offended or been arrested since release in October
    2016.  He said that he feels better now as he does not drink  and  does
    not take drugs.

24. I then heard evidence  from  the  appellant's  wife,  who  adopted  her
    witness statements.  She confirmed that she would leave  the  appellant
    if he does take drugs again and that he was aware of  that.   She  said
    she did not think he would commit a crime again.

25. In cross-examination Mrs Maziarska said that  she  knew  the  appellant
    would be in trouble with the law in Poland and committed  quite  a  few
    serious offences.  She said that she believed that he had  changed  now
    and she could see it every day.  She had not known how long he had been
    taking drugs prior to 2015.

26. Mrs Maziarksa said she would stay in Poland because she had lived  here
    for twelve years,  she  was  self-employed  running  her  own  cleaning
    business with two employees.  She  said  that  the  appellant  had  not
    worked since he left prison, he is not feeling  well  and  cannot  work
    properly.

27. In re-examination Mrs  Maziarksa  said  that  when  the  appellant  was
    released he was told in the police station that he could not work.

28. In submissions Mr Mullen relied on the  decision,  accepting  that  the
    appellant has permanent residence.  He said it was not clear  what  the
    position was regarding the convictions in Poland and that the appellant
    might have to serve a sentence if  deported.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellant's responses to the Criminal Justice Social Worker's questions
    appeared not to be full and appropriate, and that thus the  reliability
    of her assessment of the risk of reoffending or harm was not relaible.

29. Mr Mullen submitted that the appellants answers to  the  social  worker
    cast doubt on the appellant's reliability as he was sentenced to twenty
    months' imprisonment for supplying a class A drug.  He  submitted  that
    there was no independent evidence that the  appellant  was  clean  from
    drugs and that there  was  a  pattern  of  serious  offending,  limited
    integration into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  previous  deportation
    decision had not prevented him from wrongdoing in the past.

30.  Mr  Mullen  submitted  that  the  appellant   was   exaggerating   the
    difficulties in understanding the questions and was  perhaps  affecting
    not understand things properly.  He did, however, he accepted  that  he
    had not put to this to him.

31. Mr Mullen submitted that the appellant is in fact closer  to  a  career
    criminal rather than someone who was offending due to problems whilst a
    juvenile.  He submitted there was no independent evidence  as  to  risk
    and that his release in 2016 was relatively recent.

32. Mr Caskie submitted that the burden of proof was on  the  Secretary  of
    State and there was nothing to indicate the appellant  would  not  face
    imprisonment on return to Poland.  He submitted that the appellant  had
    every incentive not to return to Poland and tried to  kill  himself  in
    the past but he submitted it was difficult for the Secretary  of  State
    to prove that the appellant had given false information to  the  social
    worker and that twenty months for the offence in question  was  at  the
    low end.

The Law

33. It is to be noted also that by operation of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) (amendment) Regulations 2017 in the schedule at  4  that
    notwithstanding the revocation of the 2006 Regulations, these  continue
    to apply in respect of this appeal as it  was  pending  on  31  January
    2017.

34. It is not suggested that  there  is  any  material  difference  between
    Regulations 19(3)(a) to (c) of  the  2006  Regulations  and  Regulation
    23(6)(a) to (c) of the 2016 Regulations.  Nor  was  it  submitted  that
    Regulation 27 of the 2016  Regulations  is  materially  different  from
    Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations.   The  principle  difference  is
    Regulation 27(8) of the 2016 Regulations  which  requires  me  to  have
    regard to the considerations  contained  in  Schedule  1  of  the  2016
    Regulations.

35. In reaching my conclusion I have had full regard to Schedule 1  of  the
    2016 Regulations.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  introduced  any
    specific evidence to show  that  the  offences  committed  here  caused
    public offence nor did he submit that the public maintenance of  public
    confidence in taking action was  undermined  in  this  case.   Thus,  I
    accept that there has been persistent offending in the  Poland  in  the
    past, for the reasons set out below I consider that this is  no  longer
    likely to occur and that there is, given the findings I make below with
    regard  to  propensity  to  offend,  that  the  public  is   adequately
    protected.

36. It is of  note  that  in  2010  the  Appellate  Authorities  sought  to
    extradite the appellant to Poland to serve sentences in respect of  his
    convictions in Poland.  That request was, however, refused by the  High
    Court of  Justiciary  Appeal  Court,  reported  as  [M]  and  the  Lord
    Advocate.  In short, the extradition was not ordered,  was  refused  on
    the grounds that the appellant's medical condition  was  such  that  it
    would be oppressive to extradite him.  It is worth noting the following
    from that decision:

         "[4] It is necessary to review the appellant's mental condition, in
         so far as possible on the evidence available, from the time of  his
         youth. He was born in Chelmo, Poland in June 1982. He  had  a  very
         disturbed  and  difficult  childhood,  including  being   assaulted
         frequently by his father. He had difficulties in primary school and
         was placed in residential school for certain periods.  He  received
         some psychiatric treatment in childhood, including  hospitalisation
         for about three months at some time between the ages of 12  and  16
         years. The precise nature of his then disorder is unclear.

         [5]  In adulthood in Poland he committed a  number  of  crimes.  He
         served a custodial sentence of some fourteen months.  In  September
         2003, while acting with  others,  he  misappropriated  property.  A
         penalty of one year's  imprisonment,  conditionally  suspended  for
         four years, was imposed. In November 2005 he stole  a  quantity  of
         metal. A penalty of one year's  imprisonment,  suspended  for  five
         years, was imposed. Earlier, in October  2000,  while  acting  with
         others, he had broken into a motor vehicle causing  certain  damage
         and driven it away; in November 2000, while acting with another, he
         had broken into premises and misappropriated metal. For  these  two
         offences he was sentence to a cumulo custodial term of one year and
         two months. This penalty was initially suspended for  a  period  of
         three years but in July 2006 the Polish  court  ordered  that  that
         penalty  be  carried  out.  These  four  convictions,  with   their
         associated penalties, are the basis for the extradition request.


         [6]  The appellant's wife, who is also Polish, came to Scotland  in
         about 2006. She settled in Aberdeen.  The  appellant  followed  her
         there in 2007. He obtained  work,  initially  in  his  trade  as  a
         welder, and latterly as a butcher.  Apart  from  a  conviction  for
         driving without  insurance  he  has  no  criminal  record  in  this
         country.

         ...

         [15]  All  four  psychiatrists  gave  evidence  before  the  court.
         Although there remained differences  of  view  as  to  the  precise
         diagnosis of the appellant's condition, in the end that  difference
         was not significant. The essential medical issue was, in  light  of
         the appellant's whole history, what prospectively  was  his  likely
         mental condition in the event of his appeal being refused  and  his
         being extradited to Poland. The degree of  risk  of  his  making  a
         further attempt on his own life might be a matter  of  interest  to
         the court but, according to the expert evidence, it was not a  risk
         which could readily be quantified by  psychiatrists.  It  was  very
         difficult to predict what a particular individual might do in  that
         regard. It was, from a psychiatrist's point of view, more important
         to manage such risk  as  existed,  including  estimating  when  the
         appellant would be at  greatest  risk  of  self-harm.  However,  as
         narrated above, Dr Lenihan had opined that there would  be  a  high
         risk, until the appellant adjusted to the new situation, which  was
         estimated as lasting from some weeks to up to two months. There was
         no serious challenge to that estimate. The high risk  period  would
         start from the point when the appellant was first informed that his
         appeal had failed - should that  be  the  court's  decision  -  and
         extend through his remaining time in prison in Scotland  (he  would
         be extradited within ten days), through his transfer to Poland into
         his time in Polish custody.

         ...

         [29] In the present case the offences of which the appellant stands
         convicted in Poland are at first sight not  of  the  most  serious.
         They are crimes of dishonesty in respect of which the Polish  court
         imposed sequential custodial sentences of one year and two  months,
         one year and one year  respectively,  in  each  case  conditionally
         suspended for a number of years. In respect  of  at  least  one  of
         these sentences (that for one year and two months) a  Polish  court
         has ruled that the penalty has to  be  carried  out.  The  European
         Arrest  Warrant,  however,  refers  to  all  three   judgments   as
         enforceable and the sheriff proceeded on the basis  that  a  cumulo
         sentence of three years and two months was to be served. There  was
         no  suggestion  before  us  that  that  basis  was  incorrect.  The
         appellant has been in custody in Scotland since  10  March  2011  -
         that is, eleven months or so. We were  informed  that  that  period
         would be discounted by the Polish authorities from the  appellant's
         outstanding sentences but that,  under  Polish  law,  there  is  no
         remission of sentence, automatic or discretionary.    "

37. In assessing the appellant's evidence, I  bear  in  mind  that  he  was
    giving evidence in English rather than in Polish, his native  language.
    I accept  that  he  did  have  some  difficulty  in  understanding  the
    questions put to him but I do not accept that this was because  he  was
    seeking to be evasive.  The difficulties arose when the questions  were
    complex, containing several phrases,  and  I  bear  in  mind  that  the
    appellant does have some mental health difficulties as was noted by the
    High Court of Justiciary in the  past  and  by  the  fact  that  he  is
    currently prescribed antidepressants.

38. The core question is the  nature  of  the  threat,  if  any,  that  the
    appellant poses.

39. In analysing that issue I have paid attention to the  decision  of  the
    High Court of Justiciary as well  as  the  report  by  the  residential
    officer at HMP Grampian,  an  alcohol  and  drugs  action  letter,  NHS
    Grampian Health Centre letter from a substance and misuse nurse  and  a
    sentencing report prepared by a criminal justice social worker as  well
    as the appellant and his wife's evidence.

40. The first issue in considering the sentencing report is whether, as the
    respondent alleges, the appellant supplied  false  information.   There
    are two elements to this: the exaggeration of income  to  minimise  the
    extent of which he was deriving financial benefit  from  drug  dealing;
    and, the  lack  of  previous  convictions  highlighting  a  pattern  of
    offending behaviour relating to this offence (Section 5(b)).

41. The appellant was not questioned on the issue of  his  income  on  this
    occasion and the findings with respect that in  the  previous  decision
    are not preserved.   Nonetheless,  they  were  clearly  raised  in  the
    refusal letter and it is necessary for me  to  reach  conclusion  about
    them.  There is  nothing  in  either  witness  statement  which  is  of
    assistance but the appellant said this:

         "I was convicted of a second drugs offence 6 November 2015.  I  had
         twenty grams of cocaine in my flat which was for my  personal  use.
         The grinders that were found were used  for  grinding  up  cannabis
         because I smoke cannabis as well.  Before my custodial sentence,  I
         had a serious drugs problem, I needed  a  combination  of  cocaine,
         coffee and cigarettes to get me ready in the morning before I  went
         to work.  I used to smoke cannabis in the evening to relax.   I  do
         not take drugs anymore and I have never really been a drinker.   It
         has been over three years since I have taken cocaine or  any  other
         illicit drugs."

42. There  is,  however,  little  evidence  regarding  the  nature  of  the
    offending although it is clear that the appellant had scales, a  wooden
    grinder and other paraphernalia connected with the  supply  of  illicit
    drugs.

43. Viewing the evidence on this issue as a whole, I  considered  that  the
    appellant did seek to minimise his involvement with drugs,  seeking  to
    show that what he had was for his own use.  That  said,  there  was  no
    indication that he was a big scale dealer.

44. The issue about the appellant not being in custody before  is  somewhat
    unclear.  The first mention of prior offending is at Section 5(b) where
    it is said the author refers to the Scottish  criminal  records  office
    list which discloses driving offences.  There  is  no  indication  from
    this that the author had before her any  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    offending in Poland although it seems unlikely  that  this  information
    was unavailable generally in the circumstances of the appeal  in  2012.
    It is also notable from that that the appellant had of course been held
    on remand in Scotland for a period of eleven months.  It was  while  on
    remand that he tried  to  kill  himself  by  hanging  twice.   In  that
    context, the recording that "Mr  [M]  has  no  previous  experience  of
    custody.  He states that he does not know how  he  would  cope  with  a
    custodial sentence stating that he feels he would be 'broken  down'  by
    this." makes little sense.

45. Given that it was the centrality of the threats his mental  ill-health,
    which permitted him to avoid extradition to Poland, it is strange  that
    he did not mention this if asked about it, not least as it was a matter
    of public record.  There would in any event have been little purpose in
    the appellant, if he wanted to  avoid  a  custodial  sentence,  in  not
    making reference to what had occurred in  the  past.  He  had  been  on
    remand, but had not been sentenced.

46. Drawing these strands together, it is difficult in  the  absence  of  a
    contemporaneous record of what questions were put in the interview with
    the social worker, to draw conclusions  as  to  whether  the  appellant
    sought to mislead or not. Given the format and structure of  the  form,
    it is easy to see why the appellant  may  not  have  been  asked  about
    convictions outside the UK, and may not have mentioned being on remand.
     There would have been no advantage  to  him  in  suppressing  evidence
    about in prison on remand  before,  or  to  having  had  mental  health
    problems in the past.

47. It is evident from the report  that  the  author  considered  that  the
    author considered that the appellant's use of cocaine in the  past  may
    have undermined the appellant's thinking processes.  That is a relevant
    given issue given his evidence that he no longer abuses  drugs.   There
    is some independent evidence to confirm that.  There is a letter  dated
    8 September 2016 indicating that he attends all the arranged one to one
    meetings with the allocated drugs worker and  evidence  of  a  negative
    urine test.  These are, however, of some vintage.  There is  no  up-to-
    date evidence from such sources to confirm that  the  appellant  is  no
    longer using drugs  or  that  he  has  continued  to  attend  Narcotics
    Anonymous.

48. There is, equally, some indication that he has learnt  his  lesson  and
    thus there is less of a risk of reoffending.  There is no record of any
    convictions since his release nearly three years ago  and  there  is  a
    report from the residential officer at HMP Grampian stating that he has
    been a well-behaved and polite prisoner and opining that he has learned
    the errors of his way whilst in custody and appears to  have  undergone
    some significant rehabilitation and will pose a minimal risk to society
    when released.

49. The criminal justice social worker report predates that letter  and  at
    Section 7 conducts a risk assessment. Despite the  misgivings  set  out
    above, there does not appear to me to be any error in  relying  on  the
    identification of risk factors include minimising  the  seriousness  of
    offence and lack of consequential thinking. Such phrases are common  in
    all such  reports  as  indeed  are  the  identification  of  protective
    factors: refraining from a use of cocaine since committing the offence,
    supportive relationship (which  still  exists)  and  a  willingness  to
    engage with the drug and alcohol team.  It was also of  note  that  "Mr
    [M] does not meet the criteria for a risk of serious harm, there is  no
    evidence to suggest a period of post  release  supervision  should  the
    court impose a custodial sentence".

50. There is little merit in the Secretary of State's observation that  the
    sentencing judge did not agree with the assessment  the  appellant  did
    not pose a high risk of serious harm to the public.   Serious  harm  is
    clearly defined as the  social  worker  did  in  her  report.  and  the
    sentencing  judge  is  simply  in  a   position   of   twenty   months'
    imprisonment.  That appears in order with  the  sentencing  guidelines.
    He makes no observations about serious harm.

51. Similarly, it is difficult  to  see  how  the  convictions  for  theft,
    burglary and robbery, some of which at least  involve  violence,  which
    took place over ten years ago, are indicative of a high risk of harm to
    the public now.   There  was  no  indication  that  the  appellant  has
    indulged in such behaviour since moving to the United  Kingdom  or  has
    used unlawful violence.

52. The refusal letter notes that the social  worker  found  the  appellant
    posed a high risk of reoffending.  That phase is not put  in  quotation
    marks and does not appear in the social work report  which  appears  at
    paragraph C and that would appear to sit ill with the observation  that
    he is suitable for community disposal and that there are no  identified
    issued in relation to public protection.

53. It is odd, however, that in the context  of  the  appellant's  history,
    there is no mention of self-harm in  the  social  justice  social  work
    report.  As he said he does not identify any physical or mental  health
    issues and does not identify any risk of self-harm.

54. In the circumstances, it is difficult to  attach  much  weight  to  the
    criminal justice social work report.  The conclusions  appear  to  have
    been reached in the  absence  of  full  knowledge  of  the  appellant's
    criminal offending behaviour, albeit that those were not linked to drug
    use.  Further, no account had been taken  of  previous  serious  mental
    health problems or prior remand for  eleven  months  whilst  expedition
    proceedings were in progress.

55. I have no doubt that seeking to prevent drug dealing because of all the
    problems this causes in society is clearly a serious reason for  public
    policy.  But I am  not  satisfied  in  this  case  that  the  appellant
    currently represents a genuine, serious or sufficiently serious  threat
    to the public.

56. There is no evidence of reoffending or of continued drug  taking  which
    would be a strong  indicator  of  future  offending.  Whilst  there  is
    evidence of relatively serious violent behaviour in the past, there  is
    nothing recent and what evidence there is from anybody in  the  justice
    system as to the risk of further offending is the  observation  from  a
    prison officer who has supervision of the appellant on his  wing,  that
    he appears to have made significant  steps  towards  to  rehabilitating
    himself.

57. I have no reason to doubt his wife's sincerity in saying that she would
    leave him were he to start taking or dealing in drugs again  and  there
    is some evidence, albeit of some vintage, that he had complied with not
    taking drugs.  I can attach some weight to the observation that  if  he
    stays away from taking drugs he is  unlikely  to  be  involved  in  the
    dealing of it and overall I find that I  am  not  satisfied  that  this
    appellant presents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society,  taking  into
    account his past conduct.

58. Further, I am satisfied that the appellant has a relationship with  his
    wife. I conclude that there  would  be  significant  interference  with
    these rights were he to be deported to Poland.

59. I note that the appellant has not reoffended since his release.

60. Taking all of these factors into account I am  satisfied  that  removal
    would be disproportionate.

61. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that the Secretary of  State
    has not shown the decision made to deport  in  this  case  was  not  in
    accordance with the United Kingdom's obligations  pursuant  to  the  EU
    Treaties and I allow the appeal on that basis.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on EU grounds.


Signed                                  Date 17 June 2019.
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
