
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00454/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July 2016                              |On 4th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                          ANIS MOHAMMED ISMAIL ADEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar, Counsel instructed by SLK Immigration
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sweden born on 17th April 1991.   He
    came to the UK with his family in April  2004.   In  May  2014  he  was
    arrested and found to be in possession of  controlled  drugs.   On  6th
    November 2014 he pleaded guilty to two counts  of  possessing  class  A
    controlled drugs, namely cocaine and heroin, with intent to supply, and
    as a consequence on 14th December 2014 he was sentenced to three years'
    imprisonment.  On 17th September 2015 the Respondent decided to  deport
    the Appellant for the reasons given in a Notice  of  Decision  of  that
    date.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal  was  heard  by  a  panel
    chaired by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett (the  Panel)  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 26th February 2016.  The Panel  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeal for the reasons given in its Decision dated 2nd March 2016.  The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 30th March  2016
    such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Panel contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The decision to deport the Appellant was made under  the  provision  of
    Regulations 19(3)(b) and 21 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The Panel decided that the Appellant  had  not  been
    living in the UK for a continuous period of ten years for the  purposes
    of Regulation 21(3) and (4).   Leave  to  appeal  was  not  granted  in
    respect of that decision.  The Panel also decided to dismiss the appeal
    because it found that there were serious grounds of  public  policy  or
    public security because the Appellant represented  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society, and that it was proportionate to deport him.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Sarwar argued that the Panel had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to that conclusion.  He referred to the grounds  of  application
    and submitted that the Panel had erred by failing to take into  account
    material evidence when assessing whether the  Appellant  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.  The  Panel  had  not
    dealt with a letter from Wayne Powell, a probation officer, dated  25th
    November 2015 stating that the Appellant had been assessed to be  of  a
    low risk of re-offending.  This was material  as  the  Panel  had  only
    dealt with the earlier pre-sentence report giving  a  similar  opinion.
    As the Panel had not accepted the opinion of the  pre-sentence  report,
    it was material that the subsequent letter of  Wayne  Powell  confirmed
    the view given in the report.

 5. Further, the Panel had erred in its assessment  of  a  genuine  threat.
    The Panel had failed to give sufficient weight to the evidence that the
    Appellant was of a low risk of future offending.  The  Panel  had  only
    taken into account the evidence of a lack of remorse by the  Appellant,
    and the nature of the original offences.  The Panel had failed to  give
    sufficient reasons for not accepting the assessment of  the  propensity
    to re-offend given by the Probation Service.

 6. Finally, Mr Sarwar argued that the Panel had further erred  in  law  by
    failing  to  take  into  account  material   factors   when   assessing
    proportionality.  In particular, they had failed to take  into  account
    all of the factors listed in Regulation  21(6),  and  the  prospect  of
    rehabilitation.

 7. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there had been no such errors of law.  The grounds amounted to no  more
    than a disagreement with the decision of the Panel.  It was  true  that
    the Panel had not specifically dealt with the letter of  Wayne  Powell,
    but the Panel had noted the evidence of a low risk of re-offending  and
    had given sufficient reasons that nonetheless the Appellant represented
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.  The Panel had come
    to a decision open to it on the evidence in this respect.   The  letter
    of Wayne Powell added little to the comments made in  the  pre-sentence
    report dealt with by the Panel.  The failure to deal  with  the  letter
    was not material as that letter had been written for the purpose  of  a
    bail hearing  and  the  Panel  had  been  correct  to  concentrate  its
    attention on the pre-sentence report which had been the  report  relied
    upon by the sentencing Judge.

 8. Mrs Aboni went on to submit that the Panel had properly considered  all
    the  relevant  evidence  including  the  details  of  the   Appellant's
    involvement in the offences and the comments of the  sentencing  Judge.
    The Panel had not erred by attaching weight to the Appellant's lack  of
    remorse and had been right to conclude that there was  little  prospect
    of rehabilitation as the Appellant had not accepted his guilt.

 9. Finally, Mrs Aboni submitted that although the  Panel's  assessment  of
    proportionality  was  brief,  all  the  relevant   circumstances   were
    considered, in particular his personal circumstances and  his  ties  to
    Sweden.

10. I find no error of law in the decision of the Panel which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  I agree with the submissions of Mrs Aboni  that  the
    Panel came to a decision which was open to it on  the  evidence  before
    it.   The  Panel  considered  all  relevant  circumstances   and   gave
    sufficient reasons for its conclusions.

11. As regards the letter of Wayne Powell, it is true that  the  Panel  did
    not refer to it specifically in the Decision.  However  from  what  the
    Panel wrote at paragraph 21 of its Decision it is clear that the  Panel
    was aware of the view of the Probation Service that the  Appellant  was
    at a low risk of re-offending, and then the Panel went on in subsequent
    paragraphs to explain its decision that the  Appellant  still  did  not
    accept responsibility for the crimes he had committed, and that he  did
    not understand the possible catastrophic effects  of  his  criminality.
    It was therefore open to the Panel to find that the Appellant continued
    to present a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat.   The
    letter of Wayne Powell although describing the Appellant as being of  a
    low risk of re-offending does not say anything relevant concerning  the
    Appellant's lack of remorse nor his lack of acceptance of his guilt and
    lack of understanding of the possible consequences for society  of  the
    type of offences he had committed.

12. Finally, I am satisfied  that  the  Panel  carried  out  the  balancing
    exercise necessary for any assessment of proportionality.  At paragraph
    31 of the Decision the Panel referred to the weight to be  attached  to
    the public interest owing to the  serious  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    offending, and took into account the Appellant's personal circumstances
    including those referred to at paragraph 19 of  the  Decision.   In  my
    judgment the Panel took into account  all  the  relevant  circumstances
    required by Regulation 21(6).

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
