
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00870/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 April 2016                             |On 18 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                             Mr Joaquim Godinho
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin, Counsel instructed by Cale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought with permission  from  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Storey granted on 18 March 2015.  It relates to a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs promulgated on 10 November 2014.  It concerns
    an order made for the deportation of the appellant following a criminal
    conviction in the Crown Court at Croydon.

2.   The grounds on which permission was granted were threefold: first  that
    the judge made an error of law in failing properly  to  articulate  and
    apply the imperative grounds of protection and in the circumstances did
    not appreciate the high threshold which was required; secondly that  in
    relation to the judge's approach, no distinction was made  between  the
    two separate tests which apply depending upon  whether  the  individual
    has been resident in the UK for five or for ten years; and thirdly that
    the judge did not adopt the structured approach to  questions  of  this
    type as has been commended by MG (prison-Article 28(3)(a)  of  Citizens
    Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC).

3.   A letter dated 27 April 2015 which constituted  the  respondent's  Rule
    12 response was ambiguous. It read: "The Secretary of  State  does  not
    oppose the appellant's application for permission to appeal and invites
    the Tribunal to determine  the  appeal.  In  line  with  the  grant  of
    permission case law does leave it open for the points  to  be  argued."
    Clearly it was not simply  a  concession  that  permission  be  granted
    because that had already taken place.


4.   Mr Tarlow, who represents the Secretary of State, took instruction  and
    confirmed that the letter was intended to convey an acknowledgment that
    the grounds set  out  in  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    amounted to errors of law and that in the circumstances  the  Secretary
    of State conceded that the appeal should be  allowed.  As  will  become
    apparent, it is unnecessary for me to say any more at this stage  about
    the detail of those errors.  The  judge  failed  to  adopt  the  proper
    approach and to construe and apply  the  imperative  grounds  threshold
    correctly, as is more fully explored and explained in the  second  part
    of this decision.


5.   With the concurrence of both the  appellant's  representative  and  the
    representative of the Secretary of State, I  therefore  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  the  decision.   The
    appellant gave evidence before me. He confirmed the truth of a  witness
    statement that was put before the First-tier Tribunal, running to  some
    fourteen paragraphs. It concludes with a statement that  he  is  not  a
    dangerous man and should be given a second chance.

6.   The appellant's partner, Ms Marzena Flaga, also  gave  evidence  before
    and she confirmed the truth of her eleven paragraph witness  statement.
    She was asked one question by way of cross-examination, namely  whether
    in the event of the appellant being deported she would  follow  him  to
    Portugal. She answered that question in the affirmative. It was  common
    ground before me that the issue for my  determination  was  whether  an
    expulsion decision in respect of the appellant had been  properly  made
    based upon the imperative grounds of public security as  prescribed  in
    Directive 2004/38/EC.

7.   The appellant is a citizen of Portugal, born on  1  February  1971.  He
    arrived in the UK in May 1993. On 28 January 2014, he was convicted  of
    an offence of causing a female to engage  in  sexual  activity  without
    consent. He was sentenced to 21  months'  imprisonment,  was  made  the
    subject of a  sexual  prevention  order  and  was  placed  on  the  sex
    offenders' register for ten years.

8.   It is conceded by the respondent that  the  appellant  has  acquired  a
    right of permanent residence in the UK. In  assessing  the  appellant's
    deportation to be warranted on imperative grounds of public protection,
    the Respondent placed weight upon the assessment of risk of  the  Multi
    Agency Public Protection Arrangements, and the appellant's inclusion in
    the sex offenders register. She had regard to the sentencing remarks of
    the judge and to the affect that although NOMS1 assed the appellant  as
    at a low risk of reoffending, there was a high risk of harm  should  he
    reoffend.

7.   Regard  must  be  had  to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 which implement the Directive. Regulation 21  provides
    as follows:

         "(1) In this Regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.


         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who -


             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant  decision."
                  (emphasis added)

8.   It was conceded on behalf of the  respondent  that  the  appellant  has
    indeed resided in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of  at
    least ten years, having arrived in May of 1993.  That being the case it
    is the higher test under sub-section 4 which must be satisfied and  not
    the lower test under sub-section  3.   Ms  Tobin,  who  represents  the
    appellant, comments, however, that the facts of this case are such that
    even were the lower threshold test to be applied it would  not  in  any
    way serve to permit the deportation of the appellant.

9.   These tests have been discussed in a number of decisions, both of  this
    Tribunal and of the Court of Justice of the European Union. I have been
    taken to Land Baden-W�rttemberg v  Tsakouridis  (Directive  2004/38/EC)
    Case C-145/09.  That is a decision of the Grand Chamber of the Court of
    Justice of the European Union and deals with a Greek national  resident
    in the Federal Republic of Germany whose government took  the  decision
    to expel him because of his involvement in the  narcotics  trade.   The
    particular facts of that case are some way distant from the facts  here
    but principles of general application can be drawn from  the  following
    paragraphs:

         "41.  The  concept  of  'imperative  grounds  of  public  security'
             presupposes not only the  existence  of  a  threat  to  public
             security, but also that such a threat  is  of  a  particularly
             high degree of seriousness, as is reflected by the use of  the
             words 'imperative reasons'.


         43.  As regards public security,  the  court  has  held  that  this
             covers  both  a  member  state's  internal  and  its  external
             security.


         44.  The court has also held that a threat to  the  functioning  of
             the  institutions  and  essential  public  services  and   the
             survival of the population, as well as the risk of  a  serious
             disturbance to foreign relations or to peaceful coexistence of
             nations, or a risk to military interests,  may  affect  public
             security.


         45.  It does not follow that objectives such as the  fight  against
             crime in connection with dealing in narcotics as  part  of  an
             organised group are necessarily excluded from that concept.


         47.  Since  drug  addiction  represents  a  serious  evil  for  the
             individual and is fraught with social and economic  danger  to
             mankind [...] trafficking in narcotics as part of an organised
             group could reach a level of  intensity  that  might  directly
             threaten the calm and physical security of the population as a
             whole or a large part of it.


         48.  It should be added that Article  27(2)  of  Directive  2004/38
             emphasises that the  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
             represent a  genuine  and  present  threat  to  a  fundamental
             interest of society or of the  member  state  concerned,  that
             previous criminal convictions cannot in themselves  constitute
             grounds for taking public policy or public security  measures,
             and that justifications that are isolated from the particulars
             of  the  case  or  that  rely  on  considerations  of  general
             prevention cannot be accepted.


         49.  Consequently,  an  expulsion  measure  must  be  based  on  an
             individual  examination  of  the  specific  case  and  can  be
             justified on imperative grounds of public security within  the
             meaning of Article 28(3) of Directive 2004/38 only if,  having
             regard to the exceptional seriousness of the  threat,  such  a
             measure is necessary for the protection of  the  interests  it
             aims  to  secure,  provided  that  that  objective  cannot  be
             attained by less strict means, having regard to the length  of
             residence of the Union citizen in the host member state and in
             particular to the serious negative consequences such a measure
             may  have  for  Union  citizens  who  have  become   genuinely
             integrated into the host member state."


10.  It is submitted on behalf of the appellant and not  challenged  by  the
    Respondent that inclusion on a sex offenders register and the automatic
    multi-agency involvement  when  classified  under  MAPPA  level  2  are
    factors which can be seen as less strict means in those circumstances.

11.  I have also had regard to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  State
    for the Home Department v FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA Civ  1199.  This  case
    concerned an Italian citizen who was convicted in 2002 of  manslaughter
    having strangled his victim with an iron. He was sentenced to  8  years
    imprisonment and had  previous  convictions  for  assaulting  a  police
    officer and various motoring matters. The Court found that the Tribunal
    had plainly erred in law in its approach to the expression  "imperative
    grounds of public security". The form of words used by the Tribunal and
    condemned by the Court of Appeal read:


         "We conclude that the medium risk of the appellant killing again is
         a sufficiently serious threat to public security as to fall  within
         the highest level of calculus within the  regulations  ,  and  that
         there exist imperative grounds of public security for the  decision
         to deport him. Regulation 21(4) is thus satisfied."


    The facts relate that FV committed a number of other offences including
    battery and possession of a bladed article in 2011 and 2012.
12.  As Pill LJ put it at paragraphs 98 and 99:
         "98. I see no real prospect of  the  Tribunal  finding  'imperative
         grounds of public security' to justify deportation. The  respondent
         has committed a serious offence  of  violence  against  the  person
         justifying a sentence of 8 years  imprisonment.  He  has  committed
         other offences.
         99.  Notwithstanding those offences and the discretion permitted to
         a Member State in setting out  its  scale  of  values,  a  Tribunal
         applying regulation 21 and the guidance in Tsakouridis and PI could
         not in my judgment properly find that there are imperative  grounds
         of public security justifying deportation.  (I  bear  in  mind  the
         later offences of the respondent mentioned at paragraph 30 above.)
13.  Finally I come to MG  Portugal  (above),  where  the  criminal  conduct
    related to offences of child cruelty in relation to which  a  21  month
    prison sentence was imposed.  The  Secretary  of  State  in  that  case
    conceded that if the individual was entitled to the  highest  level  of
    protection based on ten years' residence as set out in Article 28(3)(a)
    (so that she could only be deported if there were  "imperative  grounds
    of public security") then her  appeal  must  succeed  because,  on  the
    facts, there were no such grounds. The court went on  to  consider  the
    lower threshold under "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security" and concluded that on the facts this was not met.
 14. The respondent's arguments before me today have  placed  reliance  upon
    the decision letter of the Secretary of State dated 6 May  2014  giving
    reasons for deportation.  Mr Tarlow took me in particular to  paragraph
    24 where it says:

         "In completing your NOMS assessment the offender manager found that
         you posed a high risk of harm to the young females.   In  assessing
         you as a high risk it is  has  been  acknowledged  that  there  are
         identifiable indicators of a risk of serious harm.  That  potential
         event could happen at any time and the impact would be serious."


15.  There is also reference in paragraph 27 to the likelihood  of  distress
    to the family of the victim. The Secretary of State  includes  verbatim
    the sentencing remarks of the judge.  To the extent that it is relevant
    those remarks are as follows:

         "Your victim was  16  years  of  age  at  the  time,  a  particular
         vulnerable young lady in that she was alone, in a park, sitting  on
         a bench minding her own business, she having been locked out of her
         home and was waiting for someone to come and let her back in.  This
         was a park with which she was familiar, she felt safe where she was
         but you came, approached her, engaged  her  in  conversation.   And
         very shortly after that, in the park which was not busy at about 11
         o'clock in the morning, you took her as far as a  clump  of  trees,
         whereby you pushed against her and you made her masturbate you  but
         at one stage you had hold of her, if not by her  throat,  certainly
         by the top of her neck, when you made her masturbate you.


         It is an aggravating feature of your behaviour that you  ejaculated
         during the course of all this.  I remember  well  her  evidence  in
         saying that this was an experience which she had never  encountered
         before.  And I witnessed with my own eyes just what an effect  this
         had on upon her.


         I balance your terrible offending against the following  mitigating
         features.  You are a man with nothing in the way of like  offending
         recorded against you.  It is clear from me from what I have read in
         the presentence report that you were at  the  time  suffering  from
         depression.  You have had a difficult background  of  late,  having
         lost both your parents.  And it is right that  I  record  the  fact
         that you had, in fact, been unwell, prior to the commission of this
         offence.  You have a history of self-harm, you have  a  history  of
         battling against depression.  It is right that  I  note  that  your
         poor health is something that has  been  mentioned  throughout  the
         reports I have seen."


16.  In addition, within the sentencing remarks the following appears:

         "And I am asked to consider in terms  whether  indeed  you  pose  a
         danger to the public.  In these circumstances dangerousness has got
         a very definite meaning as defined in law.  And bearing in mind the
         matter of which you have been convicted and ignoring that of  which
         you have been acquitted, I cannot, as a  matter  of  law,  properly
         conclude that you do fall to be treated as a dangerous offender."


17.  The other matter which I was taken to  specifically  was  in  the  NOMS
    form where it is recorded that the risk of serious harm is high:

         "The appellant has been convicted of  a  sexual  offence  committed
         against a very young female.   It  appears  that  he  targeted  the
         victim who was sitting alone in a public park.  He displays a  very
         high level of denial and  victim  blaming  behaviour.   He  has  no
         empathy for the victim.  He used force to restrain the victim.  The
         fact that this was a public park in the middle of the day  did  not
         deter Mr Godinho from committing the offence.  He poses a  risk  to
         females of a similar age who may be in a situation where  they  are
         alone in a public place."


18.  However, the counsel for the respondent did not dissent from  or  argue
    against any  of  the  submissions  on  law  made  by  counsel  for  the
    appellant. The following propositions emerge and do not  appear  to  be
    controversial:


    (1)  Deportation decisions concerning EEA nationals  must  be  made  by
         reference to the Regulations;
    (2)  The threshold  which  must  be  satisfied  varies  depending  upon
         whether the individual concerned has been resident in  the  UK  for
         less than 5 years; between 5 and 10 years; or more than 10;
    (3)  If an EEA national  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         continuous period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
         decision  then  the  highest  threshold  must  be  reached,  namely
         imperative grounds of public security;
    (4)   'Imperative  grounds  of  public   security'   import   something
         considerably more serious than isolated acts of criminal conduct.

19.  The matters relied upon by the respondent in this case do not begin  to
    come within the territory of  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
    properly interpreted. There is no substantial risk to public  security.
    This was an isolated criminal offence which has not  been  repeated.  I
    also consider there to be considerable force in Miss Tobin's submission
    that the matters relied upon by the respondent are insufficient even to
    meet the lower threshold of 'serious grounds of public policy or public
    security'. However, I am not required to decide the point  because  the
    appellant's length of residence in the UK engages the higher  threshold
    and the point is purely academic.

20.  The deportation order should be quashed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal from the First-tier Tribunal is  allowed  and  the  decision  set
aside.

The decision is remade, allowing the appeal  and  quashing  the  deportation
order.



No anonymity direction is made.







Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     12 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


