
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00376/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 January 2014                            |On 14 March 2014             |
|Prepared 15 January 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       CHRISTIAN CAMILO BAQUERO BERNAL

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Ukachi-Lois, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
Freemans Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mayall  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 8 August 2013 allowed the appellant's appeal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 8 February  2013  to  deport
    the appellant to Colombia.

2.    The  decision  to  deport  followed  the  appellant's  conviction  for
    possession with intent to supply a controlled drug class A  -  cocaine,
    for which he had been sentenced to a period of two years'  imprisonment
    on 3  February  2012.   The  decision  was  made  under  the  automatic
    deportation provisions in Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

3.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly, I  refer  to  Mr
    Christian Camilo  Baquero  Bernal  as  the  appellant  as  he  was  the
    appellant in the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   The appellant had arrived in Britain in July 1999 with entry  clearance
    as a student.  In December that  year  he  applied  for  asylum.   That
    application was refused  and  the  appellant  apparently  left  Britain
    before re-entering as a visitor on 19 December 2000.

5.   Thereafter the appellant overstayed until July 2011  when  he  made  an
    application for leave to remain as the spouse of Jenny Jimenez Delgardo
    Villota, a Colombian citizen whom he had  married  by  proxy  in  March
    2011.

6.   In November that year he was convicted  of  the  drugs  offences  noted
    above being sentenced the following February.

7.   Judge Mayall  quoted  extensively  from  the  letter  setting  out  the
    reasons for deportation and the consideration of the Secretary of State
    of the application of paragraphs 398 and 399A of  the  Rules,  and  the
    conclusion of the Secretary of State that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances  which  would  mean  that  deportation   would   not   be
    appropriate:  the fact that the appellant and Ms Villota had a  son  as
    taken into consideration.

8.   Judge Mayall noted the evidence of  the  appellant  that  he  had  been
    together with Ms Villota for ten years, that she had  indefinite  leave
    to remain and that their son, J was aged 5.  The appellant  had  stated
    that since his release from prison his son's behaviour had improved, he
    was involved with his local church and that he  looked  after  his  son
    while his wife was working.

9.   The appellant's wife also gave evidence stating that J,  who  had  been
    born in Britain was a British citizen naturalised after  she  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain.   The basis of her leave to  remain
    was that she had applied  for  residence  under  Regulation  8  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 in 2008.

10.  Judge Mayall recorded that he had noted during submissions that he  was
    concerned as to the immigration status of the appellant's wife and  son
    and the process by which they had obtained indefinite leave  to  remain
    and British citizenship respectively.  The appeal had been adjourned at
    that stage for further information.  A bundle of  documents  which  had
    been produced at the appellant's wife's appeal  was  submitted  by  the
    Presenting Officer.  It became apparent that the appellant's  wife  had
    been granted leave to remain after an appeal against a refusal had been
    allowed by another Immigration Judge.  The appellant's wife had claimed
    that she was living in a family unit with her brother and his wife  and
    that the appellant, the father of her child, did  not  live  with  her.
    Her appeal was allowed in May 2010.  Judge Mayall commented that -

         "Although the evidence was that there was contact between  her  and
         the appellant and that J had contact with his father it  was  clear
         that the  evidence  was  that  they  did  not  and  had  not  lived
         together."

11.  Although the appellant's representative was told that  the  appellant's
    wife  could  give  further  evidence  to  clarify  the  position   that
    opportunity was not taken up.

12.  In paragraphs 42 onwards the judge set out some  relevant  law  and  in
    particular quoted from the judgment in N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ
    1094.  It was clear that he was also  aware  of  the  judgments  in  AM
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, JO (Uganda) [2010] EWCA Civ 10 and AD Lee v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 348.  Indeed he also quoted from the judgment  of  Laws
    LJ in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.

13.  In paragraphs 55 onwards the  judge  set  out  his  assessment  of  the
    evidence.  He started by stating that  he  did  not  believe  that  the
    appellant and his wife "were entirely frank with us".  He  stated  that
    it was clear that the story put forward by the wife in support  of  her
    application for indefinite leave differs substantially from that before
    the Tribunal.  It was stated that there was a  stark  contrast  between
    the claim and that the couple had been living together for  many  years
    and the claim put forward by the wife at her appeal that they were  not
    living together and she was a dependant of her brother and his wife.

14.  Judge Mayall stated that therefore the evidence  should  be  approached
    with caution. However, he went on to  say  that  the  evidence  pointed
    towards the fact that whatever may have been the position in  the  past
    the couple were living together as a family unit with their child.

15.  He did, in paragraph 57 state:-

         "In these circumstances we are prepared to accept that this  family
         unit does now exist as a family all  living  together  as  husband,
         wife and child.  We think it more likely that the evidence that was
         given before Immigration Judge White was false.  We  bear  in  mind
         that it was necessary for the wife to establish the dependence upon
         the EEA national which would have been much more difficult  if  the
         picture had been presented of her living together with her  husband
         and child."

16.  However, Judge Mayall stated that the child was not at  fault  and  did
    have British citizenship and that it was accepted that they  all  lived
    together as a family unit.

17.  Having accepted the appellant was fully involved in  the  life  of  his
    child and had  childcare responsibilities as his wife was working,  the
    judge stated that there was a very  serious  offence.   He  noted  drug
    paraphernalia was found in the appellant's home where he claimed to  be
    living with his wife and child but noted, however, that the trial judge
    had accepted the appellant's conduct was totally out of character.

18.  The trial judge, he stated had found that the appellant had been  duped
    by someone at the time he was estranged from his  wife  and  miserable,
    who had lured him into taking cocaine and then after the appellant  had
    reconciled with his wife and freed himself from his addiction, had come
    back and threatened him and demanding money from  him.   The  appellant
    had foolishly agreed to take possession of the drugs to hold  for  this
    other person in return for that person to stop pursuing him.

19.  The judge accepted the appellant had cooperated fully.   He  had  given
    himself up to the police and had never attempted to  hide  or  minimise
    his role.

20.  The pre-sentence  report  indicated  the  risk  of  the  appellant  re-
    offending was low.  The judge went on  to  state  that  the  letter  of
    refusal was contradictory in that it accepted it would be  unreasonable
    to expect their J to leave Britain but the reason the  appellant  could
    be deported was use there was another family member  who  was  able  to
    care for him.  He noted that the letter had said that should they  wish
    it was open to the appellant's wife to return to Colombia with him.

21.  In paragraph 65 he stated that:-

         "It was contended that there were two alternatives  i.e.  that  the
         mother could remain to look after J in the UK  or  that  the  whole
         family could relocate.  This seemed, to us, to be inconsistent with
         the acceptance that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  J,  as  a
         British citizen, to leave the UK".


    Having accepted however that the appellant could not  come  within  the
    provisions of paragraphs 399A or 399B and that the appellant could  not
    qualify under the private life provisions,  Judge  Mayall  stated  that
    that was not the end of the matter.  He stated:-


         "Indeed it is strictly immaterial whether he meets  the  provisions
         of Rule 399  or  not.   The  sole  issue  is  whether  one  of  the
         exceptions applies.  The only exception that could  possibly  apply
         is that to remove him would be an unlawful  interference  with  his
         Article 8 rights."

22.  Having stated that  he  was  applying  the  guidance  set  out  in  the
    judgment of Laws LJ in SS (Nigeria) he stated that the interests of the
    child as a matter of primary importance had to  be  balanced  with  the
    "great weight which the 2007  Act  attributes  to  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals".  Having found that this was not an easy exercise he
    stated that it would not be reasonable to expect J to leave Britain  as
    he was born here  and  is  a  British  citizen.   He  stated  the  only
    realistic alternative is that the appellant is deported and his  mother
    stays to look after J.  That would split the family and remove the bond
    between father and child and would not be in J's best interests.

23.  He went on to state:-

         "Sometimes the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals
         requires that.  This may  be  especially  so  if  the  father,  for
         example, is a poor role model to the child.  There is some evidence
         of that given that drugs paraphernalia were  found  in  the  family
         home.  We have, however, found that, at least now, the appellant is
         a good father.  There is an obvious strong bond between the  father
         and the child.  In addition there is an obvious strong bond between
         the appellant and his wife.  Taking into account the fact that this
         appears, at least, to be one-off offence and that we have concluded
         that there is a low risk of further offending we have  reached  the
         conclusion that the public interest, in this particular case,  does
         not require that the family be split up in that way."


24.  The appeal was  therefore allowed on human rights grounds.

25.  The Secretary of State appealed stating that the Tribunal  had  applied
    a two stage test which  was  clearly  wrong.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    referred to the judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  quoting
    at length from that judgment.

26.  The second ground of appeal stated that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    give reasons or adequate reasons for finding that the appellant's  case
    was exceptional and that therefore the  appeal  should  be  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds.

27.  It was submitted that "exceptional" meant  circumstances  in  which  if
    the requirements of the Rules had not been met refusal would result  in
    an unjustifiably harsh outcome.   Reference was  made  to  the  Supreme
    Court's judgment in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the  Italian  Republic
    (Genoa) [2012] UKSC and in particular to the judgment of Lady  Hale  in
    which she had stated at paragraph 32:-

         "The second main criticism of the approach in later cases  is  that
         the courts have not been examining carefully the nature and  extent
         of the interference in family life. In  focussing  on  'some  quite
         exceptionally compelling feature' (para 56 in  Norris),  they  have
         fallen into the trap identified by Lord Mance, tending  'to  divert
         attention from consideration of the potential impact of extradition
         on the particular persons involved .  .  .  towards  a  search  for
         factors (particularly external factors) which can  be  regarded  as
         out of the run of the mill' (para  109).  Some  particularly  grave
         consequences are not out of the run of the mill at all. Once again,
         the test is always whether the gravity  of  the  interference  with
         family life is justified by the  gravity  of  the  public  interest
         pursued (see also Lord Wilson, at para 152).  Exceptionality  is  a
         prediction, just as it was in R (Razgar) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27 and  not  a  test.  We  are  all
         agreed upon that."


28.  It was submitted that it was only in  exceptional   circumstances  that
    removal   would   result   in    unjustifiably    harsh    consequences
    notwithstanding the public interest in removal and that the  new  Rules
    would not achieve an Article 8 compliant result.  It was submitted that
    it was not exceptional circumstances just because the criteria set  out
    in the family and private life provisions of the Immigration Rules  had
    been missed by a small margin.

29.  The grounds went on to state that the Tribunal had  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons as to why there were exceptional reasons as to why the
    appellant, his wife and child could  not  continue  their  family  life
    elsewhere.  It was submitted there were no reasons  why  the  wife  and
    child could not relocate to Colombia.

30.  Reference was made to SS (Nigeria) where it was stated that an  Article
    8 claim made in reliance  of  the  interests  of  a  child  of  British
    citizenship by a foreign criminal seeking  to  risk  deportation  under
    Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007  needed  to  be  very  strong  to
    prevail given the pressing public interest in  removal  and  the  great
    weight  to  be  attached  to  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
    Moreover there is nothing to support the Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    appellant was at low  risk  of  re-offending.   There  are  no  reasons
    provided for their finding that the appellant had  addressed  his  drug
    habit which was the cause of his offending and  therefore  it  remained
    that he was at risk of re-offending.

31.  In his submissions Mr Bramble accepted that the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal had been promulgated some  time  before  the  judgment  in  MF
    (Nigeria) had been issued but it was still correct  that  the  Tribunal
    were wrong to consider  that  there  should  be  a  two-step  approach.
    Having identified that the appellant could not succeed under the Rules,
    the Tribunal should have looked at  what  the  Rules  stated  regarding
    exceptionality rather than merely going on  to  the  Razgar  test.   He
    argued that there was a failure to give adequate reasons.  The Tribunal
    had ignored the way in which the  appellant's  wife  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain and that she had ties to Colombia  to  which
    she had travelled as recently as 2011.  They had not taken into account
    the age of the child and had not stated why it would be detrimental for
    him to return to Colombia.  They had not  been  able  to  identify  why
    there was a claim to be a low risk of re-offending.  The  Tribunal  had
    ignored the importance  of  what  had  been  said  by  Laws  LJ  in  SS
    (Nigeria).  In paragraph 46 of that judgment Laws LJ  had  stated  that
    the more  pressing  public  interest  in  removal  or  deportation  the
    stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is  to  prevail".   At
    paragraph 48 Laws LJ had stated:-

         "48. Where  such  potential  deportees  have  raised  claims  under
             Article 8, seeking to resist deportation  by  relying  on  the
             interests of a child or children having British citizenship, I
             think with respect that insufficient attention has  been  paid
             to the weight to be attached,  in  virtue  of  its  origin  in
             primary  legislation,  to  the  policy  of  deporting  foreign
             criminals. In Sanade the UT observed  'the  more  serious  the
             offending,  the  stronger  is  the   case   for   deportation'
             (paragraph 48). With respect that is no doubt  right;  but  it
             applies as readily to a case where the offender is not subject
             to automatic deportation under s.32 of the 2007  Act  and  his
             removal  is  at  the  Secretary  of  State's  discretion.   In
             Strasbourg,  within  the  �ner/Maslov  criteria  we   find   a
             comparable reference to 'the nature  and  seriousness  of  the
             offence committed by the applicant'.
         49.  These references say nothing  about  the  policy's  origin  in
             primary legislation. The policy's source, however,  is  as  we
             have seen one of the drivers of the breadth of  the  decision-
             maker's margin of discretion when the proportionality  of  its
             application in the particular case  is  being  considered.  In
             relation to foreign criminals the point was almost alive in AP
             (Trinidad & Tobago) [2011] EWCA Civ 551, referred to in Sanade
             at paragraph 41,  in  which  Carnwath  LJ,  as  he  then  was,
             observed at paragraph 44:
                  'As I have said, Parliamentary endorsement is  arguably  a
                  matter which  should  be  taken  into  account  in  giving
                  greater weight to such factors when drawing the balance of
                  proportionality under article  8.  ...it  seems  a  little
                  surprising... that this apparently definitive statement by
                  Parliament has made no difference in  practice,  at  least
                  where any form of private or family life is involved.'...
         54.  I would draw particular attention to the  provision  contained
             in s.33(7): 'section 32(4) applies despite the application  of
             Exception  1...',  that  is  to  say,  a  foreign   criminal's
             deportation   remains   conducive   to   the    public    good
             notwithstanding his successful reliance on Article 8.  I  said
             at paragraph 46 that while the  authorities  demonstrate  that
             there is no rule of exceptionality for Article  8,  they  also
             clearly show that the more pressing  the  public  interest  in
             removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim  under
             Article 8 if it is to prevail.  The  pressing  nature  of  the
             public interest here is vividly informed by the fact  that  by
             Parliament's  express  declaration  the  public  interest   is
             injured if the criminal's deportation is not effected. Such  a
             result could in my judgment only be justified by a very strong
             claim indeed."
32.  Mr Bramble then asked me to find that the Tribunal  had  identified  no
    such compelling factors and therefore to find  that  they  had  made  a
    material error of law.

33.  In reply Ms Ukachi-Lois stated that the Tribunal  had,  in  any  event,
    applied the two stage approach in that they  had  considered  both  the
    Rules and the appellant under  the  Convention  which  indeed  was  the
    approach asserted in the Tribunal determination in MF (Nigeria) in  the
    Upper Tribunal - the relevant authority at the time  the  determination
    was promulgated.

34.  The tribunal were entitled to rely on the lack of risk of  re-offending
    given the pre-sentence report which was in the bundle and at  paragraph
    63 they had set out the evidence on which  they  relied  regarding  the
    appellant kicking his drug habit.  He had undertaken  various  relevant
    courses and the evidence of London Probation Trust was that he  was  no
    longer an addict.  Similarly the evidence from the prison was positive.



35.  It was not the case that the Tribunal had incorrectly  interpreted  the
    concept of  exceptionality.   The  reality  was  that  removal  of  the
    appellant would be unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant's
    child.  It would be disproportionate and the Tribunal were  correct  to
    so find.  They had taken into account the fact that the  appellant  was
    fully involved with the relationship of the child and  had  a  relevant
    parenting role. They pointed out that the Secretary of State had in any
    event accepted that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  J  to  leave
    Britain.

36.  She asked me to find that the Tribunal had looked at  the  totality  of
    the evidence and find that they had properly  taken  into  account  all
    relevant factors before reaching their decision which was fully open to
    them on the evidence.

Discussion

37.  I find that there are material errors of law in  the  determination  of
    the Tribunal.  The reality is that Judge Mayall appeared, having  found
    that the appellant could not qualify under paragraphs 398  and  399  of
    the Rules to have discounted the  fact  that  that  was  the  case  and
    immediately gone on to the issue  of  proportionality  under  the  five
    stage Razgar process.  That was clearly wrong.  He had not  taken  into
    account what was laid down in legislation and indeed had  not  followed
    the clear guidance in the judgment in SS which  stated  that  the  more
    serious the offence the stronger needed to be the basis of the  Article
    8 claim.

38.  The only fact which Judge Mayall identified was  that  J  was  British.
    He did not appear to take into account in the proportionality  exercise
    that both J's parents were Colombian, that it appeared that either  the
    appellant had not been living with his wife at the time of  her  appeal
    or that she had misled  the  First-tier  Judge  who  heard  her  appeal
    against the refusal of the claim that she was a family member of an EEA
    national and had further ignored the fact that the appellant's wife had
    travelled back to Colombia as recently as 2011.  The  reality  is  that
    there appears no reason why, if  the  appellant  is  deported  and  the
    appellant and his wife decide that they should  remain  together  as  a
    family unit with their child that the appellant's wife and  son  should
    not accompany him to Colombia.  While,  of  course,  the  Secretary  of
    State accepts that it is not reasonable to claim that J  should  go  to
    Colombia that is rather different from a conclusion  that  his  parents
    could not make a decision that it is in  his  best  interests  that  he
    remains part of a family unit with two parents returning to the country
    of nationality of both his parents.  Judge Mayall did not consider  the
    evidence relating to circumstances in Colombia and  in  particular  the
    section relating to education in Colombia  which  is  set  out  in  the
    reasons letter.

39.  The Tribunal did not appear to place weight on the decision  to  deport
    based on the provisions set out in Section 32 of the 2007 Act.

40.  I therefore consider that there were material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal and  for  that  reason  I  set
    aside the decision.  It is appropriate that this appeal proceeds  to  a
    hearing afresh on all issues.

Directions

1.   The appeal is to proceed  to  a  hearing  afresh  on  all  issues.   It
    remains in the Upper Tribunal.

2.   Fourteen  days  before  the  hearing  a  skeleton  argument  is  to  be
    submitted together  with  a  bundle  of  all  documents  on  which  the
    appellant wishes to rely.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

