

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00469/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4th July 2019 and 12th November 2019   |On 18th November 2019          |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                MAURICHE [B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (4th July 2019);
                    Mr T Melvin (12th November 2019), Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


         1. In a decision promulgated on 4th July  2019  I  set  aside  the
            decision of First-tier Tribunal judge Bell  for  the  following
            reasons:


                      1.In a decision  promulgated  on  11  December  2017,
                      First-tier  Tribunal  judge  Bell  allowed  Mr  [B]'s
                      appeal  against  the  decision  to  deport  made   in
                      accordance with regulation 23(6)(b) and regulation 27
                      of   the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
                      Regulations 2016. She allowed the appeal on the basis
                      that Mr [B], date of birth 31st  March  1996,  was  a
                      British citizen by descent and that even if  he  were
                      not, he  would  qualify  for  the  highest  level  of
                      protection against deportation because  he  had  been
                      resident in the UK for over 10 years.


                      2.The SSHD was granted permission to  appeal  on  the
                      grounds that it was arguable that in the  absence  of
                      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that Mr [B]'s
                      mother  (a  Dutch  citizen)  and  father  (a  British
                      Citizen) had been married at the time of  his  birth,
                      the finding that Mr [B]  was  a  British  Citizen  by
                      descent was legally flawed. Secondly  permission  was
                      granted on the grounds that it was arguable that  the
                      judge  had  failed  to  properly  consider  and  make
                      findings on whether, if he were an  EU  national,  he
                      was entitled  to  imperative  grounds  of  protection
                      pursuant to his residence in the UK.


                      3.Mr [B] had been deported prior to  the  hearing  of
                      his First-tier Tribunal appeal. So far as I am aware,
                      there is no forwarding address and he  was  not  made
                      aware of the outcome of his appeal before the  First-
                      tier Tribunal,  the  application  for  permission  to
                      appeal made by the SSHD  or  the  hearing  before  me
                      today.


                      4.It is  plain  from  the  file  that  there  was  no
                      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal judge that Mr
                      [B]'s mother and father were married at the  time  of
                      his birth. The judge has erred in law in finding that
                      Mr [B] is a British Citizen by descent in the absence
                      of such  evidence.  That  he  may  have  been  or  be
                      eligible  for  registration  as  a  British   Citizen
                      because he has a British citizen father does not,  of
                      itself result in a finding that he is such a Citizen.


                      5.In so far as whether as a Dutch citizen the Mr  [B]
                      had acquired imperative grounds  of  protection  from
                      deportation, the First-tier Tribunal judge considered
                      this only by referring to his length of residence  in
                      the UK and furthermore has not considered whether  he
                      had acquired a permanent right of residence.


                      6.For these reasons, the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
                      has erred in law such that the decision is set  aside
                      to be remade.


                      Remaking the decision


                      7.Mr [B] has not had an opportunity  to  put  forward
                      his arguments in support of a claim  that  he  should
                      not be deported. It is not  apparent  from  the  file
                      where he is or whether he can be contacted.


                      8.Mr Walker very fairly said that he would make  such
                      enquiries as he could to establish whether there  was
                      an address for Mr  [B]  in  Holland.  There  are  two
                      possible sources, from the file, who  may  have  some
                      knowledge of his whereabouts and  the  Tribunal  will
                      attempt to contact them  (an  aunt  and  Peterborough
                      City Council) to  establish  whether  they  have  any
                      continuing  contact  or   knowledge   of   Mr   [B]'s
                      whereabouts.


             Remaking the decision


         2. The Tribunal established the appellant's last known address  in
            Holland from solicitors instructed by the appellant in the past
            in  a  non-immigration  matter.   Although   details   of   the
            appellant's current address  were  sought  from  his  aunt,  Ms
            Bussell, no response was received from her. The  appellant  was
            sent Notice of the Hearing on 12th November 2019; his aunt  was
            sent notice of the  hearing  to  her  last  known  address.  No
            correspondence was received from either  the  appellant  or  Ms
            Bussell.  In  these  circumstances  I  concluded  that  it  was
            appropriate to proceed with the appeal in his absence.


         3. Peterborough City Council Social Services confirmed in  writing
            that the appellant had been known to Children's Services  since
            August 2010. He was  allocated  a  Personal  Advisor  with  the
            Peterborough Leaving Care Team to provide  the  appellant  with
            advice and guidance up to his 21st birthday or longer if he was
            in education. Their records indicate that he had been  resident
            in the UK since 2004 when he arrived in  the  UK  from  Holland
            with his British Citizen father. The last  known  address  that
            Children's Services had for him was HM Prison Lincoln. On  15th
            July 2019 they wrote to the Tribunal and said their involvement
            with the appellant ceased on 7th April 2017  when  "involvement
            was closed".

         4. The appellant was convicted on 6th March 2017 of  burglary  and
            sentenced  to  21   months   imprisonment.    The   deportation
            proceedings   commenced   after   Peterborough    had    ceased
            involvement. I note that  there  is  a  detailed  psychological
            report on file that predates the criminal  conviction,  but  it
            appears that this did not result in any continuing  involvement
            by Peterborough after the appellant reached the age of 21.

         5. I am satisfied the appellant had  permanent  residence  at  the
            date of his arrest and conviction. He had been  resident  as  a
            child in the UK from at least 2004 and, given  the  involvement
            of Peterborough and that he was subject to care proceedings  on
            2 occasions up to the age of 18, there is no evidence  that  he
            left the UK for any prolonged period of time.  It  is  possible
            that he had established the third level  of  protective  rights
            and that his conviction and imprisonment had not  broken  those
            integrated links: he had been in the UK since he  was  a  young
            child; had attended school and  college  in  the  UK  and  this
            offence was his first offence. However, I have little  evidence
            of any other links; his aunt has not given evidence other  than
            a written statement to the First-tier  Tribunal  which  is  not
            particularly detailed.  I  cannot  therefore  on  the  evidence
            before me make a finding that the  appellant  has  acquired  10
            years residence such that he is entitled to the  highest  level
            of protection.

         6. Nevertheless, as I indicated to Mr Melvin at the  hearing,  the
            evidence before me does confirm that he  has  been  in  the  UK
            exercising Treaty Rights; he  came  as  the  dependant  of  his
            father from Holland (who had been working there since 1989) and
            undertook primary and secondary education in  the  UK.  He  had
            thus acquired  permanent  residence  at  the  date  of  arrest,
            conviction and deportation.

         7. Mr Melvin did not demur from this but submitted that because he
            has now been out of the  UK  for  more  than  two  years,  such
            permanent residence has been lost. The appellant  was  deported
            on 5th October 2017. According to the First-tier Tribunal judge
            she was informed by the presenting officer  that  there  was  a
            note on the file that he was not to be deported  prior  to  the
            hearing of his appeal but that note was overlooked  because  an
            earlier  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had   been
            adjourned. It therefore  seems  that  the  deportation  of  the
            appellant prior to his hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
            was an error.

         8. In those circumstances, namely that the appellant did not leave
            voluntarily but was removed from the UK  despite  an  agreement
            with the respondent that he would not be  removed  pending  the
            outcome of his appeal I take the view that the two year  period
            does not begin to bite until the statutory appeal  process  has
            been concluded.

         9. Mr Melvin also submitted that even if  the  appellant  retained
            his permanent residence, there was no evidence that he had  not
            continued to commit further crimes in Holland. That is correct;
            but likewise there is no evidence  that  he  has  continued  to
            commit crimes. It would have been open  to  the  respondent  to
            establish whether the appellant had acquired a criminal  record
            in Holland but on the evidence before  me,  the  appellant  has
            committed only one crime in the lengthy period of time  he  was
            in the UK and there was no evidence in the psychologist  report
            or other evidence that he had a propensity  to  commit  further
            crime.

        10. Accordingly, taking into account his lengthy residence, that he
            had at the time of the deportation  no  retained  knowledge  of
            Holland I am satisfied that there are  no  serious  grounds  of
            public policy or  security  such  as  require  the  appellant's
            deportation from the UK. The decision to deport  the  appellant
            is disproportionate.

        11. I allow his appeal against deportation.

        12. Although the appellant's former solicitors have said  they  are
            not acting for him in connection with immigration  matters,  it
            may be that they have some contact  with  him  in  relation  to
            other matters. I have therefore  authorised  this  decision  be
            sent to them as well as to the  last  known  addresses  of  the
            appellant and his aunt.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


                                    Date 14th November 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
