
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00345/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2018                            |On 15 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  RUBEN [C]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Radford, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
(Oxford)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge G  J  Ferguson  who  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal under Regulation 36 of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 with reference to a  deportation  order
    dated 4 May 2018 by reference to section 33(4) that his  removal  would
    breach his rights under the EU Treaties.


 2. The respondent is a national of Portugal born  30  September  1993  and
    arrived in the United Kingdom with his mother in July 2008 at  the  age
    of 14.  He was enrolled in a secondary school which he attended between
    September 2008 and July 2012.  He thereafter pursued  tertiary  studies
    at Greenwich Management School between 2013  and  2015.   He  abandoned
    those studies and moved to Cardiff where he was  convicted  on  24  May
    2016 at Cardiff Crown Court for possession of heroin and crack  cocaine
    with intent to supply. He was sentenced to 54 months' imprisonment.


 3. The FtT judge heard evidence from the respondent  and  his  mother.  He
    also had before him the sentencing judge's remarks as well as an  OASys
    assessment dated 28 October 2016.


 4. After recording the evidence  and  submissions  as  well  as  directing
    himself as to the applicable law, the judge set out his conclusions  in
    the following terms:


         "21. Having considered the evidence about this issue,  Mr  [C]  has
             established that he does accept that  he  was  guilty  of  the
             criminal offence for which he was sentenced.  There  is  first
             of all the significant  evidence  in  the  judge's  sentencing
             remarks that he "pleaded guilty at the first  opportunity"  to
             the offence.  It would be difficult in those circumstances  to
             believe that he was not guilty.  He maintained at the  hearing
             that he accepted his guilt.  The dispute appears genuinely  to
             be the characterisation of the level of his  involvement  with
             the crime.  The  sentencing  remarks  show  that  his  counsel
             accepted on his behalf, and the court treated him, as having a
             "significant role" within Category 2.  This  is  distinguished
             within the sentencing remarks from a "leading role" which is a
             higher category, Mr [C] says that he accepted the role he  had
             but did not accept that he had a leading role because  he  did
             not have such role.


         22.  This conclusion that he  accepts  his  guilt  is  not  reached
             because Mr [C] was a truthful witness in all that he said.  He
             was not being truthful about the level of  his  dependence  on
             his mother.  By the time he left home and moved to Cardiff  he
             was not dependant on his mother in any way: she did  not  even
             know that he had  been  arrested,  tried  or  convicted  of  a
             serious offence until about one year after his conviction when
             she found out via Facebook.


         23.  The conclusion is instead reached on the basis that he pleaded
             guilty and that whether the OASys report records his  position
             accurately or not, it is clear in its conclusion that he is  a
             low risk to the public.  The respondent  included  at  section
             "L" of the bundle a guide published by the  National  Offender
             Management Service titled  "an  aide  for  interpreting  OASys
             information in Immigration Appeals".   This  uses  static  and
             dynamic risk factors to estimate the risk of  reoffending  and
             the seriousness of any harm.  It is based on "the  information
             passed to them by other agencies and specialist tools and  the
             application that there will be  appropriate  controls  in  the
             community to manage  and  monitor  the  offender.   If  he  is
             assessed as a low risk even though it was believed he had  not
             accepted any wrongdoing, then the fact that  he  has  accepted
             wrongdoing must diminish the risk even further.


         24.  The fact that Mr [C] has not been able to undergo any  courses
             in prison which are directly linked to rehabilitation is  also
             a factor of little weight in the conclusion that he is  a  low
             risk.    Although   such   courses   may   have   helped   his
             rehabilitation, he was not given the opportunity to  take  any
             of these courses, and the fact that he had not  was  known  to
             the probation officer who  prepared  the  OASys  report.   The
             National Offender Management Service guide states at page  L2:
             "Everyone suggests that offenders in  the  Low  likelihood  of
             reoffending band  are  unlikely  to  benefit  from  additional
             interventions to reduce their reoffending  such  as  cognitive
             skills programmes".


         25.  There is therefore no significant reason on which to  reach  a
             different conclusion to the comprehensive  assessment  of  the
             OASys report.  The level of risk of reoffending and of  future
             harm does not meet the "serious grounds" test.  The  appellant
             has therefore discharged the burden of proof on  him  to  show
             that there are no serious grounds to establish that  he  is  a
             present,  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
             public.   The  outcome  therefore  does  not  depend  on   any
             assessment of the proportionality of the decision."


 5. Permission to appeal has been granted on two grounds of challenge.  The
    first is headed "Material misdirection in  law".   In  support,  it  is
    argued in the grounds that the judge had failed to adequately  consider
    the respondent's significant role in the offence and his potential risk
    of reoffending.  Although the respondent had accepted he played a  role
    in a "narcotic exercise", he had nevertheless sought  to  minimise  how
    extensive that was.  The fact that the respondent did not fully  accept
    his guilt made the present threat and risk of serious  harm  even  more
    acute.  The respondent had also failed to deal with the claimed reasons
    for offending which related to earning money  to  fund  his  education.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed   to   apply   the   established
    jurisprudence and so erred.  There was  no  evidence  the  respondent's
    rehabilitation might  not  take  place  in  Portugal  and  particularly
    pertinent is paragraph 7(g) of Schedule 1 to the Regulations which sets
    out that offences relating to drugs are an example of an offence likely
    to cause harm to society.


 6. Ground 2  asserts  a  failure  to  take  into  account  and/or  resolve
    conflicts of fact on a material matter.  It is asserted that the  judge
    failed to consider the respondent's conduct in seeking to  mislead  the
    tribunal through claims that he had no family in Portugal and  that  he
    was dependent on his  mother  whilst  in  Cardiff  were  false.  It  is
    contended that  the  respondent's  deportation  to  Portugal  would  be
    proportionate.


 7. Mr McGirr clarified that neither ground was a rationality challenge. In
    respect of both, he  contended  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons.  As to the first  ground,  after  discussion  on  the
    evidence that was before the tribunal, he accepted that the  judge  had
    considered the respondent's denial of responsibility  when  giving  his
    reasons for his finding that the  level  of  risk  of  reoffending  and
    future harm did not meet the "serious grounds" test.  As to the  second
    ground,  he  also  accepted  that  the  judge  had  factored  into  his
    reasoning, the respondent's untruthfulness.


 8. As a consequence, Miss Radford had little to say by  way  of  response.
    She argued the decision was rationally reached by the judge  for  which
    adequate reasons had been given in particular at [23] to  [25]  of  the
    decision in concluding that the threshold had not been met.


 9. In our judgement Mr McGirr was correct to acknowledge  that  the  judge
    had taken account of the respondent's denial of responsibility and  his
    untruthfulness in his reasons.  The OASys report notes at 2.1:


         "Following police interview Mr [C] states that there was sufficient
         evidence linking him  to  all  three  offences  for  which  he  was
         subsequently charged  and  sentenced  to  4  years  and  6  months'
         imprisonment.


         Mr [C] denies having any part of the offence."


10. At 2.14 it is recorded:


         "There is no pattern in Mr [C]'s offending as  this  is  his  first
         conviction.  However there is a clear escalation in relation to the
         magnitude of the offence.  Mr [C] understands the severity  of  the
         offence but remains to deny and minimise his involvement."


11. In addition, at 11.7 it is recorded:


         "Mr [C] informed me during interview that he is fully aware of  the
         consequences of breaking the law, however, states that due  to  him
         not having played any part in the  offence  did  not  envisage  him
         being imprisoned."


12. Finally, the author of the  report  sets  out  issues  about  attitudes
    contributing to risks of offending and harm.   These  include  evidence
    that suggests he  is  involved  in  a  criminal  sub-culture,  that  he
    displayed a positive attitude towards staff and there was  no  evidence
    to suggest  he  would  not  comply  with  any  supervision  or  licence
    conditions.  The respondent indicates that he generally  supported  the
    values of society but it was nevertheless clear that he had "...  blind
    spots particularly relating to his offending  in  this  instance".   At
    12.6 and 12.8 the author notes:


         "Mr [C] denies any direct involvement with the current offence.


         Mr [C] has  stated  that  he  will  complete  work  geared  towards
         reducing offending behaviour, but as stated  above  he  denies  any
         direct involvement with the current offence."


13. The judge noted at [18]  of  his  decision  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position that the risk of harm did not take account of  the  fact  that
    the respondent showed no remorse and denied any wrong doing.   Even  if
    the risk of reoffending was low, the risk, if he reoffended, was of  an
    offence which would cause serious harm.


14. In the course of his submissions, Mr McGirr raised  concerns  with  the
    rationality of the probation officer's thinking, an unusual approach as
    it was relied on by the Secretary of State who has the burden of  proof
    in this appeal.  There was a debate over the  accuracy  of  the  report
    recorded at [6] and [7] of the judge's decision as follows:


         "6.  He was asked  by  the  presenting  officer  about  the  answer
             recorded in the OASys report at 2.11 on K8-K9 where he  denied
             any part in the offence and his answer was  that  he  had  not
             said what was recorded there.  His  answer  at  K22  was  "not
             quite true.  I said that I knew about the consequences.  I not
             remember saying I had nothing to do with it."   He  was  asked
             again why he  denied  the  offence  when  the  criminal  court
             concluded that he a significant role and  he  said  again:  "I
             never denied that I was involved in this.  I was denying  that
             I had a leading role, the judge said I had a significant role.
              I always accepted that I had a role.  I do accept that I  had
             a significant role."


         7.   Mr [C] said that there was another error in the  OASys  report
             at K12 4.2 which recorded that he had been employed in  retail
             at his father's shop.  He confirmed that he had never met  his
             father and did not know why the report mentioned  his  father.
             He then described  how  he  had  started  university  studying
             business management but dropped out in 2014  after  the  first
             year and moved to Cardiff in 2015 where he had become involved
             with selling the drugs which led to his conviction.   He  said
             that he had still been dependant on his mother when he was  in
             Cardiff and would not be able to live and work in Portugal."


15. Mr McGirr did not pursue any argument that deficiencies in  the  report
    meant that it could not be relied on as an indicator  of  the  risk  of
    reoffending, an understandable position in  the  light  of  the  report
    being the basis on which it was contended the respondent represented  a
    risk.


16. The judge reached no finding on the respondent's claim that what he had
    said to the probation office had not been recorded as it is evident  he
    did not  consider  this  necessary.  He  observed  that  the  focus  of
    submissions at the hearing was the analysis of the OASys report and  he
    acknowledged the  respondent's  denial  in  his  conclusions.  This  is
    revealed in [23]  of  the  decision  in  terms  that  as  the  risk  of
    reoffending identified by the Probation Officer was predicated  on  the
    respondent not accepting guilt, that  risk  would,  on  that  officer's
    analysis  be  lower  if  (as  the  judge  found)  the  respondent   had
    acknowledged his offending." It cannot be said that the judge failed to
    give adequate reasons or failed  to  take  all  material  matters  into
    account.


17. Turning to the second ground, the statement by the respondent, which he
    adopted at the hearing, indicated that apart from the short  time  that
    he had been living in Cardiff (from 2015) he had always lived with  his
    mother and been dependent upon  her.   Mrs  [C]'s  statement  does  not
    address where the respondent was living after  he  completed  his  High
    School studies in 2012.  The evidence demonstrates that he was pursuing
    courses at Greenwich School of Management after completing his A Levels
    at Epping Forest College.  He had been enrolled in  Greenwich  in  2013
    and was there until 2015.  The judge recorded the evidence given by Mrs
    [C] at the hearing.  This included a statement that her son  had  moved
    out of her home when he was aged 19 and that she did not know where  he
    had lived after that or what he had done.  She did not know that he had
    been sentenced until a year  later  when  she  had  seen  something  on
    Facebook.


18. If this chronology is correct, the respondent moved out of  the  family
    house in 2012, well before  moving  to  Cardiff  in  2015.   The  judge
    acknowledged in [22] of his decision that the respondent had  not  been
    truthful about the level of his dependence on his mother.  The approach
    taken by the judge however was to focus on the respondent's guilty plea
    and the report's conclusion that he was at low risk to the public.   He
    gave adequate reasons for his conclusion that the threshold was not met
    and as with the first ground took all the evidence into account.


19. By way of conclusion the challenge by the Secretary of State is to  the
    adequacy of reasons given by the judge for  his  decision.   Mr  McGirr
    acknowledged that the judge had all the evidence into  account  and  he
    acknowledged that the result was a reasoned one.  Accordingly,  we  are
    satisfied that the Secretary of State has not made out the  grounds  on
    which permission has been granted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date 9 November 2018

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

