
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00349/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 June 2014                                |On 5 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                            DESMOND ADJEI COLEMAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Short, instructed by Migrant Law Partnership
For the Respondents:   Mr Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on 8 April 2014
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd and Dr J O de Barros which dismissed
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision dated 15  February
    2013 to refuse to revoke a deportation order.

Background

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant entered the  UK  in
    2007 as a working holiday maker. He was granted further leave until  24
    October 2009. An application as an  unmarried  partner  failed  and  he
    became an overstayer from 23 March 2010 onwards. It transpired that the
    appellant had exercised deception in the unmarried partner application.
    He was convicted for this and on 4 January 2010  was  sentenced  to  12
    months' imprisonment. On 5 August 2010 a  deportation  order  was  made
    against him. He made  an  asylum  claim  which  was  unsuccessful.   He
    absconded from bail in August 2011, his electronic tag being found in a
    pub, the appellant and his partner maintaining to immigration  services
    that he had been kidnapped. He was re-detained in  July  2012.  He  was
    convicted of making a false representation. On 21 August  2012  he  was
    sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The grounds of appeal maintain that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    give adequate reasons for finding that  the  appellant's  circumstances
    were not "exceptional" such that deportation was disproportionate.

 4. The grounds also maintained that the provisions of MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 did not preclude a full Razgar assessment  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim. The panel were in error in not  conducting
    such an assessment.

 5. The third ground of appeal was that the panel had erred in  the  weight
    given to the appellant's medical condition.

 6. I can deal with these challenges relatively simply. As conceded  by  Ms
    Short, even if a full Razgar assessment was still required, the  appeal
    could  only  succeed   where   the   appellant's   circumstances   were
    "exceptional". This is simply not such a case.

 7. The real substance of the appellant's case centred on his British child
    with his British partner and his partner's two British children from  a
    previous relationship. The First-tier Tribunal  assessed  the  evidence
    concerning the appellant's family life with his partner and  the  three
    children at [37]  to  [48].  That  assessment  took  into  account  the
    material evidence regarding  all  three  children  and  assessed  their
    circumstances, accepting at [41] the "distress of separation"  for  the
    children if the appellant were to be deported and noting that the  best
    interests of the children were a primary factor. It remained  the  case
    that the appellant had lived very little with any of the children, that
    his partner had been able to care for them when he was  in  prison  and
    that the partner's children had a relationship with their birth  father
    in the UK.

 8. The conclusion at [49] that "we do not find exceptional  circumstances"
    came at the end of this consideration of the evidence at [37]  to  [48]
    and it misreads the determination  to  suggest  that  it  is  the  only
    assessment or  comment  of  the  panel  on  whether  the  evidence  was
    sufficient to show exceptional circumstances. The reasoning at [37]  to
    [48] was more than adequate to explain the conclusion that  there  were
    no exceptional circumstances here. Any failure to set  out  a  detailed
    Razgar assessment cannot be material where that is so.  Indeed,  it  is
    difficult to see, however full the assessment, given the limitations of
    the appellant's family life with  the  children,  how  the  fullest  of
    Razgar assessments could have assisted someone with his immigration and
    criminal history.

 9. As regards the third ground, at [32] the panel accepted the evidence as
    to the appellant's mental illness.  At  [42]  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    again addressed the appellant's health and were correct in stating that
    his condition was controlled by medication and that  the  evidence  did
    not show a lack of such medication in Ghana. The panel stated  at  [47]
    that in reaching their conclusion they took "seriously" the appellant's
    health  issues.  Having  taken  into  account  the  material   evidence
    concerning the appellant's health, indeed, finding that it  was  to  be
    weighed "seriously" it cannot be correct that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    can be said to have erred  in  law  in  its  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 4 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
