
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00226/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 November 2015                        |On 8 May 2017                     |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    Y- S-
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original Appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I make this order  because
    the appellant claims to be a refugee and there is always  a  risk  (not
    necessarily a strong one) in case of this  kind  that  publicity  could
    enhance the claim.

2.   The appellant is a Somali national who was born in 1993.  He has  lived
    in the United Kingdom since he was  11  years  old  having  arrived  in
    September 2004 as the son of a refugee.

3.   He appeals the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent on  24  January  2013  to
    make him the subject of a deportation order.

4.   Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy who said at paragraph 2 of his
    reasons:

         "I consider that it is, just, arguable that  the  determination  is
         lacking in reasoning and does not show that the Judge of the First-
         tier Tribunal gave anxious scrutiny to the facts of this  case.   I
         will therefore grant permission to appeal."

5.   I therefore consider particularly carefully the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

6.   This shows that the appellant was in trouble following  his  conviction
    at the Crown Court at Woolwich for  possessing  a  Class  A  controlled
    drug, namely heroin, with intent to supply.  He  was  sentenced  to  24
    months' detention for two offences of possession with intent to  supply
    committed on 11 January 2012 and one month for an  offence  of  violent
    disorder committed, before the drugs offences, on 23 March  2011.   All
    sentences were to be served concurrently.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge was critical of the respondent.  She  had
    not produced a copy of the judge's sentencing remarks.  Apparently they
    could not be retrieved.  It is much harder to determine the details  of
    a person's offending  without  the  sentencing  remarks  which  can  be
    expected to be considered, thorough and fair.

8.   The judge referred to the "Section 72  certificate"  which  alludes  to
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
    outlines the circumstances  where  a  refugee  can  lose  international
    protection by reason of his criminal conduct.

9.   The judge lamented the absence of a pre-sentence  report  or  an  OASys
    Report to help him  determine  the  likelihood  of  the  appellant  re-
    offending.

10.  The judge said at paragraph 16:

         "The only  evidence  on  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant
         constitutes a danger to the community is from Mr  Alex  Brown.   He
         adopts his statement at p.A.36.  In it he  states  that  he  is  an
         Education  Assistant  at  the  "Fight  for  Peace  Academy".    His
         statement is dated 18.5.15."


11.  The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  been  accepted  onto  the
    Academy's "Pathway Module Number 2 Education Programme".  This required
    the appellant to study basic English and maths and to work for  a  YMCA
    Personal Trainer's qualification  at  level  2.   He  also  had  to  do
    voluntarily work on the placement at a local gym.  The course  required
    him to attend two days a week for five hours per day and Mr Brown  said
    the appellant had made  "an  excellent  start  on  the  programme"  and
    commended him for his punctuality, attitude,  commitment  and  quality.
    "Fight for Peace" was described as a  boxing  academy  targeting  young
    people at risk.  Mr Brown had known the appellant for just over a year.
     In his opinion he was no threat to the public.  He said that he "Could
    not ask for a better student".

12.  The appellant attributed his criminality to his being a drug  user  and
    submitted that the fact he had kept out of trouble  since  his  release
    from custody on 1 January 2013 was an indication  that  he  was  not  a
    danger to the community.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not  persuaded  by  these  arguments.
    The judge noted that he had not been shown an  OASys  Report.   Neither
    had he been shown that such a report was hard to get or unavailable  to
    the appellant had produced evidence  that  he  had  been  on  a  course
    entitled "substance misuse awareness" he had not produced any  evidence
    that he was drug free.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal  was  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant  had
    rebutted the presumption that his presence constituted a danger to  the
    community.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge then  went  on  to  consider  the  asylum
    claim.  The appellant was interviewed  about  his  asylum  claim  on  6
    October 2014.  He said that he feared returning to Somalia  because  of
    his "tribe".  However he did not know the name of the tribe.   He  also
    feared returning to Somalia because it was a war torn  country  and  he
    had no job or relatives or home there.

16.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the  appellant's  father   had
    identified himself as a member of  the  Qalinshube  clan  part  of  the
    Benadire tribal group.  The appellant's father claimed to have  been  a
    goldsmith in Mogadishu.

17.  The judge found that the appellant would be returned  to  Mogadishu  as
    an "ordinary civilian" within the meaning  of  the  terms  in  MOJ  and
    Others (return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC).   The
    judge found that  this  case  decided  that  a  civilian  returning  to
    Mogadishu after a period of absence  will  not  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or other serious harm either by reason of having  lived  in
    the European country or at all.  The case also determined that although
    Mogadishu is far from peaceful there is not so much social unrest  that
    the person about to be returned could rely  on  Article  15(c)  of  the
    European Union Qualification Directive.

18.  Paragraphs 34 and 35 of  the  Decision  are  particularly  interesting.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge recognised that, following MOJ, a  person
    returning to Mogadishu without family support might  face  difficulties
    and particular care was needed in assessing such a person's case.   The
    judge then said at paragraph 35:

         "Taking those circumstances in turn, the appellant has been  absent
         from Mogadishu for eleven years.  On the evidence,  I  accept  that
         the appellant has no close family  in  Mogadishu.   However,  there
         must be members of the Benadire clan there."


19.  At paragraphs 36, 37  and  38  the  judge  explained  that  his  family
    (presumably in  the  United  Kingdom)  could  afford  to  maintain  the
    appellant in Mogadishu for the foreseeable future.  The  judge  reached
    this conclusion having noted from the  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    elderly  grandmother  had  remained  in  Mogadishu  on  her  own.   The
    appellant's mother had supported her mother by sending remittances  and
    US$60 a month was sufficient.  In July  2013  the  appellant's  mother,
    with others, had gone to Dubai.  The appellant's  maternal  grandmother
    was ill in Somalia and was flown to Dubai for hospital treatment.   The
    appellant's mother and siblings spent about  two  months  there  before
    returning to the United Kingdom.  The appellant's grandmother  returned
    to Somalia but, sadly, died soon afterwards.

20.  The judge said at paragraph 38:

         "From this evidence, I concluded that the costs of maintaining  the
         appellant in Mogadishu would be relatively modest.   I  found  that
         the family could afford to maintain him there for  the  foreseeable
         future."


21.  The judge then went on to say that given the appellant was young,  able
    bodied and a competent English speaker who had not lost his ability  to
    speak Somali, he could be expected to get his own job.

22.  The judge did  not  believe  that  the  appellant  needed  humanitarian
    protection but  if  he  would  otherwise  have  been  entitled  he  had
    disqualified himself by reason of committing a serious crime.

23.  The judge then dismissed the appeal with reference to Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

24.  I have considered carefully the very full grounds  settled  by  Mr  Guy
    Davison of Counsel who represented  the  appellant  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing and the submissions  of  Mr  D  Coleman  who  appeared
    before me.

25.  There are really two attacks on the Decision.

26.  The first challenges the finding that the appellant  had  not  rebutted
    the presumption that he was a danger to the community.  The  second  is
    that he can be returned safely to Somalia.

27.  The problem with the finding that the appellant has  not  rebutted  the
    presumption is that there  was  evidence  Mr  Brown  that  praised  the
    appellant.  The evidence was not challenged and  was  not  specifically
    addressed when the judge made his finding.  Associated with this  point
    was the contention that the period of time spent without attracting the
    attention of the police was a valuable indicator about the  appellant's
    alleged changed life.  The period of eighteen months  (or  thereabouts)
    might not seem impressive to persons unfamiliar with  the  difficulties
    drug addicts find in changing their lifestyle but to a person with some
    experience it was, it was suggested, a useful indicator.

28.  These points have merit.   There  is  no  specific  finding  about  the
    evidence of Mr Smith.  I agree that the period  spent  without  further
    trouble is of some significance.  Further Mr Brown gave evidence as  an
    Education Assistant.  His statement was based on a letter dated 18  May
    2015 which does not disclose any professional qualifications.  This  is
    not in any way to devalue Mr Brown's evidence but he was put forward to
    the Tribunal as someone who knew the appellant in an  educational  role
    and spoke well of him.  He was a character  witness  and  his  evidence
    should have been evaluated accordingly.

29.  With respect to the First-tier Tribunal Judge the Decision  would  have
    been better if the judge had made express findings but I  do  not  read
    the Decision as if the judge recorded the evidence and then ignored it.
     He considered it, as he considered the time the  appellant  had  spent
    out of trouble but found it more significant that there was no evidence
    of an objective or scientific kind that confirmed  that  the  appellant
    was drug free.  It was the appellant's case the drugs were his problem.
     He had to rebut a presumption.

30.  Mr Coleman pointed out that the judge's findings do not show any or  at
    least any adequate  consideration  of  the  detailed  evidence  in  the
    statements of close members of the appellant's family about how he  had
    turned round his  life.   Clearly  evidence  from  close  relatives  is
    inherently likely to be biased but that does not make it  dishonest  or
    wrong.  The appellant's close relatives are also likely to be  uniquely
    well placed to opine on how much a person has  changed.   It  is  clear
    from the judge's notes that  he  heard  evidence  from  relatives.   He
    really should have indicated what weight,  if  any,  he  gave  to  that
    evidence and his reasons.

31.  Further, the fact that a person may have rebutted  the  presumption  of
    being a danger to the community in a  sense  that  means  he  would  be
    entitled to keep refugee status if he were at risk does not  mean  that
    he is a refugee and does not mean that he cannot be deported if  he  is
    not a refugee.  Deportation does more than protect the  community  from
    further offences.  It recognises society's disapproval  of  people  who
    break its laws.

32.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  correctly  addressed  himself  to  the
    difficulties a Somali national faces when attempting  to  claim  asylum
    that are identified in MOJ and Others.  He noted  the  developments  in
    the operation of the clan system in Somalia so that people can look  to
    their clans for social support and  found  that  it  was  a  reasonable
    assumption (albeit only an assumption) that "There must be  members  of
    the Benadire  clan  there".   As  an  expert  Tribunal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is surely entitled to know that the  Benadire  (more  commonly
    spelt Benadiri) is  seen  as  a  large  tribal  grouping  albeit  often
    identified as the minority clan.

33.  However the grounds  emphasise  the  need  to  take  care  and  make  a
    reasoned decision which was emphasised in MOJ.  I  can  understand  the
    judge's optimistic finding that the appellant will have the wherewithal
    to establish himself in Somalia.  He does have the advantage of  fluent
    English and I see nothing  wrong  in  the  finding  that  he  has  some
    understanding of Somali because that would be the language of his home.

34.  There are two things though that do concern me.   There  is  a  finding
    that the appellant's family would support him.   This  is  based  on  a
    finding that they supported another relative in the not too far distant
    past.  The apparent means of the family are very  limited.   It  is  at
    least possible that the money that was available for the other relative
    has extinguished their resources.  This does  not  seem  to  have  been
    considered.  The income of the appellant's mother and father, if I  may
    say so respectfully, is very modest and there  cannot  be  a  lot  left
    after they have discharged their responsibilities.

35.  I am also particularly concerned by paragraph  (vii)  of  the  judicial
    head note in MOJ which is in the following terms:

         "A person returning to Mogadishu after a  period  of  absence  will
         look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,  for
         assistance in re-establishing himself and  securing  a  livelihood.
         Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan  members
         who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
         forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may  have
         little to offer."


36.  I do not know if the First-tier Tribunal considered this point  or  how
    it resolved it if it did.

37.  I indicated at the hearing that I wanted a little time  to  reflect  on
    this decision.

38.  Parts of it, I am satisfied, are open to the judge  and  are  explained
    adequately but I am not satisfied having considered the matter that the
    judge's findings about the appellant's ability to reintegrate in Somali
    society have been explained adequately.  In particular, I am not making
    a complete list, I do not know where the money will come from and I  do
    not know how he will manage on his return.  However this is not a  case
    where I can  confidently  separate  the  wheat  from  the  chaff.   The
    findings must be made on the evidence as a whole and  so  I  cannot  be
    satisfied that any of the findings are sound, even if they are reasoned
    on their own.

39.  It follows that although I accept the Secretary  of  State's  arguments
    in part the Decision is not satisfactory and I  set  it  aside  in  all
    respects.

40.  As there has to be a rehearing I think it a better use of resources  of
    First-tier Tribunal and I so order.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside its  decision  and  order
that the appeal be decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed
Jonathan Perkins
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                      Dated 17 December 2015


