
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00377/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow             |            |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2018              |            |On 26 April 2018l              |
|                             |            |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                PATRYK TROCKI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Chung & Rea,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The SSHD appeals against a decision by FtT Judge Cox, promulgated on  3
    November 2017, allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  deportation
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 2. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT are stated  in  her  application
    dated 10 November 2017.

 3. A rule 24 response for Mr  Trocki  submits  that  the  matters  in  the
    grounds were addressed in the judge's decision; there is no  suggestion
    that it was perverse; the grounds suggest that the judge failed to have
    regard to relevant matters, when he patently did;  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude as he did for the reasons he gave.

 4. Mr Diwyncz accepted that the decision was not said  and  could  not  be
    said to be perverse.  He was unable to show that the decision fails  to
    give reasons for  its  findings,  or  fails  to  resolve  any  material
    conflict, those being the terms in which the alleged errors are  summed
    up at paragraph 5 of the grounds.

 5. I indicated that the appeal to the UT would be dismissed.

 6. The features on the SSHD's side mentioned in  the  grounds  are  strong
    ones, but they were all  dealt  with  by  the  judge  in  a  clear-eyed
    fashion.   They  are  not  minimised.    There   were   also   sensible
    considerations on the other side.

 7. This was a finely balanced case, which might readily have been  decided
    either way, but the grounds are no  more  than  disagreement  with  the
    judge coming down on the side he did.  The grounds disclose no error on
    a point of law.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            6 March 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




