

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00718/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Victoria Law Courts                |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 31st July 2013                           |On: 13 August 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                                 a.a.m.z.i.
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Michael Rudd, instructed by Ravi Sethi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Mr I., who is 31 years old and hails from the Sudan,  has  been  living
    in the United Kingdom for the past twelve years.  He applied for asylum
    here in August  2001,  claiming  to  be  a  member  of  the  persecuted
    Massaleit tribe in Darfur.  His claim was rejected, and  an  appeal  to
    the Immigration Appellate Authority was dismissed by an adjudicator  in
    October 2002.  In January 2003,  however,  Mr  I  married  a  Hungarian
    national, and in September 2004 he applied  through  solicitors  for  a
    residence document under the EEA Regulations 2000.  In November 2005  a
    residence card was indeed issued, valid for five years, but by then the
    marriage had broken down.  The Hungarian lady had gone back to  Hungary
    in March 2005, taking the child of the marriage with her.  She obtained
    a decree of divorce in October 2006, but arrangements are in place  for
    Mr I to have contact with his son  in  Hungary.   In  August  2007  the
    residence document was  revoked,  and  an  appeal  to  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal against revocation was dismissed in October  2007.
    By then Mr I had celebrated an Islamic marriage with a British  citizen
    ('Mrs S') in Omdurman, a union subsequently made official  by  a  civil
    marriage at a register office in Southampton.  Mrs S has three children
    from her previous marriage, and had borne a child ('Z') to Mr I by  the
    time he applied in August 2009 for indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse, using form SET(M).  Although he had not even limited  leave  at
    that time, Mr I was  granted  settlement,  and  another  child  of  the
    marriage ('Y') was born in 2010.

2.    In August 2012, however, an  incident  occurred  at  the  family  home
    which resulted in  Mr  I  being  sentenced  to  15  months  in  prison,
    rendering him liable to 'automatic' deportation under section 32 of the
    UK Borders Act 2007.  A deportation order was duly signed on 22nd March
    2013, and on 21st May 2013 an appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  came
    before a panel comprising Judge Whiting  and  Mrs  Lydia  Schmitt,  JP.
    They dismissed the appeal,  but  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by Judge Mailer, and so the matter has come before
    me.  My task of deciding whether the panel made a material error of law
    has been greatly assisted by  Mr  Rudd,  who  vigorously  advanced  the
    appellant's case, and by Mr Smart, who ably fielded the criticisms made
    of the First-tier determination.  So able were the submissions of  both
    representatives, and so extensive was the documentary evidence, that  I
    needed time to consider my decision - quite a considerable time, as  it
    has turned out.  But I think I can now give the reasons for my decision
    without being over-long.

3.   The grounds of appeal, on the strength  of  which  leave  was  granted,
    focus on paragraph 26 of the First-tier determination, contending  that
    the panel misunderstood the sentencing remarks of Mr Recorder  Burgess.
    At no point, it is said, do  those  sentencing  remarks  "suggest  that
    during the trial the Appellant sought to blame his son's injuries  upon
    his younger son."  That does not accord with the judge saying "I do not
    accept for a moment the evidence that you gave to the jury that at  any
    point you genuinely believed Y might have been responsible for  causing
    the injury."

4.    The  panel  are  then  said  to  have  mistakenly  believed  that  the
    appellant's daughter gave live evidence at the trial.  She had recorded
    an interview, which was played  before  the  jury,  but  there  was  no
    question that the appellant made his stepdaughter give evidence at  the
    trial, as the panel are said  to  have  thought.   That,  in  my  view,
    misrepresents the position.   The  panel  certainly  thought  that  the
    girl's evidence was given by video link.  That was a natural  inference
    to draw from the sentencing remarks, since the judge describes  Miss  A
    demonstrating an overarm throw, and comments upon her  demeanour.   But
    the panel did not say that the appellant  made  his  stepdaughter  give
    evidence at the trial.  What they said was that by pleading not guilty,
    and giving evidence to the  effect  that  Y  was  responsible  for  the
    injury, the appellant had  made  it  necessary  for  Miss  A,  who  had
    witnessed the assault, to give evidence as to what she  had  seen.   It
    seems to me that the panel were right about that.

5.   As for the 'not guilty' plea, it is the  grounds  that  got  it  wrong.
    They say that this plea concerned only the  question  of  intent.   The
    appellant is said to have accepted that he caused the injuries  to  his
    son, but not that he intended to cause them.  But as  Mr  Smart  points
    out from the Trial Record Sheet, the appellant  was  arraigned  on  two
    counts, but only convicted of one.  That  conviction  was  of  unlawful
    wounding under section 20 of the Offences against the Person Act  1861.
    One can safely assume that the other count was of wounding with  intent
    to cause grievous bodily harm, under section 18 of the same  Act.   The
    two charges are often laid in tandem, and  the  accused  can  obviously
    plead not guilty to the greater, but  guilty  to  the  lesser,  charge.
    What the appellant did here, however,  was  plead  not  guilty  to  the
    lesser charge of unlawful wounding.  That is the only  inference  which
    can be drawn from the following remarks of the judge :
             "That failure [to own up to your own wrongdoing] was reflected
         in your decision to choose to have a trial in this case.  I make it
         plain I do not punish you for that decision, it was your right, but
         you  have  deprived  yourself  thereby  of  what  would  have  been
         significant mitigation in the form of a  plea  of  guilty.   In  my
         judgment, the jury convicted  you,  quite  unsurprisingly,  on  the
         basis of strong evidence.  The idea that this was  an  accident  is
         one that I find wholly unpersuasive.  I think you  knew  full  well
         what you had done.  I think you  knew  full  well  that  it  was  a
         criminal act and I think that you sought to minimise that  fact  to
         conceal that fact initially and justify  your  actions  by  telling
         untruthful evidence to the jury."

6.   Plainly, the appellant pleaded not guilty  to  unlawful  wounding,  and
    tried to persuade the jury that what happened  was  an  accident.   The
    principal basis of the challenge to the panel's  determination  in  the
    grounds of appeal, namely the panel's understanding of  the  sentencing
    remarks, turns out to be mistaken.  The grounds go on to  make  another
    wholly unfounded criticism when they say that there was  no  basis  for
    the Tribunal to hold at paragraph 31 of their determination that  there
    was an unhealthy environment for the children in the  family  home  "in
    consequence of the appellant's  exhibited  anger  and  violence."   The
    panel had just given examples of such behaviour, taken from  the  Child
    Protection Conference held on 17th January 2013, so there obviously was
    a basis for the panel's view.

7.   The last paragraph f the grounds also misrepresents the true  position.
     The panel are said to have given no reasons for rejecting the view  of
    Mrs S that it is in the best interests of the children  to  have  their
    father in their lives ~ especially when, at  paragraph  33,  the  panel
    have found Mrs S to be "a truthful witness of  commendable  frankness."
    But when one actually looks to see what Mrs S was  being  frank  about,
    one reads this at paragraph 30 :
             "In the appellant's absence whilst in custody Mrs [S] obtained
         Prohibited Steps and Residence  Orders  to  prevent  the  appellant
         removing the  children  from  their  schools  of  jurisdiction  and
         returning to the matrimonial home upon release for  the  protection
         of the children.  She recorded during the  foregoing  meeting  that
         she would maybe consider a future relationship with  the  applicant
         at some stage in the future  conditionally  if  the  appellant  was
         willing to work on his anger, substance misuse and parenting  work,
         but could not make that decision without counselling,  as  she  has
         issues herself.  If the appellant wanted his family back, he  would
         need to do a considerable amount of work for  that  to  be  vaguely
         possible.  In respect of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  the
         children she would not shut the door to him but he  would  need  to
         change a lifelong belief of how the children  are  brought  up  and
         would need to change everything.  The view of the Child  Protection
         Advisor present at that meeting recorded that it would be  hard  to
         change the appellant in regard to such  matters.   Mrs  [S]  stated
         that all the children missed the  appellant  who  came  into  their
         lives in 2005, although she was considering obtaining an 'exclusion
         zone' to prevent the  appellant  contacting  the  family  upon  his
         release from custody."

8.   The grounds of appeal end by observing that the views of the  children,
    as recorded in the Social Services Report (presumably  this  refers  to
    the Child Protection Conference on 17th  January  2013),  "all  confirm
    that they miss their father and would like to  be  re-united  with  him
    again."  But that is not what the children said.  The appellant's three
    step-children attended the conference, but only Miss  A  said  anything
    about Mr I, and that was that  she  was  "trying  to  separate  herself
    emotionally" rather than wishing to be re-united with him.  It was  Mrs
    S, not the children themselves, who said that the children  miss  their
    father.

9.   It turns out that the grounds accompanying the  application  for  leave
    to appeal have absolutely no merit.  The panel have clearly  devoted  a
    great deal of attention to the best  interests  of  the  children,  and
    rightly  set  great  store  by  the  report  of  the  Child  Protection
    Conference, whose primary objective was "to examine the best  interests
    of the children resident in the  UK."   Paragraphs  28  to  32  of  the
    determination are taken up with his conference, which gave a recent and
    professional assessment of the matters most relevant to the panel's own
    assessment of Article 8 family life  and  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, in determining the appeal against deportation.

10.  The January conference might have  been  fairly  recent,  Mr  Rudd  now
    contended, but it was not recent enough.  The panel  sat  in  May,  and
    needed more  up-to-date  information  if  they  were  to  make  a  fair
    assessment of what Article 8 required, as at the date of  the  hearing.
    They had an opportunity to obtain that information when the  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Hammonds, sought an adjournment the day before the hearing.
     He had just received the Appellant's Bundle, containing the report  of
    the Child Protection Conference, and wanted to know  what  the  current
    situation was  regarding  Child  Socal  Services  and  the  appellant's
    children.  He therefore telephoned  Southampton  Social  Services,  who
    confirmed that they were willing to produce a report  "detailing  their
    position regarding the potential deportation of the Appellant owing  to
    the risk posed to the children."   But  they  could  not  produce  that
    report in time for the hearing the next day.  The report would give the
    reasons why Social Services considered the appellant to pose a risk  to
    the children, and what their concerns were over his  parenting  skills.
    The conference report, thought Mr Hammonds, told us what their concerns
    were, but not the reasons for those concerns.  Without those reasons it
    would not, in his view, be possible to give proper consideration to the
    section 55 duty.

11.  Mr Rudd had now identified a much  stronger  ground  than  any  in  the
    application for leave to appeal.   Unfortunately  for  him,  the  panel
    record at paragraph 7 of their determination that on  the  day  of  the
    hearing, when Mr Hammonds renewed his request for  an  adjournment  (it
    had already been refused on paper the previous  day),  his  application
    "was resisted upon instructions by the appellant's representative."  So
    the appellant himself was unwilling to let the panel be informed of the
    reasons for the concerns about him entertained  by  Southampton  Social
    Services.  The panel then looked at the exchange of e-mails between  Mr
    Hammonds and a social worker  in  Southampton  the  previous  day  (the
    latter having given his permission for the e-mails  to  be  disclosed).
    The social worker said that his Senior Practitioner  and  line  manager
    "would be happy to put something in writing detailing that  Southampton
    Children Services would not oppose the deportation of Mr [I] due to the
    risks he presents to the children."  But any report, the social  worker
    clarifies, "would just be a short expansion of what is  below",  namely
    that "Southampton Children's  Services  do  have  significant  concerns
    surrounding Mr [I]'s parenting capacity and therefore would not contest
    his deportation."

12.  Given the above information, the panel cannot be said to have erred  in
    law by proceeding with the appeal.  The  views  of  Southampton  Social
    Services clearly had not changed  between  January  and  May,  and  the
    appellant himself had expressed unwillingness for  the  hearing  to  be
    adjourned in order for Social Services to provide  fuller  reasons  for
    their adverse view of him.

13.  Mr Rudd points to a failure  by  the  respondent  to  provide  all  the
    documents listed in 'Specific Directions'  by  the  Resident  Judge  at
    Newport, prior to the  first-instance  hearing.   These  included  "any
    relevant Pre-Sentence Report."  The panel  really  ought  to  have  had
    that, said Mr Rudd, in order to make a full  assessment  of  the  case.
    They ought also to have had  a  post-sentence  NOMS  or  OASys  report,
    giving a prognosis of any risk still posed by the appellant.  Mr  Smart
    explained that the Border Agency (now, I  think,  Enforcement  Command)
    can request such documents, but cannot compel their  production.   True
    it is that the risk score in an OASys  report  (low,  medium  or  high)
    usually features in a deportation appeal, but it is  not  essential  to
    have it, and without it the Tribunal must simply go ahead and come to a
    decision on all the other evidence.   For  examples  of  that,  see  MK
    (Gambia) [2010] UKUT 281 9IAC) and BK (Ghana) [2010] UKUT 328 (IAC).

14.  The upshot of all this is that the First-tier Tribunal  made  no  error
    of law.  They took a long view of the appellant's conduct, noting  that
    his initial entry to the United Kingdom was achieved on the strength of
    a bogus asylum claim.  He claimed to be  a  member  of  the  persecuted
    Massaleit tribe in Darfur, when all the  time  he  had  been  born  and
    brought up in Omdurman.  He was content to be issued with  a  five-year
    residence card as the  husband  of  an  EEA  national,  after  the  EEA
    national had left the United Kingdom and his marriage to her had broken
    down.  The panel were entitled to take the view that these matters  did
    not reflect well on the appellant's character.  They were entitled also
    to have regard for the view, shared by Mrs S and the social workers  at
    the January conference, that it would be difficult for the appellant to
    change his ways, and would take a very long time,  if  it  happened  at
    all.  There was  nothing  perverse  or  irrational  in  the  conclusion
    reached by the panel.

     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.

     The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is continued.

Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            10th August 2013
