

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00411/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|11th December 2014                            |12th December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 JORAM THUO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Lawrence, counsel instructed by IMK solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Upper Tribunal Judge C Lane held, in  a  determination  promulgated
         following a hearing on 23rd  September  2014  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge had erred in law in dismissing an appeal against the
         decision to remove the appellant.  Judge  Lane  directed  that  the
         matter be adjourned to a resumed hearing at which  he  expected  to
         hear full argument on Article 8.  No  findings  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal were retained.


      2. Due to  unforeseen  circumstances  the  resumed  hearing  has  been
         significantly delayed and  as  a  result  the  respondent  and  his
         partner require to give evidence  and  submit  further  documentary
         evidence. It is also evident that since the coming  into  force  of
         s117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  s54A
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, further evidence may
         be required.


      3. Accordingly it was agreed by the parties that  it  was  appropriate
         and in line with the Practice Statement dated 25th  September  2012
         of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper
         Tribunal that this matter should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for hearing de novo.


    Conclusions:


    I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.


    Consequential Directions


    To be listed for hearing by the First-tier Tribunal.
    No findings preserved.
    2 hours.
    No interpreter.
    2 witnesses.
    Not before Judge A.D. Smith MBE. TD.






         Date 11th December 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
