

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00266/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 December 2013                            |On 11 February 2014          |
|Approved Ex Tempore Judgment                  |                             |

                                   Before

                  THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSLEY, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE K ESHUN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JAVED RUSSELL

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bhanji (of Counsel) instructed by Mordi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is the second level of appeal arising out of a decision made by
      the Secretary of State to the effect that the Appellant should be
      deported from the United Kingdom.  That decision was made on 19
      December 2012.  The Appellant exercised his right of appeal.  There
      ensued the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which allowed the
      appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

   2. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal.  The
      first ground on which permission which has been granted relates to the
      panel's conclusion that the Appellant met the requirements of
      paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules because he no longer had ties
      with Jamaica.  This was considered arguably perverse since,  in
      paragraph 13, the panel had acknowledged that the Appellant had a
      grandmother living in Jamaica and had taken family holidays there.

   3. The regime, which is constituted by paragraphs 397 to 399A and B of
      the Immigration Rules is as follows:


          "398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be
          contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
          Rights Convention, and
          (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
             less than 4 years;
          (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of less than 4 years
             but at least 12 months; or
          (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good because, in the view of the Secretary of State,
             their offending has caused serious harm or they are a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
             law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the
             public interest in deportation will be outweighed by other
             factors.


          399.  This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
          if -
          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or
             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
               the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
               immigration decision; and in either case
               (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
               the UK; and
               (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for
               the child in the UK;
          or


          (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in
             the UK, or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
             protection, and
             (i)  the person has lived in the UK with valid leave
               continuously for at least the 15 years immediately preceding
               the date of the immigration decision (discounting any period
               of imprisonment); and
             (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with
               that partner continuing outside the UK.


          399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
          if -
          (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
             years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no
             ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country to
             which he would have to go if required to leave the UK; or
          (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half
             of his life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding
             the date of the immigration decision (discounting any period of
             imprisonment) and he has not ties (including social, cultural
             or family) with the country to which he would have to go if
             required to leave the UK.


          399B. Where paragraph 399 or 2399A applies limited leave may be
          granted for a period not exceeding 30 months.  Such leave shall be
          given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State deems
          appropriate.

   4. It has been determined that the deportation of this person from the UK
      is conducive to the public good on account of a relevant qualifying
      conviction, which applies in  this case.  The Secretary of State, in
      assessing the claim, will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A
      applies.  If it does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances
      that the public interest in deportation will be outweighed by other
      factors.   It follows from this, of course, that if paragraph 399 or
      399A does apply then the elevated threshold constituted by having to
      demonstrate exceptional circumstances whereby the public interest in
      deportation is outweighed does not apply.

   5. In the present case, the focus is on paragraph 399A, sub-paragraph (b)
      of the Rules.  This provides that the person is aged under 25 years,
      has spent at least half of his life living continuously in the UK,
      immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision,
      discounting any period of imprisonment and has no ties, including
      social, cultural or family with the country to which he would go if
      required to leave the UK.

   6. The question which the First-tier Tribunal had to decide was whether
      the Appellant has no ties with the country of Jamaica (the proposed
      country of destination).  In its determination, the Tribunal rehearsed
      some evidence and facts bearing on this issue in paragraphs [12] and
      [13].  Upon the hearing of the appeal today, it is confirmed that the
      following facts which bear on this discrete issue are not in dispute.



   7. The following facts are undisputed.The Appellant is now aged 20 and he
      has lived in the UK from the age of three years as a fully settled
      person in a fully settled family.  Secondly, he has little or no
      memory of life in Jamaica.  Thirdly, in his lifetime, he has returned
      to Jamaica on four occasions for holidays which have been of some two
      weeks duration and have involved staying in hotel accommodation.  Of
      these four visits, the last was made at least four years ago when the
      Appellant would have been aged 16 or younger.  All of the Appellant's
      family members, with the exception of his grandmother, live in the
      United Kingdom.  He has no particular ties (social, cultural or other)
      with Jamaica.

   8. Some little guidance on the correct approach to this provision in
      paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules is provided by the decision of
      the Upper Tribunal in the case of Ogundimu v SSHD [2013] UKUT 00060
      (IAC).  In this decision the Upper Tribunal held that the natural and
      ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' in paragraph 399A of the Rules
      imports a concept involving something more than merely remote or
      abstract links to the country of proposed deportation or removals.  It
      involves there being a connection to life in that country.
      Consideration of whether a person has no ties to such a country must
      involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances and is
      not to be limited to social, cultural and family circumstances.  What
      is clear from this passage is that every case in which the issue of
      ties arises will be unavoidably fact-sensitive.  Secondly, what also
      emerges from this decision is that a connection of some substance with
      the proposed country of destination is required.  Thirdly, a rounded
      assessment of all relevant circumstances is required of the Tribunal.
      There is no suggestion that the Tribunal erred in law in its approach
      to this issue or in how it conducted the assessment.  Rather, this
      ground of appeal is confined exclusively to the outcome of the
      exercise.  The grant of permission to appeal allows the argument to be
      canvassed that the finding the panel made that the Appellant has no
      ties with Jamaica is perverse.  Perversity is an elevated threshold in
      the world of appeals on points of law.  It is established only where
      no reasonable Tribunal properly directing itself in law and having
      regard to all the evidence could have come to the conclusion under
      scrutiny.  This has been the law since the decision of the House of
      Lords in Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC 14.

   9. We are satisfied that the threshold of perversity, or irrationality,
      is not overcome in the present case.  Having regard to the evidence
      available to the Tribunal on this issue and the findings which it
      made, both explicit and implicit, we consider that the Tribunal's
      conclusion on this issue was plainly open to it.  In the absence of
      any suggestion of a misdirection in law, we conclude that the first
      ground of appeal has not merit.

  10. The second ground on which permission to appeal was granted recites
      that the panel's approach to Article 8 issues should now follow the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA
      (Civ) 1192, which suggested that the two-stage approach followed by
      the Upper Tribunal in MF is not correct.  That  indeed is what the
      Court of Appeal decided in MF (Nigeria).  It held that these
      provisions of the Rules constitute a composite code, or regime.
      Importantly, however, and not unexpectedly, the Court of Appeal also
      held that it is incumbent in any appeal of this kind to examine the
      substance of what the lower Court or Tribunals decided in order to
      ascertain whether any error of law has been committed: that is the
      approach which we adopt in the present case.

  11. Elaborating on this ground on behalf of the Secretary of State it is
      contended that the following frailties contaminate the First-tier
      Tribunal's assessment and determination of the Article 8 issue.
      Firstly, it is argued that the Tribunal failed to give sufficient
      weight to the judge's sentencing remarks.  Secondly it is said that
      more weight should have been given to the offence of theft committed
      whilst an inmate in the young offenders' institution.  Thirdly, it is
      claimed that more weight should have been given to the Appellant's
      adult status.  Finally, it is suggested that insufficient weight was
      given to the public interest.

  12. The formulation of each of these arguments is noteworthy.  They
      challenge the merits of the Tribunal's evaluative assessments,
      findings and conclusions  They suggest that greater weight should have
      been given to certain factors and they complain that insufficient
      weight was given to others.   This formulation is important because it
      points this appellate Tribunal in the direction of what the relevant
      criterion to be applied is.  Where there is a challenge of this genre
      the legal standard to be applied is, as in the first ground of appeal,
      that of irrationality.   In other words, could a reasonable Tribunal,
      properly directing itself in  law  and having regard to the evidence
      considered and findings made, have reasonably reached this conclusion?

  13. The consideration of this matter in the First-tier Tribunal's
      determination is extensive.  At the outset, in paragraph [16], they
      reminded themselves that they must strike a balance between the public
      interest that would be served by the removal of a foreign criminal and
      the Appellant's right to respect for his private and family life.  In
      the twelve paragraphs which follow, the Tribunal identified a series
      of factors and evaluated each of them.  Importantly, there is no
      suggestion that in conducting this exercise the Tribunal left out of
      account any material factor, nor is it suggested that in performing
      this exercise the Tribunal impermissibly allowed the intrusion of some
      alien consideration.  Furthermore, there is no suggestion of any
      misdirection in law in this part of the determination.  The Tribunal,
      having set itself the task mentioned above, made the following
      conclusion in paragraph [28]:

     "We turn to the final Razgar question that related to proportionality
           considering this in the context of both the appellant's family
           and his private life.  We have concluded that the public
           interest to be served by the appellant's removal is
           significantly reduced because there is little risk that he will
           re-offend and he therefore represents little risk to the public.
             In our view, the appellant has family and private life rights
           here, of considerable moment.  We therefore find the appellant's
           right to respect for both his private and family life in the
           United Kingdom outweighs the public interest in his removal".

  14. In considering whether the applicable threshold, namely that of
      irrationality, is overcome in this aspect of the appeal, we can find
      no fault in the findings or evaluative judgements which are littered
      throughout these paragraphs.  We consider that the conclusion which
      the Tribunal made, having conducted this exercise, fell within the
      band of reasonable conclusions open to a reasonable Tribunal properly
      directing itself in law. We conclude, accordingly, that the second
      ground of appeal, which encompasses the complaints articulated inter
      alia in paragraphs [6] and [7] of the application for permission to
      appeal, must be rejected.

DECISION

  15. It follows that we dismiss the appeal and we affirm the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal.




                                                 [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                  Date:     10 February 2014





