
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/00276/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard At                             |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 21 March 2019                     |On 02 May 2019                       |

                                   Before:
                                  LORD UIST
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                       Upper Tribunal Judge McWILLIAM


                                  Between:
                                JAROSLAW [B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr S Ell, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP (Oxford)
For the respondent: Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal by Jaroslaw [B], a citizen  of  Poland  who  has  a
       permanent right of residence in the UK, against the decision  of  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Ford),  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  16
       November 2018, to dismiss the appeal by  the  appellant  against  the
       decision of the Secretary of State dated 20 March 2018 to deport  the
       appellant on serious grounds of public  policy  and  public  security
       under the Regulation 23 (6)(b) of the Immigration (European  Economic
       Area) Regulations 2016 with reference to Regulation 27 (SI  2016,  No
       1052).

    2. The background to this case is the appellant's criminal  history.  On
       15 August 2010 he  pleaded  guilty  to  battery  against  his  former
       partner and received a conditional discharge  of  12  months.  On  25
       October 2011 he pleaded guilty to two counts of battery  against  his
       former partner and breach of his conditional discharge, for which  he
       was sentenced to 16 weeks imprisonment concurrent on each  count  and
       made the subject of a restraining order. On 14 May  2016  he  pleaded
       guilty to destroying or damaging property  and  was  again  made  the
       subject of a restraining order. On 2 December 2016 he  was  convicted
       of eight breaches of the  restraining  order  protecting  his  former
       partner from harassment over a six months  period  between  June  and
       December 2016. He was sentenced to six months imprisonment  suspended
       for 12 months and had a rehabilitation  activity  requirement  of  35
       days imposed on him. On 24 April 2017 he was sentenced to six  months
       imprisonment for failing to comply with the terms  of  his  suspended
       sentence. On 10 May 2017 the respondent wrote to the  appellant  (who
       was then detained in Winchester Prison) informing him that  his  case
       had been carefully considered and that he had concluded, in light  of
       the sentence involved, to take no further action against him "on this
       occasion". On 25 July 2017 the appellant pleaded guilty to two counts
       of shoplifting and had a community order with a 60 hours unpaid  work
       requirement imposed on him. On 5 December 2017 he  was  convicted  of
       two breaches of his restraining order and  sentenced  to  consecutive
       sentences of 26 weeks and 8 weeks imprisonment. The details of  these
       breaches are set out at paragraphs 25  and  26  of  the  respondent's
       letter of 20 March 2018 in the following terms:

           "25.     On the Memorandum of Entry from Berkshire  Magistrates'
           Court dated 5 December 2017 it stated that  between  9  February
           2017 to 14 February 2017 you  contacted  MK  directly  via  text
           message, which you are prohibited from doing. This  offence  was
           said to be so serious because the victim was vulnerable  and  it
           caused deep distress and psychological harm to  her.  There  was
           also said to be a racially aggravated element to the message(s),
           which were said to be deeply unpleasant and  which  was  further
           aggravated by your previous offending.


           26.      Additionally, on 15 February  2017 you contacted MK via
           a telephone call and once again the offence was regarded  to  be
           so serious as it was racially motivated and caused  your  victim
           further deep distress. You also  pleaded  not  guilty  to  these
           offences, indicating that you did not accept responsibility  for
           your actions in this  regard,  although  you  were  subsequently
           found guilty."


    3. There are two grounds of appeal. The first ground is that, while  the
       judge correctly identified that serious grounds of public policy  and
       public security were required  to  justify  the  deportation  of  the
       appellant, she applied too low a  standard  as  to  what  constitutes
       "serious" in Regulation  27(3)  (Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department v Straszewski  [2015] EWCA Civ 1245 at paragraph  20).  As
       the respondent had accepted in the letter of 10 May 2017,  which  was
       written at a time when he considered that the appellant did not  have
       a right  of  permananent  residence,  that  the  deportation  of  the
       appellant could not be justified grounds of public policy and  public
       security, his deportation in March 2018 could  not  be  justified  on
       serious grounds of public policy and  public  security  as  the  only
       difference since May 2017 was the acquisition of a conviction for two
       offences of shoplifting and two further breaches of  the  restraining
       order. The second ground was that the judge had erred in her approach
       to the issue of proportionality in respect that she  failed  to  take
       account of all factors, in particular, the fact  that  the  appellant
       had permanent residence.

    4. So far as the first ground of appeal is concerned,  the  judge  dealt
       with this at paragraphs 38 and 39 of her decision as follows:

           "38.     Mr Ell argued that the Secretary  of  State's  position
           was untenable  because  the  only  offences  the  appellant  had
           committed since the letter of April 2017 (sic) was sent  to  the
           appellant and he was told that no action would be taken at  that
           time  were  the  two  shoplifting  offences  which   could   not
           reasonably be said to have heightened the public interest in the
           appellant's removal. He argued that because  the  only  offences
           the  appellant  had  committed  since  April   2017   were   the
           shoplifting offences his deportation cannot be justified.


           39.       I  do  not  accept  these   submissions.   On   closer
           examination, at the time that the letter was  written  in  April
           2017 the breaches of the restraining / harassment order that led
           to the imposition of custodial sentences of 34 weeks in December
           2017 were not known to the Secretary of State.  It  is  slightly
           unclear when these breaches occurred as the appellant appears to
           be saying that they occurred in December 2017, whereas the  PNIC
           refers to the breaches being in February 2017. But it  makes  no
           differnce to the outcome because either way  the  appellant  had
           not been sentenced to 34 weeks imprisonment for  those  breaches
           as at April 2017. The 34 (sic) period of  imprisonment  was  the
           second period of  imprisonment  for  repeated  breaches  of  the
           domestic violence orders."


       She went on to set out the reasoning for her decision at paragraph 55
       as follows:


           "I have concluded that in the absence of  any  understanding  on
           the part of the appellant as to the  underlying  causes  of  his
           repeated violent and threatening behaviour and  his  failure  to
           engage in any work to equip himself to resist such behaviour  in
           future there is a genuine and present risk that those behaviours
           will be repeated once the appellant comes out of  detention  and
           seeks to resume contact with V (his daughter). He urgently needs
           to engage with anger management and domestic violence courses to
           avoid such difficulties in future  relationships.  He  needs  to
           recognise the terrible impact of domestic violence  on  children
           and their wellbeing. Until he  does  so  and  in  light  of  the
           seriousness, repeated  nature  and  extended  timescale  of  his
           violent and aggressive behaviours and  his  contempt  for  court
           orders and probationary supervision, I am satisfied  that  there
           are serious grounds of public interest  and  public  policy  for
           deporting the appellant as a persistent (sic) violent offender."
           (The italicising is ours.)


    5. We are satisfied  that the judge was wrong to reject  the  submission
       by Mr Ell set out at paragraph 38 of her  decision.  In  our  opinion
       that submission  was  well-founded.  Mr  Ell's  point  was  that  the
       respondent had accepted in  his  letter  of  10  May  2017  that  the
       appellant's then criminal record did not bring him within grounds  of
       public policy and public security and the acquisition thereafter of a
       conviction  for  two  counts  of  shoplifting  and  breaches  of  his
       restraining order could not, when added to his pre-May  2017  record,
       bring  him  within  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public
       security. We doubt, from  what  she  said  in  paragrpah  39  of  her
       decision, that the judge fully appreciated the force of  this  point.
       In any event, even if there had been no letter of 10  May  2017  from
       the respondent, the appellant's criminal record up to  December  2017
       could not on any conceivable view be said to justify his  deportation
       on serious grounds of public policy and public security.  We  do  not
       doubt that his behaviour was highly distressing and  frightening  for
       his ex-partner and daughter, but he has been punished for what he did
       and the question in these proceedings is whether his deportation  can
       be justified on serious grounds of public policy and public security.
       The answer is that it cannot. This case is far removed from the  type
       of case which the legislature intended to be  covered  by  the  words
       "serious grounds of public policy and public security". Moreover, the
       judge was in error  when  she  considered  the  appellant's  criminal
       history. She used the word "violent" three times in paragrapah 55  of
       her decision, at one point referring to  "his  repeated  violent  and
       threatening behaviour". The fact is that  his  only  convictions  for
       physically violent behaviour were on 15 August 2010  and  25  October
       2011 and were known to the respondent when he wrote his letter of  20
       May 2017. He has had no convictions for violence since October  2011.
       The details of his breaches of the restraining order in 2017 are  set
       out at paragraphs 25 and 26 of the respondent's decision letter of 20
       March 2018: they do not involve violence. For the above  reasons  the
       judge materially erred. The decision to dismiss  the  appeal  is  set
       aside.

    6. In light of our decision on the first ground of appeal  we  can  deal
       with the second ground of appeal briefly. In his oral  submission  Mr
       Ell made clear that he was not contending  that  permanent  residence
       equalled integration. His point was that it was a strong factor to be
       taken into account in the proprtionality assessment. In our view  the
       judge  did  not  err  in  her  approach  to  proprtionality  and  the
       submission  on  this  point  is  unsound.  Recital  17  of  Directive
       2004/38/EC explicity states that "enjoyment of permanent residence by
       Union citizens who have chosen to settle long term in the host Member
       State ... is a key element in  supporting  social  cohesion".  Having
       regard to the findings which she made the judge  was  fully  entitled
       not to be satisfied that the appellant  had  integrated  socially  or
       culturally in the UK.

    7. We re-make the appeal. The respondent has failed to establish serious
       grounds under Regulation 27(3).  In the light  of  this,  it  is  not
       necessary to consider Regulation 27 (5) or (6). The appeal is allowed
       under the 2016 Regulations.


Appeal allowed.


Signed        Lord Uist    dated 30 April 2019

Lord Uist
(Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

