
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00406/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 November 2014                            |On 8 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               HARWINDER SINGH

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Timson, instructed by Amelius Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

ERROR OF LAW

 1. In my decision dated 20 August 2014 I set aside  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal for the reasons set out below.

         "1.  The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal
             the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Levin  and  Mrs  S
             Hussain (the panel) who for reasons given in  a  determination
             dated 3  June  2014  allowed  the  appeal  by  the  respondent
             (referred to as  the  claimant)  against  the  decision  under
             s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 on the basis  that  removal
             in pursuance of the deportation order would be  in  breach  of
             Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

         2.   The conviction giving rise to the decision  was  on  30  April
             2012  at  Manchester  Crown  Court  of  two  counts  of  money
             laundering for which the claimant was sentenced on 17  October
             2012 to  three  years'  imprisonment  concurrently  upon  each
             count.

         3.   The background facts relied on in support  of  the  Article  8
             claim are these.  The claimant is a national of  India  and  a
             Sikh.  He was born 27 May 1985.  He entered the United Kingdom
             unlawfully in 2008  and  came  to  the  attention  of  the  UK
             immigration authorities following his arrest on  30  May  2011
             when he was served with a notice of a decision to  remove  him
             as an illegal entrant.  That  removal  was  cancelled  as  the
             claimant had made application  for  leave  to  remain  as  the
             spouse of Rama Mall, a Pakistani national who was  settled  in
             the  United  Kingdom  and  who  has  since  acquired   British
             citizenship.  On 25 November 2011  the  claimant  was  granted
             discretionary leave to remain until 25 November 2014.

         4.   The offending by the claimant  occurred  between  30  November
             2010 and 3 November 2011 when he was arrested by  the  Serious
             Organised Crime Agency who had been carrying out  observations
             at an address in Manchester.

         5.   In her reasons for the decision that s.32(5) of the  2007  Act
             applied, the Secretary  of  State  considered  the  case  with
             reference to paragraphs 398 to 399A of the Immigration  Rules.
             The relationship with Ms Mall  was  accepted  as  genuine  and
             subsisting but in the light of the claimant not  having  lived
             in the United Kingdom with valid leave for  at  least  fifteen
             years preceding the date of the  decision,  the  claimant  was
             unable to benefit from the provisions under the Rules.

         6.   No evidence had been submitted to show that the claimant would
             be unable to settle in India or Pakistan.  Ms Mall's status as
             a British citizen did not preclude her from travelling  to  or
             settling in India, and thus it was considered Article 8  would
             not be breached.

         7.   The Secretary of State also considered that the  private  life
             provisions under paragraph 399A did not apply in the light  of
             the limited length of time the claimant had been in the United
             Kingdom and that it was not unreasonable to expect him  to  be
             able to readjust to life  there.   There  was  additionally  a
             separate but brief consideration under Article 8.

         8.   A medical issue had been raised by the claimant.  However,  it
             was considered that treatment  for  his  depression  would  be
             available in India although  it  might  not  be  of  the  same
             standard as available in the UK.

         9.   The panel were not provided with the sentencing remarks  which
             the Secretary of State had been previously directed to supply.
              An adjournment was sought but refused.  The panel had  before
             them  a  psychiatric  report  which  had  been  prepared   for
             consideration for the sentence and an OASys assessment.

         10.  The claimant had been previously admitted to hospital  with  a
             diagnosis of a first episode psychosis in May 2012.  This  was
             followed by a further admission in September that  year.   The
             psychiatrist, Dr Bashir, observed there  was  no  evidence  of
             mental disorder before the commission of the serious  offences
             with the onset of symptoms some months after conviction.

         11.   There  was  a  paucity  of  reliable  collateral   background
             information and Dr Bashir was concerned that Ms  Mall  was  an
             unreliable informant appearing not to know basic  facts  which
             any wife entering into a marriage by choice would  know.   The
             current working diagnosis in the hospital appeared to  be  one
             of a psychotic disorder.  However, Dr  Bashir  concluded  that
             there were a number of factors to suggest to him that the most
             likely diagnosis was one of malingering  and  that  ultimately
             was his conclusion.  There was some evidence that the claimant
             had a dissociative disorder but Dr Bashir did not believe that
             had any relevance to  any  sentence  which  the  court  deemed
             appropriate.

         12.  The OASys Report assessment was completed on 21 November 2012.
              The author  observed  that  the  claimant  had  not  accepted
             responsibility for the offence in which two  others  had  been
             involved.  Reference is made to the psychiatric report  having
             been completed on 18 October  2012  prior  to  sentencing.   I
             observe here that it is not at all clear whether the author of
             the OASys Report actually saw  the  psychiatric  report.   The
             author  of  the  OASys  report  concluded  that  the  risk  of
             reoffending was low as was the likelihood of serious  harm  to
             others.

         13.  Mr Timson also represented the claimant at the hearing and  he
             accepted that the only  basis  on  which  the  claimant  could
             succeed was under Article 8.

         14.  The panel noted the history of the  relationship  between  the
             claimant and Ms Mall.  They had claimed to have lived together
             since  October  2010  and  the  panel  found  that  they  were
             genuinely devoted to one another.  Although the panel referred
             to them having been together since 2008, this  appears  to  be
             the year when they met.

         15.  The panel were satisfied that the claimant  would  not  be  at
             risk of persecution in India  by  virtue  of  his  faith  with
             reference to the country information before them.   They  also
             noted that Dr Bashir had concluded that the  claimant  was  an
             unreliable witness who had feigned mental  illness.   Although
             accepting it credible that the claimant  had  faced  hostility
             from his family in India as a consequence of his marriage such
             hostility did not mean that there was real risk that he  would
             either be killed by his family or would suffer serious harm.

         16.  Having regard to the evidence, the  panel  thought  it  highly
             unlikely that Ms Mall would be granted a visa to  settle  with
             the claimant in India and if they were wrong on that, it would
             be unreasonable and disproportionate to expect her  to  settle
             in that country as a Christian (Roman Catholic)  of  Pakistani
             origin.  The decision to deport the claimant  would  therefore
             mean the end of the couple's family life together as there was
             no realistic  possibility  of  the  claimant  obtaining  entry
             clearance to Pakistan to settle there  in  the  light  of  his
             conviction and his origins.

         17.  After providing detailed reasons for these varying conclusions
             the  panel  then  proceeded  to  set  out  its   decision   on
             proportionality on these terms:

             '57. In assessing whether the respondent's decision to  deport
                  the appellant is disproportionate in  circumstances  where
                  it will end the appellant's family life with his  wife  we
                  have had regard to the seriousness of  the  offence  which
                  the  appellant  committed,  to  the  likelihood   of   his
                  reoffending, and  also  to  the  public  expectation  that
                  foreign criminals who commit serious  offences  should  be
                  deported from the UK.  We have also had regard to the fact
                  that the Immigration Rules carry considerable  weight  and
                  they have been approved by Parliament and  reflect  public
                  interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  Against
                  these factors we have weighed the fact that the  appellant
                  has been punished for the offence that he has committed by
                  way of a sentence of three years' imprisonment and in  the
                  absence of any evidence to show otherwise, it would appear
                  that this was the first offence  that  the  appellant  had
                  committed.  We have also had  regard  to  the  appellant's
                  OASys assessment that he poses a low risk  of  reoffending
                  and a low risk of harm to the public.  We have taken  into
                  account the fact that  the  appellant  and  Ms  Mall  were
                  married in a religious ceremony in June 2010 and that they
                  married again in a Roman Catholic Church on  30  September
                  2011 and the fact that the respondent saw fit to grant the
                  appellant three years' discretionary leave  to  remain  in
                  the UK having regard  to  that  marriage  outside  of  the
                  Immigration Rules and despite the  appellant  not  meeting
                  the requirements of the Rules, and which  we  find  to  be
                  cogent evidence that the respondent accepted the  strength
                  of their relationship.  Last but not least we  had  regard
                  to the highly unusual circumstances of the appellant being
                  an Indian Sikh and Ms Mall being a Christian of  Pakistani
                  origin and our finding that  these  unusual  circumstances
                  will preclude the couple living together either  in  India
                  or in Pakistan.'

         18.   And  in  the  following  paragraph  the  panel  reached   its
             conclusion:

                  'Having regard to our finding that the deportation of  the
                  appellant will effectively end  the  family  life  of  the
                  appellant and Ms Mall and having weighed up carefully  all
                  of the factors set out in the preceding paragraph, we find
                  that on the facts  of  this  particular  case  the  public
                  interest in deporting the appellant is outweighed  by  the
                  permanent destruction of  the  family  life  which  exists
                  between the appellant and the sponsor.  We find  therefore
                  that the respondent's decision to deport the appellant  is
                  unreasonable   and   that   it    also    constitutes    a
                  disproportionate breach of his rights of the appellant and
                  Ms Mall to a family life under Article 8.   We  also  find
                  the fact that the appellant is an Indian Sikh and his wife
                  is a Christian of Pakistani origin amount  to  exceptional
                  circumstances which outweigh the public  interest  in  the
                  appellant's deportation.'

         19.  The challenge by the Secretary of State argues  a  failure  to
             give reasons or adequate  reasons  on  material  matters.   As
             accepted by Mr McVeety, the references to Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
             00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  were  in  the
             circumstances misconceived.  He relied on paragraph 4  of  the
             grounds as follows:

                  'Although the judge considered  the  appellant's  risk  of
                  harm and reoffending, he failed to engage the  seriousness
                  of the offence committed, the  deterrent  factor  and  the
                  public's  revulsion  at  such  offending  behaviour   when
                  balancing the proportionality arguments in this case.'

         20.  There was no Rule 24 response.

         21.  I have taken into account the submissions of Mr McVeety and Mr
             Timson in reaching my decision.  In essence Mr  Timson  argued
             that the Secretary of State was disagreeing with the  decision
             with which she had not found favour  and  that  there  was  no
             error of law.  It had been open to the Secretary of  State  to
             produce the sentencing report  and  she  needed  to  take  the
             consequences of not having done so.   He  contended  that  the
             judge had taken into account the seriousness  of  the  offence
             and reminded me of the length of  the  determination  and  the
             care with which the Tribunal had approached the task.

         22.  I reserved my determination.  Both  representatives  confirmed
             that it was open to me to proceed to remake the decision based
             on the findings made by the panel.  I should also take account
             of the fact that Ms Mall now believes she is pregnant although
             it is too early to identify a due date.  I reminded Mr  Timson
             that I would need to have regard to the amended provisions  of
             the 2002 Act with reference to s.19  of  the  Immigration  Act
             2014 in such an exercise.

         23.   It  is  necessary  to  unpack  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  in
             particular at paragraph 57 as  quoted  above.   It  cannot  be
             doubted that the panel sought to direct itself  regarding  the
             legal principles it was required to apply.

         24.  Earlier in the determination at [44] the panel explained  that
             it had had regard to the  decision  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
             [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 referring to a two stage assessment

                  '... firstly under the Immigration Rules and  secondly  if
                  the appellant's [sic] did not meet the requirements of the
                  Rules, whether the appellant can nonetheless succeed under
                  Article 8 outside of the Rules, was not  applicable  to  a
                  deportation case and that  the  issue  of  proportionality
                  should be considered as part of the  consideration  as  of
                  whether there are exceptional circumstances which outweigh
                  deportation.'

         25.  Nowhere in the determination  does  the  panel  refer  to  the
             language of MF (Nigeria), in particular that expressed at [42]
             of the judgment of the Master of the Rolls:

                  '... In approaching the question of whether removal  is  a
                  proportionate interference with an individual's Article  8
                  rights, the scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
                  deportation and something very compelling (which  will  be
                  'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest
                  in removal.  In our view, it is no  coincidence  that  the
                  phrase 'exceptional circumstances'  is  used  in  the  new
                  Rules in the context of weighing the competing factors for
                  and against deportation of foreign criminals.'

         26.  This may not matter if  it  is  possible  to  glean  from  the
             determination that, in substance,  the  panel  approached  its
             enquiry whether there was  something  very  compelling.   What
             appears to have been uppermost on their mind is the  inability
             of the relationship to continue outside  the  United  Kingdom.
             This appears to have acquired an importance at the expense  of
             a  properly  reasoned  analysis  of   the   public   interest.
             Remaining with  [57]  I  consider  that  the  panel  erred  by
             regarding  the  seriousness  of  the  offence  as   some   how
             ameliorated by the punishment imposed on the  claimant.   This
             was clearly wrong.  The scales are heavily weighted in  favour
             of deportation by virtue of the seriousness of the offence  as
             reflected in the sentence the length of which does not  reduce
             that weighting.

         27.  The panel failed to have any real regard to the seriousness of
             the offence itself and appears to have been content that  this
             was  reduced  by  the  assessment  revealing  a  low  risk  of
             reoffending and a low risk of serious harm to others.   Whilst
             the panel may not have seen the sentencing remarks, there  was
             enough in the psychiatric report for them to consider  whether
             the OASys Report assessment on the  risk  of  reoffending  was
             sufficiently reliable.   The  panel  did  not  ask  themselves
             whether  the  author  of  the  OASys  Report  had   seen   the
             psychiatric report.  Furthermore they did not  ask  themselves
             whether the evident readiness of the claimant to malinger  and
             seek to deceive others regarding his mental state  might  also
             have had an impact on  the  quality  and  reliability  of  the
             answers which he gave to the probation officer.

         28.  The reference in [57] to the  decision  by  the  Secretary  of
             State to grant the claimant three years'  discretionary  leave
             outside the marriage had  no  real  relevance  to  the  public
             interest side.  There is no indication that the  Secretary  of
             State was aware when she granted discretionary leave that  the
             claimant had been arrested.

         29.   Finally,  with  regard  to  the  relationship,  the  weighing
             exercise required the  panel  to  examine  its  intensity  and
             duration.  They did not address the concerns expressed  by  Dr
             Bashir regarding Ms  Mall's  reliability  as  a  witness  when
             accepting her account of difficulties in seeking to  obtain  a
             visa from the  Indian  High  Commission.   Pausing  there,  Mr
             McVeety withdrew the assertion in  the  grounds  of  challenge
             that it was open to the parties to relocate to Pakistan in the
             light of this possibility  no  longer  being  pursued  at  the
             hearing by the Presenting Officer.

         30.  Even if the panel was entitled to conclude that there  was  no
             possibility of Ms Mall settling in India, the determination is
             inadequately  reasoned  why.   There  is  a  possibility  that
             criminal behaviour can result in the permanent separation of a
             couple and whether  that  should  be  permitted  is  a  proper
             function of the exercise of proportionality and one which  the
             panel failed to undertake.

         31.  I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
              I have concerns about aspects of the evidence which mean that
             I cannot fairly proceed to remake the decision without  giving
             the parties a further opportunity of  addressing  the  aspects
             that trouble me.  It would be helpful to know if the probation
             officer, the author of the OASys Report, took into account the
             contents of the report by Dr Bashir.  Whether he did so has  a
             potential impact on the reliability of the author's assessment
             of the risk of reoffending, particularly in the light  of  the
             clear indication by  the  claimant  that  he  did  not  accept
             responsibility.

         32.  I consider also that further evidence is needed regarding  the
             likelihood of the  Indian  High  Commission  granting  a  visa
             temporary or permanent to Ms Mall  as  a  British  citizen  of
             Pakistani origin.  The panel accepted  her  testimony  of  the
             difficulties that she had encountered but that evidence  needs
             to be reassessed in the light of Dr  Bashir's  concerns  about
             her reliability.  The test now to be applied  under  s.117C(5)
             of the 2002 Act is whether the effect  on  Ms  Mall  would  be
             'unduly  harsh'.   This  requires  further   submissions   and
             argument.

         33.  Accordingly the hearing will be adjourned for that purpose  on
             a date to be fixed.

         34.  I direct that the claimant file with the  Upper  Tribunal  and
             serve on the SSHD an updated bundle of documents dealing  with
             the  above  points  including  any  additional  statements  of
             evidence relied on within 21 days of the date of  the  sending
             out of this decision. The parties are to file with  the  Upper
             Tribunal and serve on the other party their skeleton arguments
             no  later  than  14  days  after  receipt  of  the  claimant's
             bundles.'

REMAKING THE DECISION

 2. There was been no compliance with my directions.  It is  puzzling  that
    the Secretary of State who  sets  great  store  by  seeking  to  remove
    foreign national criminals has not applied her resources to this  case.
    With characteristic candour Mr McVeety acknowledged there was no reason
    why  the  directions  had  not  been  complied  with.    It   is   also
    unsatisfactory that the claimant's advisors did not bother  to  comply.
    All the more so because this case involved  consideration  of  the  new
    provisions identified  in  my  direction  at  [34]  above  as  well  as
    consideration of changes to  the  Immigration  Rules  which  Mr  Timson
    acknowledged are applicable to this case following the decision  in  YM
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1202 as affirmed  in  ZZ  (Tanzania]  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1404.  Given
    the desirability for detailed skeleton arguments I  proceeded  to  hear
    evidence from claimant  and  his  wife  Ms  Mall  as  well  as  opening
    submissions on that evidence.  I directed that the Secretary  of  State
    file within  7 days of the  hearing  her  written  submissions  and  Mr
    Timson to respond within 7 days of receipt of those submissions.  I  am
    grateful to them for their compliance with this direction.

LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK

 3.  Part 5A of the Immigration Act 2014 applies to this case by virtue  of
    the transitional provisions at Section 75.   Its terms are as follows:

         "PART 5A

         Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations


         117A   Application of this Part


             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Acts-

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)   In considering the public interest question,  the  court
                  or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
             117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                      117C.

             (3)   In subsection (2), "the public interest question"  means
                  the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                  under Article 8(2).

         117B    Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
             cases


             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the  person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

         117C    Article 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                  in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted.

         117D     Interpretation of this Part



             (1)  In this Part-

                     .  'Article  8'  means  Article  8  of   the   European
                       Convention on Human Rights;

                     . 'qualifying child' means a person who  is  under  the
                       age of 18 and who-

                           (a)  is a British citizen, or


                      (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                           period of seven years or more;


                     . 'qualifying partner' means a partner who-

                           (a)  is a British citizen, or


                      (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the
                           meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section
                           33(2A) of that Act).



             (2)  In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person-

                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                      offence, and

                  (c)  who-

                      (i)  has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
                           of at least 12 months,

                      (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                           serious harm, or

                      (iii)    is a persistent offender.

             (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a  person  subject
                  to an order under-

                  (a)  section 5 of the Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act
                      1964 (insanity etc),

                  (b)  section 57 of the Criminal Procedure  (Scotland)  Act
                      1995 (insanity etc), or

                  (c)  Article 50A of the Mental Health  (Northern  Ireland)
                      Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted  of
                      an offence.

             (4)  In this  Part,  references  to  a  person  who  has  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain  length
                  of time-

                  (a)  do not include a person who has received a  suspended
                      sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the
                      sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to
                      take effect);

                  (b)  do not include a person who has been sentenced  to  a
                      period of imprisonment of that length of time only by
                      virtue of being sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences
                      amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

                  (c)  include a person who is sentenced  to  detention,  or
                      ordered or directed to be detained, in an institution
                      other than a  prison  (including,  in  particular,  a
                      hospital or an institution for young  offenders)  for
                      that length of time; and

                  (d)  include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment  or
                      detention, or ordered or directed to be detained, for
                      an indeterminate period, provided that  it  may  last
                      for at least that length of time.

         (5)  If any question arises for the purposes of  this  Part  as  to
             whether a person is a British citizen, it is  for  the  person
             asserting that fact to prove it."


 4. Amendments to paragraph 398ff came took effect from 28  July  2014  and
    are relevant to this case:


         "Deportation and Article 8


         A398. These rules apply where:


               a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
                  deportation would be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                  obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   Human   Rights
                  Convention;


               b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
                  against him to be revoked.


         398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and


               a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;




               b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or


               c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                  view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law,


              The Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

             (a)      the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and


                      (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case


                   (a)     it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported; and


               b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
                  without the person who is to be deported; or


               b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  Citizen  or
                  settled in the UK, and

                   i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and


                  ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                      and


                 iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A.  This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
             if -

               a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
                  of his life; and


               b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


               c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported.

         399B.  Where  an  Article  8  claim  from  a  foreign  criminal  is
             successful:

               a) in the case of a person who is in  the  UK  unlawfully  or
                  whose leave to enter or remain has  been  cancelled  by  a
                  deportation  order,  limited  leave  may  be  granted  for
                  periods not  exceeding  30  months  and  subject  to  such
                  conditions   as   the   Secretary   of   State   considers
                  appropriate;


               b) in the case of a person who has not  been  served  with  a
                  deportation order, any limited leave to  enter  or  remain
                  may be curtailed to a period not exceeding 30  months  and
                  conditions  may  be  varied  to  such  conditions  as  the
                  Secretary of State considers appropriate;


               c) indefinite leave to enter or remain may be  revoked  under
                  section 76 of the 2002 Act and limited leave to  enter  or
                  remain granted  for  a  period  not  exceeding  30  months
                  subject to such  conditions  as  the  Secretary  of  State
                  considers appropriate;


               d) revocation of a deportation order does  not  confer  entry
                  clearance or leave to enter or remain  or  re-instate  any
                  previous leave."

 5. The Secretary of State has published a policy s.EX.2 is in these terms:

         "for the purposes of EX.1.(b) "insurmountable obstacles" means  the
         very significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant
         or their partner in continuing their family life  together  outside
         the UK which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
         hardship for the applicant or their partner."

THE CLAIMANT'S CASE AND THE EVIDENCE

 6. In the absence of any skeleton argument before I heard the  evidence  I
    asked Mr Timson to clarify the claimant's case which is as follows:

         (i)  it is accepted that the claimant does  not meet Exception 1 in
             s.117C.

         (ii)     it is contended that Exception 2 applies.   Miss  Mall  as
             qualifying partner by virtue of her British citizenship.   The
             effect of the claimant's deportation on her  would  be  unduly
             harsh.

         (iii)    Paragraph 399(b) applies on the basis it would  be  unduly
             harsh for Miss Mall to live in India and  unduly  harsh   were
             she to remain in the United Kingdom without the claimant.

 7. The new evidence relied on by the parties comprises

    (i)  updated statements by the claimant and Ms Mall

    (ii)     a bundle of country information, and

    (iii)    an exchange of correspondence in relation to the OASys Report.

 8. The claimant explains in his new statement that:

    (i)  Ms Mall is pregnant with his child and the  baby is due  17  April
         2015

    (ii) the claimant is extremely  remorseful  for  having  committed  the
         crime and had  been  drawn  into  it  without  full  knowledge  and
         understanding of what was happening.   He  has  a  record  of  good
         behaviour in the prison and no other criminal history

    (iii)    when the psychiatric assessment was carried out by  Dr  Bashir
         the  claimant  did   not  deliberately  try  to  mislead   him   or
         misrepresent his situation. He has never hurt his wife.

    (iv)     throughout their relationship he has tried to  obtain  a  visa
         for Pakistan and she endeavoured to obtain a visa for  India.   His
         wife had even been unable to make an application due to the  Indian
         High Commission not treating individuals of Pakistani origin in the
         same way as others.  They  had  visited  the  "Indian  Embassy"  in
         Birmingham on six occasions since June  2014.  On  each,  enquiries
         were made about his wife travelling to India and she was refused an
         application form on each occasion because of her origins.

    (v)  their child would be of mixed race and it would be  difficult  for
         the child to be allowed entry into India due to its origins.

 9. When asked in cross-examination about the attempts to obtain a visa for
    Ms Mall for India the claimant referred to having  sent  a  request  by
    recorded delivery on 20/11 and there had been no answer.  He had chased
    it up by telephone. On the five or six occasions he  had  travelled  to
    Birmingham he made enquiries about his wife's visa  and  asked  for  an
    application form which was refused because she was born in Pakistan and
    is a Christian. He had been not allowed to see a  higher  officer  when
    rebuffed.  As to whether he had paid a  fee  with  the  application  in
    2011, the claimant explained that he had provided details of his credit
    card and telephone number and his own address.  The fee  had  not  been
    taken.  He is not currently on any medication  nor  is  he  seeing  any
    counsellor or psychiatrist.

10. In my questions for clarification, I asked the claimant  what  type  of
    visa had been applied for in 2011.  He responded that it had been   for
    settlement and travel as well. As to when he had applied in 2011 he did
    not remember exactly but believed it was June or July, after his arrest
    by Immigration Officers but before the arrest for the criminal offence.
    As to why he had applied for a settlement visa, the claimant  explained
    that he had consulted his solicitor who had advised that  it  would  be
    very difficult for his wife to obtain a visa and  live  in  India.  The
    application for a settlement visa had been because of the  difficulties
    he had encountered living in the United Kingdom and he  confirmed  that
    they had decided to go and live in India in 2011.  He was last in India
    in February 2012 but his wife had not accompanied him as  she  had  not
    been given a visa.

11. Miss Mall's statement confirms the following:

    (i)  That she is pregnant

    (ii)     The couple have lived together since 2010

    (iii)    She has tried to obtain a temporary visa to enter India  since
         2011.  She had first written a letter by recorded delivery "letting
         them know that the respondent had no leave to remain in the UK  and
         that I wished to travel to India with him but I received no reply".



    (iv)     She was refused entry to the Indian Visa Centre which  was  in
         Manchester at the time the claimant had received notice of intended
         deportation. She was informed by the Manchester  Visa  Centre  that
         they were unable to help her because she was  of  Pakistan  origin.
         The Manchester India Visa Centre refused to give her an application
         form.  The form that people of Pakistani origin require is  not  on
         the  internet.   She  accompanied  the  claimant  on  each  of  the
         approximately six occasions he had gone to renew his  passport.  On
         four, she asked if she could obtain a visa for India and  was  told
         she could not because of her origin and was refused an  application
         form on all occasions.

12. I pause here to note that  both  statements  referred  to  attempts  to
    obtain a visa for the claimant  to  travel  to  Pakistan.   Mr  McVeety
    confirmed the Secretary of State's position that it is accepted he will
    be unable to travel there.

13. At the hearing Ms Mall explained that she was naturalised as a  British
    citizen  in  September  2011.   When  asked  by  Mr  McVeety  how  many
    applications she had made for a visa she confirmed that none  had  ever
    been made.   She  had  never  been  given  an  application  form.   She
    confirmed that she had spoken to the staff and had also written to  the
    Consulate General which had been sent by recorded delivery.

14. Ms Mall also explained that the family in the United  Kingdom  includes
    her parents and a brother and sister.  She  did  not  see  her  parents
    regularly, just on special occasions.  Mr McVeety reminded her  of  the
    earlier evidence that  they  had  disapproved  of  the  match  and  she
    explained that had now changed as she was  pregnant.  In  addition  her
    mother was unwell. Over the last year she had seen them some 30  or  40
    times. Miss Mall works as a house carer/ assistant for 33 hours a week.

15. When questioned further about the application in  2011,  she  explained
    that an application had not been made  then  but  they  had  written  a
    letter together and sent this to an address in  Birmingham.   No  forms
    had been completed.

16. In response to my questions Miss Mall explained that she had arrived in
    the United Kingdom in  September  2005  from  Lahore.   Prior  to  that
    journey she had not been outside Pakistan. She confirmed  she  worships
    at a Catholic church in Old Trafford.

17. A file note has been provided of the telephone conversation between the
    appellant's solicitors  and  the  author  of  the  OASys  Report.   She
    confirmed that she did not see the psychiatric report but had been sent
    the pre-sentence report and that the Probation Officers  had  sight  of
    the psychiatric report when preparing  the  pre-sentence  report.  Miss
    Flick confirmed in a subsequent email on 29 October 2014 that  she  was
    unable to confirm whether she had sight of the  psychiatric  report  as
    with the claimant no longer in custody, she was unable  to  access  his
    records.

FINDINGS

18. I make these findings of fact.  Miss Mall either alone or together with
    the claimant has never made application for a settlement  or  temporary
    visa for her to travel to India.  The  claimant  was  not  telling  the
    truth when he explained that he had provided his credit card details in
    2011.  There would be no requirement to  do  so  if,  as  Ms  Mall  has
    explained, it was  a letter of enquiry.  I accept the possibility  that
    such an enquiry was made but do not accept that any serious attempt has
    been made by the parties to obtain an application form and apply.

19. The claimant relies on an extract from The Guardian newspaper dated  14
    August 2010 which indicates that applications by  British  citizens  of
    Pakistan origin take longer. It quotes from the website for  visas  for
    India that applications from persons of Pakistani origin take a minimum
    of 7-8 weeks in contrast to British Citizens who  take  2  to  3  days.
    Such evidence does not support the assertion that simply by  virtue  of
    Ms Mall's Pakistan origins she would be unable to obtain  a  settlement
    or visit visa. There may be a delay but no more than that.

20. I do not accept that the  evidence  demonstrates  Ms  Mall  would  face
    difficulties in India by  virtue  of  her  origins  or  religion  or  a
    combination of both that would make it unreasonable  for  her  to  live
    there.  Furthermore, I do  not accept that the claimant  himself  would
    face any difficulties as a consequence or his  marriage.   The  country
    information relied on demonstrates that  a  number  of  individuals  of
    Pakistan origin have been granted citizenship in India.   The  evidence
    does not demonstrate that Christians per  se  have  real  difficulties.
    Inevitably Ms Mall's faith and her origins will attract  attention  but
    the evidence does not show anything approaching hostility.

21. The article by Robert Wintemute in the Guardian edition 14 August  2010
    identifies a long processing period for visa  applications  without  an
    explanation  why  he  considers  that  this  makes  travel   to   India
    impossible. He refers to those who are denied visas resenting India for
    excluding them and yet he does not particularise why visas are  denied.
    The article does not represent a balanced view. The  extract  from  the
    International Edition of The News for May 21, 2014 refers  to  problems
    encountered by Pakistanis in obtaining visas  to  India.  The  concerns
    expressed by the author who  is  a  teacher  of  English  as  a  second
    language based in Sydney appears to relate to difficulties  encountered
    by Pakistan nationals rather than British citizens of Pakistan origin.

22. An extract  from  a  website  www.ekklesia.co.uk  refers  to  hostility
    towards Christians in a remote area of Orissa State in 2008.  There  is
    nothing more recent to indicate that that hostility has  spread  or  is
    widespread.

23. The OASys Report was based on an assessment carried out  shortly  after
    the claimant was sentenced in October 2012, as observed by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at [28] of its decision.  The  claimant  is  assessed  as
    being of no risk  of  serious  harm  to  others  and  of  low  risk  of
    reoffending.  It  is  also  recorded   that   he   had   not   accepted
    responsibility for the offences. The OASys report refers at  [10.8]  to
    Dr Bashir's report by date. I note that it refers to a report dated  18
    October but as there is no dispute that he prepared this report  before
    sentencing on 17 October this is a typographical  error.  There  is  no
    reference to the "most likely diagnosis of malingering" that Dr  Bashir
    considered might be the case. It is not at all clear that the author of
    the OASYs report was aware of this aspect which clearly  had  relevance
    to the assessment being  undertaken.   I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
    assessed low risk of reoffending is particularly reliable.





DISCUSSION

24. There is no question that the couple are committed to one  another  and
    that they have a genuine relationship.  For the reasons  I  have  given
    there is no practical or legal bar to the  couple  living  together  in
    India. Their relationship was formed when the claimant had no leave  to
    remain. Although he was refused leave to remain based on his  marriage,
    he was granted discretionary leave until 25 November 2014.

25. Mr Timson's post-hearing skeleton accepts  that  in  the  light  of  YM
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA 1292, I am to apply the Rules introduced in
    July 2014.  These are capable of  permitting  the  claimant  to  remain
    notwithstanding the public interest.  His offending places him  in  the
    upper tercile of the range in paragraph 398(b).  It  is  accepted  that
    paragraph 399(a) does not apply because there is no child. It is argued
    that 399(b) applies because it would be unduly harsh  for  Ms  Mall  to
    live in the country to which the claimant is to be deported and for her
    to remain here without him.  It is also argued that section 117C (5) is
    applicable as this too raises the threshold of undue harshness.  It  is
    also argued that "unduly harsh" should be read with child  guidance  at
    section 3 and the partner guidance at section 4 of the IDI version  5.0
    dated 28 July 2014.

26. The recent decision of the Court of Appeal  in  SSHD  v  AJ  (  Angola)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 emphasises the significant effect of the new rules
    as a complete code. Sales LJ observed at [39] :

        "...because it means that an official or a tribunal should seek  to
    take account of any Convention rights of an appellant through the  lens
    of the rules themselves, rather than looking to apply Convention rights
    for themselves in a free- standing way outside the new rules."

        And at [40]:

        "The  requirement  that  claims  by  appellants  who  are   foreign
    criminals for leave to  remain,  based  on  the  Convention  rights  of
    themselves or their partners, relations or children,  (emphasis  added)
    should be assessed under the  new  rules  and  through  their  lens  is
    important, as the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) has emphasised."

    Although the Court of Appeal was considering the July 2012  rules,  its
    judgment applies equally to the rules made two years later.

27. It is not argued that the claimant can benefit from paragraph  399A  as
    he has not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his
    life.  He has undoubtedly integrated to an extent in the United Kingdom
    but I do not consider there would be any significant obstacles  to  him
    living in India.

28. Ms Mall's circumstances cannot be considered without taking account  of
    her pregnancy. Absent this factor, I do not consider it would be unduly
    harsh for her to accompany the  claimant  to  India  and  for  them  to
    continue their family life there.  Having come to Britain in 2005, Miss
    Mall has experience of moving to a new country and culture.  I  do  not
    consider her origins and faith would not rule out such an option.   She
    has family in the United Kingdom from  whom  she  would  be  separated.
    However as a British citizen it will be open to her to come  back  here
    regularly and otherwise keep in touch by social media as many do.

29. The test in paragraph 399 (b) (ii) requires Ms Mall to show  compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in EX.2;  see  [5]  above.
    The resulting test is a demanding one. I am however persuaded that  the
    fact of Ms Mall's pregnancy when considered with the potential  absence
    of family support in India and an inability to  access  NHS  and  other
    healthcare interventions that she would be entitled  to  as  a  British
    Citizen living in this country, triggers compelling circumstances  over
    and above those described in EX.2. That is not the end  of  the  matter
    however. Paragraph 399(b) (iii) also needs to be met which involves  an
    enquiry whether it would be unduly harsh for Ms Mall to remain  in  the
    UK without her husband. The focus  must  again  be  on  her  pregnancy.
    Although s.55 has no application, the reality is that the baby will  be
    born all being well  in  April  2015.  Does  this  aspect  elevate  the
    circumstances to unduly harsh? On the  evidence  before  me  Ms  Mall's
    relations with her parents have recently improved.  Although her mother
    has been  unwell,  I  consider  there  will  be  emotional  and  likely
    practical family support when the baby is delivered. The absence of her
    husband will be hard on her but in the context of the above factors,  I
    do not consider that it would be unduly harsh for Ms Mall to give birth
    in the absence of her husband or that this would result in very serious
    hardship.

30. How does the Act impact on this case? In order to come within Exception
    2 of s.117C(5) not only does the claimant need to demonstrate a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner (which he has  in
    this case by virtue of that relationship  and her citizenship), he also
    needs to demonstrate that the effect on Miss Mall  of  his  deportation
    would be unduly harsh.  I see no basis for finding  that  the  test  of
    unduly harsh under primary legislation can be anything less  than  that
    defined in the Rules. Having found that it would not be unduly harsh on
    Ms Mall to remain without her husband under the Rules, I also  conclude
    that same result flows under s. 117C (5).

31. Returning to the Rules, I must also  ask  whether  notwithstanding  the
    inability of the parties to come within the  exceptions  in  the  rules
    there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the  rules
    sufficient to trump the public interest. I am satisfied there are  not.
    The public interest requires the claimant's deportation which  is  made
    greater by the seriousness of his offence reflected in the three  years
    term of imprisonment.  The force of the public  interest  reflects  the
    will of parliament and, as a consequence, this is a powerful factor  in
    the Article 8 consideration.

32. The claimant continues to question his culpability which, coupled  with
    the suggestion of malingering by Dr Bashir, brings  into  question  the
    sincerity of his remorse and the reliability of the assessment  of  low
    reoffending.

33. Whilst the claimant obtained leave after he married,  the  relationship
    was formed whilst he did not have leave. He does  not  have  indefinite
    leave and his criminal offending has imperilled such leave as he has. I
    have found that his wife could not accompany him to  India  because  of
    her pregnancy but I have concluded that it would not  be  unduly  harsh
    for her to remain even though that will entail having her child without
    the presence of her husband. Such private life that  the  claimant  has
    developed in the UK does not have any compelling features sufficient to
    tip the scales. None of these factors even when considered cumulatively
    comes near to the very compelling circumstances demanded  by  paragraph
    398.

34. Accordingly the appeal by the claimant  against  the  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State that s.32 (5) of the 2007 Act applies is dismissed.





Signed
                                                                     Date  6
    January 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



