
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00914/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2013                               |On 29 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

            LORD BURNS (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL



                                   Between

                          dushaine jermaine gruber

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Shah, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who is a national of Jamaica, was  born  on  17  January
    1990. He appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated  on  15  March  2013  upholding  the  respondent's
    decision of 16 October 2012 to make a  deportation  order  pursuant  to
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 (the 2007 Act).

 2. The appellant was born and brought up in Jamaica.  On 6 September  2007
    when he was 17 he was granted indefinite  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as a dependant of his mother. Between May 2010 and July 2011 he
    was convicted for eight offences, including possession of a  controlled
    drug (Class B - cannabis resin), possession of a controlled drug  Class
    A (crack cocaine), assaulting a  police  officer  and  obstructing  the
    powers of search for drugs.  On 28 July  2009  he  was  issued  with  a
    penalty notice relating to possession of a controlled drug (Class  B  -
    cannabis/cannabis resin).

 3. On 22 July 2011 at London Crown Court, the appellant was  convicted  of
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm  and  sentenced  to  two  years'
    imprisonment. It is plain from the sentencing  judge's  remarks,  which
    were set out in some detail in paragraph 6 of the First-tier Tribunal's
    determination, that the appellant and his  co-defendant  had  assaulted
    the victim by punching him whereupon the victim fled and the  appellant
    pursued him.  Thereafter the victim was hit on the head by one  of  the
    assailants and while being held  by  the  other,  was  subjected  to  a
    further assault with a bottle.  The victim was then pushed  on  to  the
    road into the direction of oncoming traffic, fell to the ground and was
    attacked by being punched and stamped upon the stomach  and  head.  All
    this was recorded on CCTV which was viewed  by  the  sentencing  judge.
    The sentencing judge found  that  it  fell  under  category  1  of  the
    sentencing guidelines.  He viewed the culpability of the appellant  and
    his co-defendant as extremely serious  since  they  had  perpetrated  a
    sustained assault. The  sentence  of  the  court  was  one  two  years'
    imprisonment.  That sentence came to  an  end  in  July  2012  but  the
    appellant remained in detention having regard to the deportation  order
    made on 16 October 2012.

 4. The presentencing report in respect of the appellant found him to be of
    medium risk of harm to members of the public and that harm was said  to
    be likely  to  be  physical  and  emotional,  resulting  from  assault.
    Following a request for Offender Management Information  on  a  Foreign
    National Prisoner, dated 23 May 2012, the  appellant  was  assessed  at
    medium risk of serious harm.

 5. As at the time of decision of the Secretary of State appealed  against,
    namely February 2013, the appellant had two children who were  resident
    in the United Kingdom with their mother in Manchester.  Those  children
    were twins aged 2 years of age and were United  Kingdom  citizens.  The
    mother of those children had made written representations that she  was
    in a relationship with the appellant  and  had  visited  the  appellant
    while  he  was  in  prison  together  with  the   children.    In   the
    supplementary reasons for deportation letter dated 26 February 2013  it
    was stated that the appellant had been in custody and  later  detention
    since his children were approximately 8 months old and had  not  played
    any physical role in the life of the children since his conviction.  It
    was not considered, in the light of that, that removal from the  United
    Kingdom would be likely to affect his  children's  day-to-day  life  or
    emotional wellbeing. He could maintain contact with them  from  Jamaica
    by telephone and other means.  Their primary carer  was  their  mother.
    It was considered that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399A of the new Immigration Rules.  In respect  of  paragraph
    399B of those Rules it was accepted by the respondent was in a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his partner but he had  not  lived  in
    the United Kingdom with valid leave continuously for fifteen years  and
    thus could not meet the requirements of that paragraph.  The respondent
    also concluded that the decision to deport did not amount to  a  breach
    of  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights   (the
    Convention)  and  there  were  no   exceptional   circumstances   which
    outweighed the public interest in the appellant's deportation.

 6. The appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    and his case was heard at Kingston Crown Court on 4 March 2013 before a
    panel consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll and Dr de Barros.
    In a preliminary ruling at the instance of the appellant in  connection
    with certain police  evidence  contained  in  a  separate  respondent's
    bundle, the First-tier Tribunal decided that information enclosed  with
    a letter  of  25  February  2013  from  the  respondent  would  not  be
    considered as evidence in the appeal.  It related  to  the  appellant's
    association with gangs linked to drugs  supply  and  violence  and  was
    based  on   intelligence   information   to   which   the   appellant's
    representative had taken objection. Despite that objection, much of  it
    was included within the appellant's bundle, as the panel noted [44]

 7. The appellant gave evidence as did his partner.  It was recognised that
    the appellant was liable to automatic deportation in terms  of  Section
    32 of the 2007 Act. However it was  argued  that  he  fell  within  the
    exception under Section 33 of that Act,  namely  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would be in breach of Article 8  of  the  Convention.   The
    Tribunal recognised in its approach to its determination that, in terms
    of the paragraph 397 of the Immigration Rules, a deportation could  not
    be made if the person's removal would be contrary to the Convention and
    it considered the content of paragraphs 398 and 399 of those Rules.  It
    was  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  was  unable  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of those Rules  but  the  Tribunal  went  on  to  consider
    whether the decision to deport would contravene Article 8 and addressed
    its mind to that question under reference to relevant case law which is
    set out in paragraphs 20 to 23 of the decision.

 8. The Tribunal then analyses what it describes  as  a  very  lengthy  and
    troubling history of  offending  and  makes  findings  adverse  to  the
    appellant in respect of his credibility.  Having  heard  evidence  from
    both the appellant and his partner, the Tribunal did not accept, unlike
    the respondent in the decision of February 2012, that the appellant and
    his partner were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  It accepted
    that  the  appellant  and  his  partner  met  in  2008  and  formed   a
    relationship but found little or no documentary evidence to  show  that
    they actually cohabited.  The appellant was recorded as stating in  the
    pre-sentence report that he was not currently  in  a  relationship  and
    informed the author that he resided in council house accommodation with
    his mother and younger brother, and had resided there since  coming  to
    the United Kingdom in 2007.  In the circumstances, the Tribunal was not
    satisfied that the appellant had ever  lived  with  his  partner  on  a
    permanent or  even  semi-permanent  basis.   His  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal to the effect that he had been present at the hospital at  the
    birth of the twins was contradicted by the evidence of the mother.   It
    concluded that the evidence demonstrated that the  appellant  had  left
    his partner in March 2010, had not lived with her since that  date  and
    had never lived  with  the  twins  (see  paragraph  32).  The  Tribunal
    acknowledged in the same paragraph that his partner had visited him  in
    prison and had before them the full list of  prison  visits.   However,
    all those visits had taken place after the appellant had been  notified
    of his liability to deportation by letter dated 12 July  2012.   Whilst
    the appellant attempted to rely on his relationship as  a  "stepfather"
    with his partner's daughter who had been born on 22 February  2001,  he
    did not mention the existence of that child to the author of  the  pre-
    sentence report or to the questionnaire submitted to  the  Home  Office
    when notified of liability  to  deportation.   There  was  no  credible
    evidence to show that he had played any role in her  life.   The  child
    suffered from certain serous medical conditions.

 9. The Tribunal considered the family ties that the appellant retained  in
    Jamaica and found that, having been bought up  by  his  grandmother  in
    Jamaica until 2007, he had meaningful  cultural,  social  and  familial
    ties there. He had close family members living there.

10. In relation to his children, the Tribunal acknowledged that he  enjoyed
    a family life with those children and that the decision to  deport  him
    amounted to an  interference  with  that  family  life.   However,  the
    evidence as to his very  poor  parenting  coupled  with  his  offending
    history and propensity to violence did not support the argument that it
    was in the best interests of his children for  him  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

11. The Tribunal found that the decision to deport  did  not  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's right to respect for
    family life in the context of his relationship with those children.  It
    was not satisfied that the appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner since they had not lived together for  at
    least three years and concluded that the decision  to  deport  did  not
    amount to a disproportionate interference with his right to respect for
    his family life in the context of his relationship  with  his  partner,
    his sons and  his  stepdaughter.   The  Tribunal  also  considered  the
    appellant's right to respect for his private life and for  reasons  set
    out at paragraph 42 considered that,  if  deported,  his  private  life
    would continue in respect of all its essential elements.

12. On 8  April  2013  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal against that decision.

13. The appeal was then heard by the Upper Tribunal on 13 June  2013.   The
    appellant was again represented by Mr Shah.  He spoke to the grounds of
    appeal which were before us.  Mr Shah  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to deal adequately with a preliminary argument that the
    respondent had not taken into account the factors that she was required
    to by virtue of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009 (the 2009 Act).  It was submitted that that  section  required
    the  Secretary  of  State  to  treat  the  welfare  of  the  twins  and
    stepdaughter as a paramount consideration and, in the context  of  this
    case, the Secretary of State had failed in her duty  in  that  respect.
    He accepted that the UKBA had  written  a  letter  to  the  appellant's
    partner dated 23 May 2012 asking for detailed information in respect of
    the children.  That letter was  written  pursuant  to  the  duty  under
    Section 55. However, no reply had been received to that  letter  which,
    apparently, although sent by recorded delivery, was  returned  as  "not
    called for".

14. The Tribunal dealt with this matter at paragraphs 16 to 18.  They  were
    satisfied that the respondent wrote to the appellant's partner  at  the
    correct  address  and  used  her  best  endeavours  to  obtain  further
    information about the appellant's children.  It was contended  both  at
    the First-tier Tribunal and by Mr Shah before  us  that  further  steps
    ought to have been taken by the respondent, for example by  writing  to
    the appellant's legal representatives.  However there was  no  evidence
    to show that those representatives were also acting for the appellant's
    partner.

15. The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that in  the  circumstances,  the
    Secretary of State fulfilled the duty upon her under section 55 of  the
    2009 Act.   The Secretary of State made attempts to obtain  information
    from the partner of the appellant in good  faith.  In  the  context  of
    considering the reasons for deportation in the letter  of  26  February
    2013, the best interests of  the  children  are  carefully  considered.
    Reference is made to paragraphs 43 to 45 of that letter.  In any event,
    the appellant's partner gave evidence before the  Tribunal  and  had  a
    full opportunity to address the specific matters which were  raised  in
    the letter of 23 May 2012.  We do  not  consider  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in its consideration of this matter.  Although  Mr  Shah
    pointed out that various points were  made  within  that  letter  which
    sought additional  information,  he  was  not  able  to  point  to  any
    information which, if provided to the Secretary of  State,  would  have
    made any material difference to the consideration of this matter.

16. Mr Shah had made an application to the First-tier Tribunal  to  adjourn
    so that the matter could be remitted back to  the  Secretary  of  State
    which was refused.  No ground of appeal is taken against the refusal of
    that application.. In paragraph 17, it is clear that in doing  so,  the
    Tribunal was satisfied that  the  appeal  could  be  justly  determined
    without such a remit. In view of the careful way in which the  Tribunal
    then proceeded to examine the interests of the children in the  context
    of the Article 8 assessment, we endorse that approach and find no error
    of law therein.

17. Mr Shah further argued that the Tribunal did not  specifically  address
    itself to all the steps set out in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   However,
    since the Tribunal carried out an assessment of the proportionality  of
    the decision to deport at paragraph 40, it follows that  it  must  have
    addressed the prior questions and answered them in the affirmative.  In
    any event, the Tribunal expressly recognises that it  considered  "Lord
    Bingham's step by step approach" at paragraph 21.  Under  reference  to
    Maslov v Austria, it was suggested that the Tribunal failed to  address
    the effect of deportation on his family and children but the  terms  of
    paragraph  40  of  the  Tribunal's   determination   contradicts   that
    assertion.  Mr Shah submitted that the Tribunal had fallen  into  error
    by failing to accept that the appellant had a genuine relationship with
    his partner, contrary  to  the  position  adopted  by  the  respondent.
    However, the Tribunal was not bound by the respondent's  conclusion  on
    this matter which, along with all  questions  of  fact,  was  at  large
    before it.  It has set out cogent reasons, based upon the  evidence  it
    heard, for its conclusion at paragraphs 29 to 33 and these disclose  no
    error of law.

18. The fifth ground of appeal contends that the Tribunal erred in  failing
    to have proper regard to the circumstances surrounding the daughter  of
    the  appellant's  partner.   However,  from   paragraph   35   of   its
    determination it is clear that the Tribunal  carefully  considered  the
    salient features of that  child's  circumstances  and  it  quotes  from
    medical records before  it  which  emphasised  the  importance  of  the
    appellant's partner having support in looking after her daughter.   The
    finding, which the Tribunal was entitled to make,  that  there  was  no
    genuine and subsisting relationship legitimately led to the  conclusion
    at paragraph 41 that the  decision  to  deport  did  not  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with his right to a family life with  his
    partner and her daughter.

19. Mr Shah also argued that the Tribunal erred in law in failing to comply
    with its own ruling not to consider police evidence enclosed  with  the
    letter of 25 February  2013.  The  Tribunal  narrate  their  ruling  at
    paragraph 15.  However, Tribunal say this [44]:

         "We have not taken into account the  police  intelligence  evidence
         submitted under cover of the letter of 25 February  2012  from  the
         respondent. There have, however, been included in  the  appellant's
         bundle two police witness statements - pages 28 and following.  The
         second of these statements by a PC Lisa  Ryal  provides  background
         and context to  the  complexity  of  that  gang  offending  has  on
         communities in Lambeth and London as a whole. It is well known that
         the Metropolitan  Police  have  been  given  greater  priority  and
         devoted substantial resources to tackling gang crime."

20. It was accepted by Mr Melvin that the reference to the statement by  PC
    Lisa Ryal was "police intelligence evidence submitted under  cover  the
    letter of 25 February 2012 from the respondent". However, he  submitted
    that in its assessment of public interest and the appellant's  criminal
    offending, there was no finding that  such  activity  was  in  any  way
    aggravated by the appellant's membership of gangs.

21. We are satisfied that the Tribunal did not materially  err  in  law  in
    making the reference it did at paragraph  44  to  the  content  of  the
    statement. As is clear, the only reference in that paragraph is to  the
    "background and context of the impact that gang offending  has  had  on
    communities in Lambeth and London as a whole." It is not  evident  from
    its determination that  Tribunal placed this matter in the balance when
    assessing the proportionality of the decision to deport.   The Tribunal
    restricted  itself  to  a  careful  consideration  of  the   particular
    circumstances of the history of offending and, in  particular,  to  the
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm for which he  was  sentenced  in
    July 2011 as we have narrated above. There  is  no  suggestion  in  the
    sentencing judge's remarks or in the reasoning  of  the  Tribunal  that
    that offence was gang related.

22. We consider that the reference to the statement of PC Lisa Ryal and the
    other material which, in any event, had been placed in the  appellant's
    bundle, a bundle served on the Tribunal after objection to it had  been
    made, is not  indicative  that  was  not  taken  into  account  in  the
    Tribunal's consideration of  the  issues  upon  which  it  required  to
    decide. It is, we consider, simply a reference to the existence of  the
    excluded material and a description of it.

23. In the circumstances we consider that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law  and  we  uphold
    it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The determination of the First-tier tribunal did not involve the making
    of an error of law and we uphold it.





Signed                                  Date

Lord Burns
(Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)



