
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/00335/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 July 2017                            | On 13 July 2017                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 HANAD OSMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Warren, instructed by South West Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Hanad Osman, was born on 17 October 1994 and
    is a male citizen of the Netherlands.  On 14 July 2016 the decision was
    made to deport the appellant.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Gurung-Thapa) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  24
    April 2017, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of  State  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. First, the Secretary of State acknowledges that  the  judge  identified
    the correct approach for determining residency of an EEA national [46].
     However, the Secretary of State  asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to
    include a custodial sentence from 1 September 2010 to 7  December  2010
    which the appellant served at HMP Cookham Wood.  On the basis that  the
    judge found that the appellant had entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  1
    September 2005 [45] the higher level of protection available under  the
    EEA Regulations was not available to  this  appellant.   Secondly,  the
    Secretary of State disputes the start date of the appellant's residence
    on the basis that there is alternative evidence  indicating  that  this
    should be 18 January 2016.  The judge had preferred  evidence  to  show
    that the date should  be  1  September  2005  when  the  appellant  had
    enrolled at school.

 3. Miss Warren submitted that the period of four months referred to in the
    grounds of appeal when the appellant was subject  to  a  detention  and
    training order should not prevent the accrual of 10  years'  continuous
    residence for the purposes of the  Regulations.   She  relied  upon  MG
    (Portugal) [2014] 1 WLR 2441 and also the Upper Tribunal decision in MG
    (prison - Article 28(3)(a) of the Citizens Directive)  Portugal  [2014]
    UKUT 392 (IAC) in which  the  Tribunal  held  that  "the  judgment  [MG
    (Portugal)]  should  be  understood  as  meaning  that  a   period   of
    imprisonment during those ten years  does  not  necessarily  prevent  a
    person from qualifying  for  enhanced  protection  if  that  person  is
    sufficiently integrated."  MG had required the judicial  decision-maker
    to determine "whether the integrating links previously forged with  the
    host member state have been broken."

 4. I agree with Miss Warren's submissions.  MG establishes  the  principle
    that the appropriate level of protection is  to  be  determined  by  an
    assessment of integration or reintegration into the host  state.   That
    more nuanced approach is not referred to in the respondent's grounds of
    appeal.  Secondly, I agree with Miss Warren that the judge did  provide
    an explanation for accepting the enrolment date as the beginning of the
    material period as indicated in the determination at [45] and also [59]
    (where the judge discusses the evidence  of  the  appellant's  sister).
    Thirdly, Miss Warren is right to point out that the  judge  found  that
    both imperative' and 'serious' ground thresholds for  deportation  were
    not met in  the  appellant's  case;  even  if  she  had  erred  in  her
    calculations  of  the  period  of  residence/integration,  the  judge's
    finding that neither threshold had been reached defeated the  Secretary
    of State's challenge.

 5. The second ground of appeal asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons as to why the appellant did not  represent  a  genuine
    present and sufficiently serious threat  given  that  he  had  shown  a
    propensity to commit crimes as  indicated  by  17  convictions  for  27
    offences, including offences  involving  class  A  and  B  drugs.   The
    grounds refer to two cases in which the  devastating  effect  of  drugs
    upon the community had been emphasised (Tsakouridis C-145/09 and Baghli
    34374/971 999 ECHR 135).

 6. Miss Warren referred to Regulation 21(5)(d-e):

         (d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;

         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.

 7. Matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  or,  indeed,  which
    relate to considerations of general prevention together with  "previous
    criminal convictions" do not justify a decision.   I  agree  with  Miss
    Warren that the Secretary of State's ground seems to suggest otherwise.
     The judge has carried out a detailed and thorough  assessment  of  all
    the relevant evidence.  She was not compelled  to  reach  a  particular
    outcome in this appeal by reason of the seriousness of the  appellant's
    previous criminal offending.

 8. Thirdly, the Secretary of State challenges the decision on the  grounds
    that the judge had failed to take into account  evidence  showing  that
    the appellant had not genuinely altered his lifestyle and was likely to
    commit further offences.  I agree with Miss Warren that the  judge  was
    not required to find that the appellant shows no propensity to reoffend
    or does not pose a current risk.   The  judge  accepted  evidence  from
    family members and concluded that the appellant did not pose a genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious  threat.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    ground represents little more than a  disagreement  with  that  finding
    which was not perverse but which, indeed, was available to the judge on
    a rational assessment of the evidence.

 9. I find that the judge did not err in law for the  reasons  asserted  in
    the grounds of appeal or at all.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

11. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 10 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane






