
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00399/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                     |On 29 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AT
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Not represented
For the appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity  direction.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant(s).

 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judges Sharma & Parkes promulgated 17.12.18, allowing the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    4.6.18, to deport him from the UK pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016.  With his consent, preserving his appeal  rights,  he
    was removed to Lithuania on 16.6.18.

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    15.1.19. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission  to  appeal  on
    8.3.19.

 4. The appeal was listed before me on 12.4.19. I  am  satisfied  from  the
    correspondence file that the appellant was fully aware  of  the  appeal
    date. He could  not  attend  in  person  as  he  has  been  removed  to
    Lithuania. However, in a phone call on 10.4.19 he  confirmed  awareness
    of the substantive hearing date and indicated that he would advise  his
    mother and his representative to attend. There is no indication on  the
    file that the appellant has a UK legal representative  and  his  mother
    did not attend the appeal hearing.

 5. In the circumstances, I considered that  it  was  consistent  with  the
    tribunal's objectives to deal with cases fairly and justly to hear  the
    appeal in the appellant's

Error of Law

 6. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 7. It is common ground  that  the  claimant  had  not  acquired  permanent
    residence status under the Regulations and therefore the primary  issue
    for the panel  was  whether  he  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat, assessed at the lowest level of protection
    pursuant  to  Regulations  23(6)(b)  and  27(c).  The  tribunal   panel
    concluded that he did not pose such a threat.

 8. In granting permission, Judge Smith considered  it  arguable  that  the
    risk assessment was flawed. In particular, the panel failed to  explain
    why the previous offences of  driving  without  a  licence  and  whilst
    uninsured, whilst not  as  serious  as  the  index  offence,  were  not
    relevant to that index offence given the nature of it. It  is  arguable
    that there are conflicts between the findings at [26] and [30]  of  the
    decision in this regard. It was also arguable that there is a  conflict
    between the finding as to the claimant's remorse at [33]  and  what  is
    said about that evidence at  [14]  of  the  decision.  Further,  it  is
    arguable that the panel failed to sufficiently take  into  account  his
    reaction to the offence and the view of the sentencing  judge  recorded
    at [11] of the decision.

 9. The Home Office decision to remove the claimant was on the basis of his
    criminal history evidencing his  behaviour  over  a  number  of  years.
    Between March 2015 and October 2017 he had amassed  convictions  for  a
    total of 10 offences. The index offences were causing death by careless
    driving, and driving whilst unlicensed,  disqualified,  and  uninsured.
    The brief facts of the case are set out more fully between [6] and [10]
    of the decision. In summary, in May 2017 whilst intoxicated  and  tired
    he drove a vehicle he had acquired in April 2017, with his partner  and
    mother of his child in the front passenger seat and two friends in  the
    back seat. He fell asleep and drove head-on into an  oncoming  vehicle.
    Both friends were thrown from the vehicle to their deaths. His  partner
    was very seriously injured but survived. He sustained fractures to  his
    pubic bones and the occupants of the other vehicle were  also  injured.
    He immediately fled the scene and took  steps  to  try  and  avoid  the
    police. When finally arrested, he repeatedly told the police he was not
    the driver, and subsequently gave a no  comment  interview.  Whilst  he
    pleaded guilty, the Crown Court Judge rejected the explanation for  his
    post-crash actions that that he was unable to recall the  aftermath  of
    the incident. The judge concluded that he was not genuinely remorseful.



10. The findings of the panel relevant to risk are set out between [29]  to
    [33] of the decision and at [32] the panel accepted that, following the
    guidance in Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration)  [2013]  UKUT  00316
    (IAC), it is an exercise looking to the future to assess the risk  that
    he   presents   and   which   necessarily    includes    rehabilitation
    considerations.

11. It was accepted that the index offences were  aggravated  by  the  fact
    that he had no  licence,  was  uninsured,  and  that  he  had  previous
    convictions for similar driving offences. The panel found it likely  he
    had  been  driving  uninsured  and  without  a  licence   since   2015,
    perpetually breaking the law and putting others at risk.  However,  the
    panel considered the real gravamen of the offence  was  driving  whilst
    drunk and that  part  of  the  offence  was  deliberate  and  the  most
    culpable.

12. The panel also accepted that  the  imposition  of  a  significant,  not
    short, custodial sentence increased the likelihood that the  claimant's
    continued presence  in  the  UK  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat.  It  was  also  noted  at  [29]  that  the
    Secretary of State  pointed  to  the  lack  of  any  information  about
    rehabilitative work.

13. As Ms Kenny explained in her submissions, the issue is whether  or  not
    the expulsion or removal of the claimant was justified, on the basis of
    the lowest level of protection under the Regulations. There has to be a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat. She  pointed  to  the
    repeating pattern of behaviour in relation to the  claimant's  driving,
    continuing up to the fateful night of the  fatal  crash.  There  is  no
    suggestion that he would have stopped continuing to drive in  the  same
    unlawful way. He was disqualified before he could obtain a  licence  to
    drive. MS Kenny submitted that for the tribunal  to  suggest  that  the
    real gravamen was driving whilst drunk and to point out he has not done
    that before trivialises the seriousness of his conduct.  She  submitted
    that it was only a matter of time before a serious accident occurred.

14. It is difficult to follow the conclusion of  the  panel  at  [30]  that
    because  he  had  not  previously  been  convicted  of  driving  whilst
    intoxicated suggested that the risk of repeating such actions  is  "not
    great." The panel also went on at [31] to conclude that because of  the
    serious consequences of the index offences, the loss of  the  lives  of
    two of his friends and serious injuries to his partner, "it is unlikely
    that such offending would be repeated." Having earlier pointed out that
    there was no formal risk assessment and  no  pre-sentence  report,  the
    panel then asked rhetorically, "what rehabilitative work in reality  is
    there any need for?"

15. On its face, the decision fails to accord any or any sufficient  weight
    to the fact that the claimant failed to take heed  of  the  warning  in
    previous non-custodial  sentence  of  2015,  which  is  an  aggravating
    factor. Causing death by bad driving is not the sole risk the  claimant
    presents and, in particular, the risk assessment is not to be  confined
    to the question of whether he would commit the same death  by  careless
    driving offence again but must take into account his overall behaviour,
    including his running away from the scene, leaving his friends dead  or
    dying and his girlfriend  seriously  injured,  failing  to  report  the
    matter to the police, his deliberate evasion of the police, his denials
    to the police that he had been driving, his no-comment  interview,  and
    the conclusion of the sentencing judge that he  had  shown  no  genuine
    remorse for his actions but only self-pity at  his  own  situation.  In
    that context, the claimant's letter purporting to express  remorse  can
    be viewed as entirely self-serving, particularly when it fails to offer
    any explanation for his conduct following the collision.

16. It is also difficult to understand why the  panel  considered  at  [32]
    that the claimant's  post-offending  behaviour  is  not  indicative  of
    future risk. This harks back to the finding at [26] that  "his  conduct
    after the accident is less of a concern as he may well have acted in  a
    way that he would not normally have  done  had  it  not  been  for  the
    traumatic events of the night. His  age  in  this  regard  is  relevant
    also." With respect, the conduct after the accident surely fits into  a
    pattern of his previous behaviour, flouting the  law  and  putting  the
    public at risk by driving uninsured and without a valid licence.

17. Given the absence of  any  rehabilitative  work  to  address  his  more
    general behaviour of acquiring a car when he had  no  right  to  drive,
    driving whilst  intoxicated,  driving  without  a  licence  and  whilst
    disqualified and uninsured, and driving  carelessly  with  serious  and
    fatal  consequences,  and  given   his   previous   motoring   offences
    demonstrating a total disregard for the law and public  safety,  it  is
    questionable to what extent the tribunal could have concluded that  the
    claimant had learnt the lesson  from  the  fatal  consequences  of  his
    actions. The extent of any genuine remorse is also questionable in  the
    light of the judge's sentencing remarks. On  the  evidence,  there  was
    nothing to suggest that he would not continue to  flout  the  law  with
    regard to his driving behaviour, putting  public  safety  at  real  and
    serious  risk.  It  is  not  equating  the  risk  he  presents  to  the
    seriousness of the  consequences  to  take  into  account  the  overall
    pattern of behaviour leading up to and following the index offences.

18. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  decision  was  made  in
    error of law and is not sustainable so that it must be  set  aside  and
    remade. Bearing in mind the absence of any submissions by or on  behalf
    of the appellant, the appeal having been brought by  the  Secretary  of
    State, I can only conclude that he has nothing to add or  offer  beyond
    that evidence and those submissions made to the First-tier Tribunal, of
    which I have taken full account.

19. However, I have to bear in mind that the appellant is entitled only  to
    the lowest level of protection under the Regulations. I am satisfied on
    the evidence referenced above that the  claimant  presents  a  genuine,
    presents and sufficiently serious  threat.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    decision to remove him from the UK  is  one  justified  on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security, or public health,  in  accordance  with
    regulation 23(6)(b) and was taken in order to protect  the  fundamental
    interests of society.

20. The decision must also be proportionate and based  exclusively  on  the
    personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned,  which  I  am  satisfied
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society, and  taking  into  account
    his past conduct as mentioned above. The threat does  not  need  to  be
    imminent and can be taken on preventative grounds. I am satisfied  that
    there is no basis before the tribunal to conclude otherwise  than  that
    the claimant would continue to drive  unlawfully,  without  a  licence,
    without insurance, whilst disqualified and in a manner  likely  to  put
    his own safety and that of others including the public at risk. This is
    a clear case where the preventative grounds specific  to  the  claimant
    and  the  pattern  of  his  behaviour  are  entirely  appropriate   and
    justified.

21. The appellant's  personal  circumstances  have  also  been  taken  into
    account. In particular, I have taken into account his relative youth, a
    factor mentioned in the First-tier Tribunal. However,  he  is  fit  and
    healthy and able to work to support himself. There has been a degree of
    integration into life in the UK in the  sense  of  a  relatively  short
    length of residence but one during his formative years,  and  that  his
    immediate family members are also in the UK. Against that, the level of
    repeat motoring offending is cogent evidence that he has not integrated
    into the society of the UK. Further, pursuant to schedule 1 I  have  to
    bear in mind that merely because he has family or societal  links  with
    persons of the same nationality or language in the UK does  not  amount
    to integration in the UK; "a significant degree of wider  cultural  and
    societal integration must be present before a person may be regarded as
    integrated in the UK."  Also,  little  weight  is  to  be  attached  to
    integration in the UK if the alleged integrating links were  formed  at
    or around the same time as the commission of  a  criminal  offence,  or
    other acts otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of society.  I
    also have to take account fo the fact that the claimant has  failed  to
    adduce any substantive evidence to suggest that  he  does  not  pose  a
    threat, such as evidence of reformation or rehabilitation.

22. In particular, I note that he lived in Lithuania until the  age  of  13
    and speaks the language. He  must  have  retained  at  the  very  least
    cultural ties and understanding of his  country,  despite  his  absence
    from the country for 7 years or more. It was claimed that there was  no
    one in Lithuania who can help him, but the fact is that he was returned
    there and has been living there pending appeal, for  some  considerable
    period. Nothing has been put forward to suggest that he  is  living  in
    desperate circumstances or is not able  to  support  himself,  with  or
    without family assistance.

23. Perhaps the most significant factor in the claimant's favour is that he
    has a child in the UK and I have taken as a primary  consideration  the
    best interests of that child, pursuant to Section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. Ideally, it would be in a child's
    best interests to have his father present and playing an active role in
    his life in the UK. However, the claimant's behaviour and  actions  had
    the consequences of separating himself from his child, first whilst  he
    was serving a prison sentence, and latterly after  he  was  removed  to
    Lithuania. The claimant is  able  to  maintain  contact  with  his  son
    through modern means of communication. In any event  no  cogent  reason
    has been advanced as to why family life  with  his  son  could  not  in
    theory or practice continue in Lithuania, especially  given  the  young
    age of the child and that his former partner is of Lithuanian heritage.
    Of course, it is up  to  the  child's  mother  whether  she  wishes  to
    facilitate the continuation of the previous degree of  relationship  by
    relocating there.

24. There are therefore factors  both  for  and  against  the  question  of
    integration and ties to the UK, with the evidence, all of which I  have
    taken into account. However, in my  view  the  evidence  falls  largely
    against any significant integration.

25. I have taken account of the claimant's article 8 ECHR rights to respect
    for private and family life. Applying the R  (Razgar)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2004] UKHKL 27  stepped  process,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision creates  such  interference  as  to  engage
    article 8, the threshold for which is low. The decision is  lawful  and
    necessary to protect a fundamental public interest, the  protection  of
    the public from continued bad and illegal irresponsible if not reckless
    driving behaviour by the appellant, which at any time  could  have  had
    and ultimately did have serious and fatal consequences. It was  only  a
    matter of time before such an accident happened, or to put  it  another
    way, the pattern of the claimant's behaviour was an accident waiting to
    happen. On balance, notwithstanding the separation from  his  child,  I
    find that the balance falls clearly in favour of the decision to remove
    him from the UK being entirely proportionate and  not  disproportionate
    to the rights of the claimant or his child, or indeed his  relationship
    with his mother and siblings residing in the UK.

26. Whilst Part 5A of the 2002 Act  does  not  directly  apply  to  an  EEA
    national, paragraphs 398 to 399A and s117A-D reflect Parliament's  view
    of the public interest in the deportation  on  the  basis  of  criminal
    convictions. His removal is conducive to the public  good  and  in  the
    public interest. In essence, under those provisions the claimant  would
    have to show both that it was unduly harsh  for  his  child  to  either
    leave the UK to join him in Lithuania and to remain in the  UK  without
    him. It is not clear that the child is a British citizen and given  the
    young age he cannot have lived in the UK for the threshold  requirement
    of seven years. Further, it is questionable on the evidence whether the
    claimant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  the
    child, which requires more than a biological relationship and more than
    mere presence. There is insufficient evidence before  the  tribunal  to
    demonstrate that the appellant has any current meaningful  relationship
    with his child or any involvement in the child's  upbringing  or  well-
    being. On the limited information before  the  tribunal,  I  cannot  be
    satisfied  that  the  claimant's  removal  causes  any   unduly   harsh
    consequence for his child. Neither am I satisfied that  there  are  any
    very compelling circumstances over and above the unduly harsh threshold
    tests.

27. There is no ongoing family life with a partner  to  consider.  However,
    applying the same principles and  considerations,  I  find  nothing  to
    demonstrate that it would be unduly harsh for  the  former  partner  to
    join the claimant in Lithuania, where  she  was  born  and  raised  and
    speaks the language. Neither is there any evidence that it would unduly
    harsh to expect her to remain in  the  UK  without  the  appellant.  In
    reality, it appears that the child  will  continue  to  live  with  his
    mother and it will be up to the mother to determine the extent  of  any
    ongoing contact with the claimant.

28. I have also considered the claimant's private life claim, but I am  not
    satisfied that he has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his
    life, or that he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK,  or
    that there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  in
    Lithuania. In the circumstances, he cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules.

29. In all the circumstances, I find that the claimant's removal would  not
    breach either the requirements of the EEA Regulations or  infringe  his
    human rights under article 8 view through the perspective of paragraphs
    A398 to 399A of the Rules and section 117A-D of the 2002 Act.

30. It follows that the appeal must be dismissed on all grounds.

Decision

31. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

     Signed   DMW Pickup
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated    23 April 2019



Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.

     Signed   DMW Pickup
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated    23 April 2019
