
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00199/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                            |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mario [m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant, Mario [M], was born on 9  July  1994  is  a  citizen  of
    Portugal. Following a hearing at the Royal Courts of  Justice  in  July
    2017, I found an error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Subsequently,  severe  problems  arose   in   securing   the
    attendance of the appellant  at  court  for  the  resumed  hearing.  On
    several occasions, the hearing had to be adjourned on  account  of  the
    failure of the prison authorities to  produce  him.  Eventually,  at  a
    hearing on 21 January 2019, the appellant was produced. His mother also
    attended the tribunal. Following a discussion with  the  appellant  and
    the Senior Presenting  Officer,  I  concluded  that  the  interests  of
    justice indicated that  the  decision  should  be  remade  following  a
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. It is possible that other witnesses
    for the appellant will attend to  give  evidence  in  addition  to  the
    appellant's mother. Given that the appellant is in prison  and  is  not
    legally represented, it would be extremely difficult for him to  comply
    with directions to  serve  witness  statements  and  other  documentary
    evidence prior to the next hearing. The  fact-finding  effort  exercise
    which will be required may be lengthy and it will be better  if  it  is
    undertaken in the First-tier Tribunal. I therefore rescind my  previous
    direction that the decision should be remade following a  rehearing  in
    the Upper Tribunal and direct that the decision shall be made following
    a hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  18
    January 2017 is set aside.  The appeal is returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 21 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

