
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00910/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 28th January 2016                |On: 8th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     ET
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S. Chelvan, Counsel instructed by ADH Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




 1. The Appellant is a national of the Turkish Republic of Northern  Cyprus
    born on the 13th July 1983.  He appeals with permission the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Omotosho & Judge  Goodrich)  to  dismiss
    his appeal against a decision to deport him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.




    Background

 2. The Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since he was seven  years
    old, having entered with his parents in May 1991.  In  August  2000  he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 3. On the 4th January 1999 the Appellant  was  convicted  at  the  Central
    Criminal Court of wounding with intent to cause Grievous  Bodily  Harm.
    He was sentenced to five years and six months  in  a  Young  Offender's
    Institution.  He was then aged 15.  He was released on the 16th October
    2001.  The Respondent  informed  the  Appellant  of  his  liability  to
    deportation  as   a   result   of   this   conviction   but   following
    representations decided not to pursue such action; a  "warning  letter"
    was issued to the effect that any  future  criminality  may  result  in
    deportation action being pursued.

 4. On the 31st January 2003 the Appellant was convicted of drunk  driving.
    He was fined and disqualified from driving for 16 months.

 5. On the 27th October 2010 the Appellant was convicted of possession of a
    Class B drug (842 grams of cannabis) with  an  intent  to  supply,  and
    possession of criminal property (�1440 he had made from drug  dealing).
    In concurrent sentences he was sent to prison for  one  year  and  nine
    months.  As a result of these convictions  the  Respondent  decided  to
    institute deportation proceedings.  The Deportation Order was signed on
    the 23rd April 2014.  The reasons given for that decision were:

          i) That the Appellant  automatically  qualified  for  deportation
             under the terms of s32(5)

         ii) It was not accepted that the Appellant fell within any of  the
             exceptions in paragraph 399 or 399A of the Immigration  Rules,
             specifically it was found

               a) That  the  Appellant  did  not  have  a  genuine  parental
                  relationship with his two children in the UK;

               b) Even if he did it would not be unreasonable  for  them  to
                  reside in Northern Cyprus where both  their  parents  were
                  born;

               c) It would not be unduly harsh for the children to remain in
                  the UK without their father;

               d) It was not accepted that the Appellant was  in  a  genuine
                  and subsisting relationship with his wife;

               e)  Even  if  that  could  be  established  there   were   no
                  insurmountable obstacles to her living in Northern Cyprus,
                  the country where she had been born;

               f) Although the Appellant had been in the UK for 23 years  he
                  had spent the "majority of his formative years" in  Cyprus
                  and it was not unreasonable to expect him to  readjust  to
                  life there;

               g) The Appellant has family in Northern Cyprus including  his
                  grandparents, an uncle and a brother who had himself  been
                  deported from the United Kingdom in  March  2009  (another
                  brother also had a Deportation Order  signed  against  him
                  and  was  'appeal  rights  exhausted'  and  was   awaiting
                  removal).

 6. The Appellant not having demonstrated that any of the exceptions in 399-
    399A applied to him the Respondent was not satisfied  that  there  were
    any exceptional reasons why he should not be deported.

 7.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Respondent prepared a bundle in the normal way which was
    dated the 6th June 2014.  This contained a copy of the indictment,  the
    sentencing remarks of His  Honour  Judge  Patrick,  and  correspondence
    between the parties.  This was filed and served at  a  Case  Management
    Review hearing (CMR) on the 24th July 2014 before Designated First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Peart.  It would appear that Judge Peart  was  concerned
    that the evidence was incomplete since he gave  a  direction  that  the
    parties "review material" and listed a further CMR.  That hearing  took
    place on the 25th September 2014 when Judge Peart was informed that the
    Respondent needed more time to  prepare  and  serve  further  evidence,
    including a witness  statement  from  Detective  Constable  A.  Yau  of
    Operation Nexus.

 8. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Kamara on the  27th
    November 2014 the Respondent had already served and filed  the  further
    bundle of evidence mentioned before Judge Peart.  This is described  as
    'Respondent's supplementary bundle 1'.  It contained the  statement  of
    DC Yau.  Included  in,  and  exhibited  to,  DC  Yau's  statement  were
    extracts  from  the  Police  National  Computer  (PNC)  and  the  Crime
    Reporting Information System (CRIS).  The Respondent requested  further
    time to amend DC Yau's statement.  Judge Kamara agreed to the admission
    of the new evidence but granted an adjournment inter alia so  that  the
    Appellant's representative could take instructions and prepare the case
    in light of all the evidence.   In  doing  so  Judge  Kamara  gave  the
    following direction:

         "The respondent is directed not to  use  the  opportunity,  without
         having first made an application, caused by the adjournment of this
         appeal at her request, to serve any other evidence  which  she  has
         neglected to serve earlier or any further amended statements of any
         witness"

 9. By a further CMR on the 11th December 2014 Judge Kamara  was  satisfied
    that all relevant material had been lodged and set the matter down  for
    hearing.

10. The appeal came before Judge Omotosho and Judge Goodrich  on  the  31st
    March 2015.  The panel heard the live evidence of DC Yau and  began  to
    hear live evidence from the Appellant.  Mr Chelvan  had  completed  his
    examination in chief and the Presenting Officer was  part  way  through
    his cross examination when the matter had to be adjourned for  lack  of
    time.  The Tribunal records [at paragraph 50 of the determination] that
    the "customary warning" was given to the Appellant that he  should  not
    talk to anyone about his evidence until  his  testimony  was  complete.
    The Record of Proceedings shows that at the close of  proceedings  that
    day the panel directed that any additional evidence had to be served at
    least 7 days before the hearing was resumed.

11. On next hearing was listed for the 27th May 2015.  At some point before
    that (the date is in dispute) the Respondent served and filed by fax an
    additional bundle of evidence which included  the  Pre-Sentence  Report
    (PSR) prepared by the Probation Service for the benefit  of  the  trial
    judge.  When the hearing resumed on the morning of the 27th May 2015 Mr
    Chelvan on behalf of the Appellant objected to the  admission  of  this
    material.  He pointed out that the report was dated the 29th  September
    2010 and that there appeared to be no good reason  why  the  Respondent
    had failed to include it in any of the bundles served  thus  far.   The
    Appellant's case had been  prepared  on  the  evidence  that  had  been
    adduced prior to the hearing starting and  he  was  in  the  middle  of
    giving evidence: neither his solicitor nor barrister could give  advice
    or take instructions at that stage.  Mr Chelvan's objections were noted
    but overruled and the new material admitted.   The  Presenting  Officer
    was permitted to resume his cross examination and he did so  by  asking
    the Appellant questions based on the PSR.  He sought to draw a contrast
    between matters in that report and  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    already given about his circumstances.

12. In its determination the Tribunal made  negative  credibility  findings
    about the Appellant's evidence,  found  against  him  on  all  material
    issues (see 5(a)-(g) above) and dismissed the appeal.  At paragraph  54
    the determination reads:

         "...Whilst we noted that it was regrettable that the PSR  (and  the
         documents produced by the appellant) had not been  provided  before
         the hearing began on the 31st March  2015  we  considered  the  PSR
         should be considered by us since it was an  integral  part  of  the
         criminal proceedings.  The appellant said that he has not seen  the
         PSR before because his counsel has arrived very late  at  court  on
         the day that he was sentenced.  We therefore rose for 25 minutes to
         enable the  appellant  to  read  the  report.   In  the  event  the
         appellant said that the report was 99% accurate and  gave  evidence
         as to which parts of the report  contained  errors.   His  date  of
         birth was wrong the recorded as was the sex of his youngest  child.
         It was not right that he said he had used cocaine: he said that  he
         mixed in a crowded that used cocaine."

    Submissions on Error of Law

13. The grounds of appeal raise three issues.  Complaint is made  that  the
    Tribunal gave insufficient  weight  to  the  Appellant's  status  as  a
    settled migrant in its consideration of proportionality, and  in  doing
    so failed to apply the principles set  out  in,  for  instance,  Maslov
    (Application no. 1638/03) and R (Akpinar) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1192.
    It is further submitted that the Tribunal misdirected itself as to  the
    relevance of delay in assessing Article 8.   I  need  not  address  the
    merits of these grounds of appeal since Mr Wilding  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent expressly accepts that if Ground 1 is made out,  the  entire
    determination must be set aside and the decision remade.

14. Ground 1 is that there was a  procedural  unfairness  in  allowing  the
    Respondent to adduce and rely upon the PSR in the middle of  the  cross
    examination of the Appellant.  Simply put, it prejudiced the  Appellant
    because it prevented his legal  team  from  effectively  preparing  his
    case.  Although the Appellant had been given 25  minutes  to  read  the
    document and had agreed its contents, he was not  legally  trained  and
    was deprived on the benefit of receiving legal advice.   The  point  is
    illustrated by the fact that Counsel - and indeed the Tribunal  -  were
    able to identify discrepancies in the evidence given by  the  Appellant
    to the Tribunal and what was recorded in the  PSR.   Counsel  had  been
    unable to effectively address these inconsistencies  in  re-examination
    because he had not been in a position to take instructions.

15. The Respondent submits that the adverse credibility  findings  made  by
    the Tribunal flow directly from the sentencing  remarks  of  the  judge
    rather than the PSR.  Mr Wilding points out that  the  Tribunal  itself
    had directed the production  of  additional  evidence  and  did  so  in
    accordance with the overriding objective of the Procedure Rules.   They
    took a pragmatic and flexible approach and were keen to get all of  the
    evidence that they could in this complex and serious case.   As  to  Mr
    Chelvan's submission that the Appellant was  unable  to  speak  to  his
    legal team once he had started giving evidence, Mr Wilding pointed  out
    that no application had been made to go behind  this  convention.   The
    flexibility in the Procedure Rules  would  have  permitted  this.   The
    Appellant himself was able to read the document and made comment on it.
     Finally Mr Wilding submitted that any procedural impropriety  was  not
    material since  it  would  appear  that  only  two  paragraphs  of  the
    determination turned on the evidence given about the PSR: the  Tribunal
    did not, as a matter of fact, place a great deal  of  reliance  on  the
    matter.

    My Findings

16.  The  right  to  a  fair  trial   is   fundamental,   irreducible   and
    inalienable[1].

17. In this case the Respondent had eleven months between  the  deportation
    order being signed and the hearing commencing.  That was eleven  months
    in which to prepare a bundle  which  would,  as  a  matter  of  course,
    contain all the evidence that the Respondent would want to rely  on  in
    support of her decision.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  routinely  issues
    directions about the production of such bundles and indeed  did  so  in
    this case, upon receipt of the application for permission to appeal  in
    May 2014.  The Respondent prepared her bundle, dated 6th June 2014,  in
    compliance with those directions.  There followed no  fewer  than  four
    case management reviews.  At the first three of these,  the  24th  July
    2014,  the  25th  September  2014  and  the  27th  November  2014,  the
    Respondent was permitted more time to sort out her evidence.  The final
    CMR, in December 2014, was conducted on the papers but  at  that  stage
    Judge Kamara was advised that all parties were  ready  to  proceed.   I
    infer from this chronology that when  the  matter  was  called  on  for
    hearing on the 31st March 2015 the Respondent was content that she  had
    been given all reasonable opportunity to submit her evidence,  and  the
    Appellant's representatives were confident  that  they  knew  the  case
    against their client and all of the evidence  that  they  had  to  deal
    with.

18. I am satisfied, having heard from the parties, that when  the  Tribunal
    decided, at the close of business on the 31st March 2015, to direct the
    production of "further evidence" it understood this to  mean  the  PSR.
    Mr Wilding asked me to note that the direction did not  result  from  a
    special request by the Respondent; rather the Tribunal decided  of  its
    own motion to ask for the PSR.  It is difficult to understand  why  the
    Tribunal considered it necessary at that stage to obtain this document.
     The determination records that it was considered an "integral part  of
    the criminal proceedings"; presumably the Respondent, in preparing  her
    case, did not agree.  The PSR had been available since 2010, no  reason
    had been advanced for its absence, and it is after all a matter for the
    parties what evidence they wish to rely upon.

19. At that point Mr Chelvan, the Appellant's Counsel, could do little  but
    wait and see what was in the PSR.  When it arrived, and it was apparent
    to him that the record taken by  the  Probation  Officer  in  2010  was
    materially different from evidence that the Appellant had given on  the
    31st  March  (for  instance  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's   family
    circumstances and his involvement with drugs), he was placed in a  very
    difficult position.  His client had been given an  express  warning  by
    the Tribunal not to confer with his legal team about evidence that  had
    been given, and Mr Chelvan himself understood  the  convention  of  the
    'hermetic seal' to arise from his duties as an officer of the court and
    a member of the Bar of England  and  Wales.   Consequently  neither  Mr
    Chelvan nor his instructing solicitor went behind the direction of  the
    Tribunal.  All he could do, upon resumption of the proceedings  on  the
    27th May 2015, was to object to the document being  admitted  into  the
    evidence.

20. I am satisfied that the decision to ask for,  and  admit  the  PSR  was
    procedurally unfair.  The Appellant's  representatives  had,  over  the
    preceding year, prepared the case on the basis  of  the  evidence  that
    they were given.  The fact that Mr Chelvan could not take  instructions
    on the contents of the PSR, nor give advice upon it,  impinged  on  the
    Appellant's  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   That  the  unfairness   was
    substantive is apparent from the fact  that  the  Presenting  Officer's
    cross-examination on the 27th May 2015 contains numerous references  to
    the PSR, as did his written submissions (at paragraphs 19, 20,  21,  22
    and 23).  Although Mr Wilding  is  correct  in  saying  that  only  two
    paragraphs of the determination's  findings  could  be  said  to  arise
    directly from the evidence in the PSR (paragraphs 74 and 111) I  cannot
    be  satisfied  that  the  panel  had  excluded  from  their  minds  any
    prejudicial matters arising from the cross examination.  In matters  of
    this kind, where the Tribunal is obliged to make a global assessment of
    credibility, it is virtually  impossible  to  extricate  what  evidence
    influenced their thinking and what did not.   The  Tribunal  themselves
    evidently considered the PSR to be  of  some  significance.   There  is
    therefore a real, as opposed to fanciful, possibility that the  outcome
    would have been different.

21. Mr Wilding realistically accepted that if these were  my  findings  the
    appeal would need to be re-heard de novo in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    That is a matter to be regretted, given the time that this hearing took
    and the history of the matter thus far.  Now that the matter is leaving
    the Upper Tribunal I have no power to make any  directions  as  to  the
    evidence but it is to be expected that the parties  will  not  seek  to
    adduce any further  materials,  beyond  any  relevant  updates  on  the
    Appellant's circumstances.




    Decisions

22. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  flawed  for  procedural
    impropriety and the decision must be set aside.

23. The Appellant himself has been convicted of a serious criminal  offence
    and does not therefore merit the protection of his identity.  This case
    does however involve his young children.  There  is  a  risk  that  his
    children's identities could be disclosed unless an anonymity  order  is
    in place, so having had regard to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders I make such an order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              2nd March 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Per the President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey in MM (unfairness; E &
R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC) [at 14]

