
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00280/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2017                          |On 20 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              VALENTINA BUFALO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Fraser, Counsel, instructed by the Aire Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Appellant)  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Chohan (the  judge),  promulgated  on  7  September  2017,
        allowing the appeal of Ms V.  Bufalo  (the  Respondent)  against  a
        decision dated 8 May 2017 to remove her from  the  UK  pursuant  to
        regulation 23(6)(b) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
        Regulations 2016 (the 2016 Regulations).


Relevant background

     2. The Respondent is an Italian national, date  of  birth  4  November
        1978. She claims to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  2003,
        although this has been disputed by the  Appellant.  On  26  October
        2015 the Respondent was convicted of  18  counts  of  theft  by  an
        employee, 15 counts of other dishonestly offences, and one count of
        possessing or controlling an article for use in fraud. She received
        a total sentence of 4 years imprisonment on 20 June 2016.


     3. In making a deportation  order  the  Appellant  accepted  that  the
        Respondent had been continuously resident in the  UK  between  2004
        and 2013, and that she had attained a permanent right of  residence
        (requiring the Appellant to demonstrate the existence  of  'serious
        grounds of public  policy  and  public  security'  to  justify  her
        expulsion  -  regulation  27(3)  of  the  2016  Regulations).   The
        Respondent was not however satisfied that  the  Appellant  provided
        adequate evidence of her residence in the UK since 2003, and  there
        was said to be a lack of evidence confirming her presence in the UK
        beyond 2013. The Appellant was not  therefore  satisfied  that  the
        Respondent had resided in the UK for a continuous  10-year  period.
        She could not therefore avail  herself  of  the  highest  level  of
        protection  as  described  in  regulation  27(4)(a)  of  the   2016
        Regulations ("a relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  except  on
        imperative grounds of public security").


     4. The Appellant considered  the  Respondent's  offences  to  be  very
        serious, noting that she offended from 12 March  2012  until  2015,
        and that her offending involved an abuse of  trust.  The  Appellant
        noted the impact of the  offending  on  the  Respondent's  victims.
        While noting that, according to an OASys assessment, the Respondent
        posed a low risk of reoffending, the Appellant concluded  that  any
        reoffending would entail serious harm. The Appellant considered the
        Respondent's presence posed a significant threat to the safety  and
        security of the public and that,  having  regard  to  her  age  and
        circumstances and prospects of rehabilitation,  her  expulsion  was
        proportionate.

 The First-tier Tribunal decision

     5. One of  the  key  issues  at  the  appeal  hearing,  at  which  the
        Respondent gave oral evidence, was whether she was entitled to  the
        highest level of protection available to an EEA  national  who  has
        resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  at  least
        10 years prior to the relevant decision. The relevant decision  is,
        in the context of the instant appeal, the making of the deportation
        order.


     6. The judge briefly set out the Respondent's account of  her  arrival
        in the UK on 6 June 2003 and the work she claimed to  have  started
        on 14 June 2003. Although there were no tax records for  the  years
        2014 and 2015 the judge was shown the Respondent's bank  statements
        for those  years  showing  transactions  that,  it  was  submitted,
        established her presence in the  UK.  At  paragraph  9  the  judge,
        without any other reasoning, accepted the Respondent as a  truthful
        witness and found, with reference to the bank statements, that  she
        had been in the UK in 2014 and 2015.


     7. In paragraph 10, having accepted that the Respondent was present in
        the UK from at least 2004 up until the time of her conviction on 26
        October 2015, the judge found that she had accumulated a period  of
        over 10 years residence in the UK.  The  judge  consequently  found
        that the Respondent could only be removed on imperative grounds  of
        public security because she had been in the  UK  for  a  continuous
        period of at least 10 years prior to the expulsion decision.


     8. The judge thereafter considered whether the Respondent's  offending
        justified her expulsion on imperative grounds with reference to  VP
        (Italy) v SSHD [2010] EWA Civ 806 and LG (Italy) v SSHD [2008] EWCA
        Civ 190. The judge found  the  Appellant  had  not  discharged  the
        evidential burden  of  establishing  the  existence  of  imperative
        grounds noting, inter alia, the findings of the OASys  report,  and
        the evidence that the Respondent had been a 'model prisoner'.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of permission, the  rule  24  response  and
the Upper Tribunal hearing

     9. The grounds  submitted  that  the  judge  materially  miss-directed
        himself in concluding that  the  Respondent  was  entitled  to  the
        highest level of protection. Although the Respondent had resided in
        the UK for at least 10 years prior to her imprisonment, the 10-year
        period was assessed by counting back from the  expulsion  decision.
        The Respondent had been detained for approximately 2 years  at  the
        date  of  the  expulsion  decision.  Reliance  was  placed  on  the
        authority of Ahmed Warsame v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 16. The  question
        whether the Respondent still qualified for  the  highest  level  of
        protection  depended  on  an  overall  assessment  of  whether  the
        integrating links previously forged by  her  in  the  UK  had  been
        broken. It was submitted that the judge failed to  engage  in  this
        assessment. Permission was granted on this basis.


    10. The Respondent filed a response to the grant of leave  pursuant  to
        rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The
        detailed response, dated 3 November 2017,  helpfully  set  out  the
        background to the appeal, the applicable legal  framework  and  the
        applicable legal test  for  determining  whether  the  'imperative'
        threshold applied. The rule 24 response  accepted  that  the  judge
        erred in simply counting  10  years  back  from  the  date  of  the
        Appellant's decision.


    11. At the outset of the Upper Tribunal hearing it was accepted  by  Mr
        Fraser, representing the Respondent, that  the  judge  committed  a
        material error of law  because  of  his  failure  to  undertake  an
        overall  assessment  of  the  Respondent's  integrative  links.   I
        indicated that I believed Mr Fraser's concession was properly  made
        and that the judge had indeed materially erred in law. In  response
        to my observations relating to how the appeal should proceed  given
        the identification of a material error of law  Mr  Fraser  properly
        acknowledged  that  the  judge's  acceptance  of  the  Respondent's
        credibility was not adequately reasoned,  and  that  there  was  no
        satisfactory  evaluation  of  the  nature  and   quality   of   the
        Respondent's integrative links prior to her imprisonment.  Although
        he accepted that there were limited  findings  in  respect  of  the
        Respondent's  integrative   links   Mr   Fraser   highlighted   the
        Respondent's exemplary prison record and submitted that her conduct
        whilst in prison was very significant in respect  of  the  'overall
        assessment' test.

Discussion

    12. Regulation 27(4) of  the  2016  Regulations  provides,  so  far  as
        material:
             A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
             a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision;
    13. In MG (prison - Article 28(3)(a) of Citizen's  Directive)  Portugal
        [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal considered  the  judgement
        of the Court of Justice of the European Union  in  case  C-  400/12
        (SSHD  v  MG)  with  respect  to  the  meaning  of  the   "enhanced
        protection" provision. The CJEU case made clear  that  the  10-year
        period should be calculated by counting back from the date  of  the
        expulsion decision and that, in principle, periods of  imprisonment
        interrupted the continuity of the period of residence. A period  of
        imprisonment during those 10  years  did  not  however  necessarily
        prevent a person from qualifying for enhanced  protection  if  that
        person was sufficiently integrated, even though, according  to  the
        same judgement, a period of imprisonment had a negative  impact  in
        so far as establishing integration was concerned.


    14. In Ahmed Warsame  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  16  Counsel  for  the
        Secretary of State for the Home Department accepted that there is a
        "maybe" category of cases under MG where a person  has  resided  in
        the  host  state  during  the  ten  years  prior  to  imprisonment,
        depending on an overall assessment  of  whether  integrating  links
        have been broken, and that in such cases it might  be  relevant  to
        determine,  by  way  of  'overall  assessment',   the   degree   of
        integration in the host member state or the extent to  which  links
        with the original member state have been broken.


    15. It is readily apparent from the judge's decision that  he  did  not
        adopt this approach. The judge appears to have only counted back 10
        years from the Appellant's expulsion decision but has not taken any
        account of the  Respondent's  period  of  imprisonment.  Given  the
        apparent break in continuous residence  it  was  incumbent  on  the
        judge, in  considering  whether  the  Respondent  was  nevertheless
        entitled to  the  highest  level  of  protection,  to  undertake  a
        detailed assessment to determine whether she fell into  the  'maybe
        category' identified in Warsame. In my  judgement,  the  First-tier
        Tribunal decision does not contain an adequate analysis of  whether
        the Respondent's integration was of a degree sufficient to  attract
        the operation of the highest level of protection. I am consequently
        satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot stand.


    16. I have considered whether it is appropriate to retain the appeal in
        the Upper Tribunal or to remit it back to the First-tier  Tribunal.
        In order to determine  whether  the  integrating  links  previously
        forged by the Respondent within the UK  have  been  broken  by  her
        imprisonment, it is necessary to engage in a qualitative assessment
        of her earlier level of integration. This is best achieved  if  the
        Respondent chooses  to  give  oral  evidence.  The  judge  did  not
        adequately engage in an assessment of the nature and quality of the
        life established  by  the  Respondent  in  the  UK.  There  was  no
        assessment  of  her  daily  social  and  cultural  experience   and
        expectations as a resident in the UK, or of the nature and  quality
        of the relationships that she has established. Nor  was  there  any
        adequate assessment of  her  offending  behaviour  or  the  lengthy
        period during which her offending occurred. These primary  findings
        have not been made. In these circumstances, it is  appropriate  for
        the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
        hearing to consider whether, by  overall  assessment,  the  nature,
        quality and length of  the  Respondent's  residence  prior  to  her
        incarceration  is  sufficient  to  catapult  her  into  the  'maybe
        category' identified in MG, with reference to Warsame (at  [9]  and
        [10]), such that she  is  entitled  to  the  enhanced  category  of
        protection.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material  error  of
law. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  in
a fresh hearing by a judge other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Chohan.


[pic]                               1 December 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


