
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00585/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 31 March and 15 June 2015                  |on 23 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 JOYNED MIAH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on  2  March  1962.   He
    appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mr  P  A
    Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 4 December 2014, dismissing his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to  make  an  "automatic  deportation
    order."

 2. The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  run  at
    paragraphs 3 and 4 as follows:

         In terms of section 117C(4) and (6) of the Nationality, Immigration
         & Asylum  Act  2002  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  to  resolve  3
         questions of fact and one question of mixed fact and law, viz:

          a) Has the appellant resided lawfully in the UK for most  of  his
             life;

          b) Is he socially and culturally integrated here;

          c) Are there very significant obstacles to his integration in the
             country of his nationality; and

          d) (Standing that his conviction is for more than  4  years)  are
             there additional and very compelling circumstances.

      The First-tier Tribunal Judge has resolved none of these questions.

 3. Those grounds are accurately framed.  Those questions were live in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and are not resolved in the determination.

 4. At the hearing on 31 March 2015, Mrs O'Brien said  that  the  appellant
    had not brought evidence by  which  the  relevant  questions  could  be
    resolved in his favour, particularly (c) and (d).  She was prepared  to
    accept my observation that it might be difficult  on  the  evidence  to
    resist a positive finding for the appellant on issue (a).  On (b),  the
    appellant has lived here for most of his  life  but  the  Secretary  of
    State's  position  was  that  his  serious  criminality  went   against
    accepting his social and cultural integration.  Mrs O'Brien pointed out
    that the appellant needed to succeed on all  the  listed  points.   She
    submitted that even if the  determination  was  not  particularly  well
    expressed,  any  errors  were  immaterial,  because  the  outcome   was
    inevitable.  The determination should therefore stand.

 5. Mr Bryce observed that in addition to the  deficiencies  identified  in
    the grounds, paragraph 20 of the determination says  that  no  decision
    was to be reached regarding  the  Refugee  Convention  or  humanitarian
    protection  "as  the  appellant's  appeal  had  been  dismissed  by  an
    Adjudicator on 24 September 1992.  The case had also  been  certified."
    This bore no relation to the appellant's circumstances.  He has had  no
    previous appeal.

 6. Mr Bryce contended that the  appellant  was  likely  to  succeed  at  a
    rehearing on questions (a) and (b), and that on (c) and (d) he at least
    had a case which required examination and resolution.  The obstacle  to
    his integration in Bangladesh is a  family  and  land  dispute  at  his
    original home.  The very compelling circumstances argued are as set out
    in the note of argument in the First-tier Tribunal.  The first is  that
    due to the family history he has a longstanding  degree  of  connection
    with the UK  "going  far  beyond  even  that  of  many  actual  British
    citizens."  The second is the significance of  the  Council  of  Europe
    Committee of Ministers Recommendation to Member States  adopted  on  13
    September 2000, REC [2000] 15, concerning security of residence of long
    term migrants  (referred  to  in  Uner  v  the  Netherlands  [2007]  45
    EHRR.14).

 7. I indicated my view that there were shortcomings in  the  determination
    such that it could not safely stand, and that the submission that  only
    one outcome was possible went too far.

 8. Mrs O'Brien sought time to prepare further submissions on remaking  the
    decision.  Mr Bryce did not oppose that.  There  was  in  any  event  a
    shortage of time on the day, as a number of other hearings were listed.

 9. Parties agreed that the further hearing was not likely to involve  oral
    evidence, or indeed any significant dispute of primary fact.  The  live
    issues were identified at points (c) and (d).  15 June 2015 was  agreed
    as a suitable date, when the hearing resumed.

10. Sentencing the appellant in the High Court of Judiciary on 8 May  2012,
    Lord Doherty said:-

           Mr Miah, at the time of the  offence  of  which  you  have  been
           convicted, the complainer was a prostitute.  She had attended at
           your home to provide you with sexual services  for  payment,  as
           she had done on numerous occasions previously.  Like any  woman,
           she had the right to withhold her consent to any sexual activity
           she did not wish to engage in.  On the occasion  in  respect  of
           which you have been convicted, you raped her twice.

           In approaching sentence I have had regard to all that  has  been
           said on your behalf.  You  have  four  previous  convictions  on
           indictment, in relation to two of  which  you  served  custodial
           sentences.  However, all those convictions were many  years  ago
           and they were not  for  analogous  offences.   Since  they  were
           committed, you have avoided further offending.  It appears  that
           you have  worked  hard  in  the  restaurant  industry  and  have
           contributed positively in several ways to the lives  of  others.
           I take all this into account.

           However, the fact remains that the crime you have been convicted
           of is a very serious one.  The public interest requires  that  I
           impose a significant custodial sentence.

11. There had been a delay between charge and trial of two years, four  and
    a half months.  The judge found that to have been inordinate.   Had  it
    not been for that breach of the appellant's right to  have  the  charge
    determined within a reasonable time, the sentence  imposed  would  have
    been one of five years imprisonment.   In  light  of  the  breach,  the
    sentence imposed was four years and nine months.

12. Although the crucial questions are accurately identified by Mr Bryce in
    his grounds of appeal and written argument, it is I think worth setting
    out the bulk of Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act  and  working  through  its
    provisions in turn:-


        ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


        117A Application of this Part


        (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
        determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


        (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
        life under Article 8, and


        (b) as a result would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
        Rights Act 1998.


        (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
        tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


        (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and


        (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
        the considerations listed in section 117C.


        (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
        question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
        respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
        8(2).


        117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
        cases


        (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
        public interest.


        (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
        interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
        persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
        to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


        (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


        (b) are better able to integrate into society.


        (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
        interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
        persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
        financially independent, because such persons-


        (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


        (b) are better able to integrate into society.


        (4) Little weight should be given to-


        (a) a private life, or


        (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


        that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
        United Kingdom unlawfully.


        (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
        a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
        precarious.


        (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
        public interest does not require the person's removal where-


        (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
        with a qualifying child, and


        (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
        United Kingdom.


        117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
        foreign criminals


        (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


        (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
        the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


        (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
        sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
        public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
        Exception 2 applies.


        (4) Exception 1 applies where-


        (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
        C's life,


        (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom,
        and


        (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  C's  integration
        into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


        (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
        parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
        C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


        (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
        period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
        requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
        circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
        2.


        (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
        into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
        deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
        the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
        been convicted.


        117D Interpretation of this Part


               1) In this Part-


        "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
        Rights;


        "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
        who-


        (a) is a British citizen, or


        (b) has lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
        seven years or more;


        "qualifying partner" means a partner who-


        (a) is a British citizen, or


        (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
        Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).


        (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


        (a) who is not a British citizen,


        (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and


        (c) who-


        (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12
        months,


        (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm,
        or


        (iii) is a persistent offender.


        (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject  to  an
        order under-


        (a) section  5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
        (insanity etc),


        (b) section 57  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
        (insanity etc), or


        (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order  1986
        (insanity etc),


        has not been convicted of an offence.


        ...

13. Section 117A:  The appellant is divorced.  He has two adult  daughters,
    several siblings and numerous other relatives in the UK.  I accept that
    he has lived here without returning to  Bangladesh  since  about  1982,
    when he was aged around 16.  He is now aged 55.  He  does  not  have  a
    family life with  a  spouse  or  minor  children  which  is  the  usual
    protective limit of that part of Article 8.  I was not asked to make  a
    finding that he has family life in the narrower Article 8  sense.   The
    matter makes no practical difference as all  the  circumstances  remain
    relevant and his private life  is  to  a  large  extent  based  on  his
    relatives.  Plainly his deportation would interfere  with  private  and
    family life as he has carried it on throughout adulthood.  There  is  a
    public interest question to be answered.

14. Section 117B:  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in
    the public interest.  The appellant can speak English, appears to  have
    been  mostly  financially  independent  throughout  his  life  when  at
    liberty, and his residence in  the  United  Kingdom  has  been  neither
    unlawful nor precarious.  Sub-sections (2), (3), (4)  and  (5)  do  not
    count against him.  He is liable to deportation and there is  no  child
    in the case so (6) does not apply.

15. Section 117C:  The appellant is a foreign criminal.  His deportation is
    in the public interest.  His crime was very serious,  as  described  by
    the sentencing judge, so the public interest in his deportation is that
    much the greater.

16. In terms of Section 117C(4) exception  1(a),  the  appellant  has  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life.

17. In terms of Section 117C(4) exception 1(b), the respondent argued  that
    the appellant should not be considered as integrated due to the  nature
    of  his  offence.   I  do  not  find  that  a  meaningful  or  workable
    distinction.  Having conducted all his adult life in the UK,  in  spite
    of the conviction leading to his deportation (and some distant but also
    quite serious offences) I do not think the appellant could sensibly  be
    found to be other than socially and culturally integrated here.

18. The first seriously disputed issue  is  whether  in  terms  of  Section
    117C(4), exception 1(c), there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration into Bangladesh.

19. I accept that there  is  a  family  land  dispute  in  the  appellant's
    locality of origin in Sylhet, likely to lead  to  his  being  met  with
    hostility by relatives if he were to return there.   The  argument  for
    the appellant was that deportation would result in his having to make a
    new life in what in substance is a foreign country, and that  would  be
    tantamount to exile.   I  think  that  goes  much  too  far.   Although
    integrated in the UK the appellant has spent his  life  here  within  a
    close-knit community of  Bengali  origin,  speaks  the  language  as  a
    native, and it is only reasonable to conclude that he remains  familiar
    with a culture from which he has never  disengaged.   While  the  ideal
    situation on removal would  be  to  be  welcomed  within  his  original
    community, there is no reason to think he would  find  it  particularly
    difficult to live in Bangladesh away from that locality.  He  has  made
    his living as a restaurant worker moving around within the UK.  It  was
    acknowledged on his behalf that he would not be destitute.  Support (if
    and when necessary) would be forthcoming from a relative who  is  in  a
    good position to provide it.  Such health problems as he  suffers  have
    no significant impact on the  issue.   The  test  of  very  significant
    difficulties sets the bar high.  I do  not  think  the  case  discloses
    difficulties close to that level.

20. There is no spouse, other partner  or  minor  child  in  the  case,  so
    exception 2 does not apply.

21. In terms of Section 117(C)(6), the appellant having been sentenced to a
    period of imprisonment of over four years, the public interest requires
    deportation unless he shows  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above exceptions 1 and 2.

22. Mr Bryce pointed out that the sub-section does  not  require  the  very
    compelling circumstances to be of a compassionate  nature.   He  argued
    two points for a finding in the appellant's favour.

23. The first was  based  on  the  appellant's  immigration  history.   The
    appellant's connection to the UK went back to his father's arrival as a
    Commonwealth immigrant in 1962.  If the appellant had been  brought  to
    the UK at an earlier age, he would have been immune  from  deportation.
    It appeared there had been some attempt to bring him to the UK in 1972.
     He had a degree of protected status until 1 August  1988.   Being  "in
    the small and diminishing cohort of persons who arrived in  the  UK  as
    dependants of Commonwealth immigrants who were free to  settle  in  the
    UK, and having held that status for the first 28 years of his life, his
    connection with the UK might be traced not just to the age of 16 but to
    the age of two when his father came here - a degree of connection going
    far beyond even that of many actual British citizens".

24. In my opinion, the case has to be judged as statue  now  provides.   If
    Parliament had intended exceptions from deportation for persons with  a
    particular immigration history, that would have been enacted.   In  the
    context  of  Part  5A  of  the  Act  the  history  of  the  appellant's
    immigration status does not constitute a very compelling  circumstance.
    The strength of what is required can be gauged by the high tests  which
    have gone before.  There must be something even greater than that.

25. The argument perhaps more strongly pressed by Mr Bryce was that it  was
    legally compelling that the appellant's circumstances fell  within  the
    terms of the Council of Europe Committee of  Ministers  Recommendation.
    This provides at  paragraph  1(a)(2)  that  each  member  state  should
    recognise as a long term immigrant an alien authorised to reside in its
    territory  permanently  or  for  a  period  of  at  least  five  years.
    Paragraph 4 recommends that after 20 years of residence,  a  long  term
    immigrant should no longer be expellable.  There is a qualification  at
    4(d), an option to provide in the internal law of member states "that a
    long term immigrant may be expelled if he or she constitutes a  serious
    threat  to  national  security  or  public  safety".   Paragraph   5(b)
    recommends that before deciding on expulsion of a long  term  immigrant
    the competent authorities  should  consider  alterative  measures  (for
    example, by  replacing  the  permanent  residence  permit  with  a  non
    permanent one).   Mr  Bryce  submitted  that  the  respondent's  policy
    provides such an alternative measure (mentioned further below).

26. Mr Bryce acknowledged that the recommendation also recites as follows:-

           Concerning the possibility of an expulsion  after  20  years  of
           residence (paragraph 4.b.-second sentence), the  United  Kingdom
           reserves the right to apply national law.

27. The bundle of authorities produced by Mr Bryce includes  a  paper  from
    the  European  Centre  for  law  and   justice   on   the   status   of
    recommendations of the Committee of Ministers.   Although  non-binding,
    these are said to be legal instruments with  legal  significance,  upon
    which the European Court of Human Rights might rely "to justify  a  new
    development  of  the  Convention".   In  Uner  v  The  Netherlands  the
    recommendation was taken into account (paragraph 58).   Mr  Bryce  said
    that the threshold suggested by the recommendation was effectively  the
    same as the EEA threshold for expulsion of  persons  with  a  permanent
    right of  residence,  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security".  The appellant was  not  such  a  threat  and  presented  no
    serious risk.

28. In course of submissions and in light of  the  developing  debate,  the
    appellant's representatives (very properly) produced a copy of  a  home
    background report produced by the Social Work Department of Dundee City
    Council, dated 18 February 2014.  This includes the following:-

           Analysis of offending and attitude to the victim

           Mr Miah has four previous  convictions  for  abduction  (of  his
           wife); forgery and  counterfeiting;  fraud;  theft  of  a  motor
           vehicle and bail offences.  His first two offences were in  1985
           and the other two in 1990.  Three of those offences resulted  in
           him receiving a custodial sentence and one was dealt with by the
           High Court.  The fact that he received  custodial  sentences  in
           the absence of numerous convictions  would  suggest  that  those
           offences were of a serious nature.

           Mr Miah has always maintained that he and his victim were  in  a
           consensual relationship spanning two years, and  he  denied  the
           offence of rape.  He proceeded to  appeal  his  conviction,  but
           abandoned his appeal on 5 November 2012.

           Risk Assessment

           ...  Mr Miah is assessed as a low risk to the general  community
           and has low social needs.  This risk is heightened  to  moderate
           when looking at his sexual  offending  ...  the  main  areas  of
           concern would be in relation to his sexual preoccupation and use
           of prostitutes.  I  cannot  discount  his  previous  offence  of
           abduction against his wife, which is indicative of  force  being
           used.   Therefore  his  attitude  towards  women  needs  to   be
           addressed further in order to reduce his risk.

           Whilst Mr Miah is a low category prisoner and he is  engaged  in
           working in further education, he has been referred in prison for
           the Good Lives and Constructs programmes.  Despite his denial of
           his offence he is willing to participate in  them.   Once  those
           programmes are completed this should  equip  Mr  Miah  with  the
           necessary skills .... to  manage  any  future  risk  of  further
           reoffending.

           ...

           Summary & Conclusion

           ... Mr Miah ... has  yet  to  address  his  offending  behaviour
           through completing programme work prior to his  release  in  the
           community.

           Taking all of the above into account Mr Miah  is  not  currently
           assessed as suitable for parole.

29. Mr Bryce submitted that  the  evidence  as  a  whole  showed  that  the
    appellant was of low risk to the general public, a moderate risk  to  a
    particular category of persons, and no present  or  serious  threat  to
    anyone.  In light of my view of the status of the recommendation, I  do
    not find this to be a decisive issue, but I am  unable  to  agree  with
    that analysis  of  risk.   The  Presenting  Officer  pointed  out  that
    although the appellant abandoned his appeal against conviction, all the
    evidence is that he continues to refuse to accept any guilt.  I  prefer
    the assessment proposed by the Presenting Officer that while  there  is
    not a risk to the public in general there is a real risk of harm  to  a
    very particular section of the population.  The level of that  risk  is
    moderate, if not higher, it is present, and the level of  the  possible
    harm is serious.

30. I prefer the submission for the respondent that the scheme in place for
    deportation  is  a  complete  code,  enacted  in   knowledge   of   the
    recommendation and of the UK's reservation from it.  The recommendation
    is no more than that.  It is not of the nature of a  treaty  obligation
    with legal effect.  It might be a powerful aid to applying Article 8 if
    national law were silent  or  ambiguous.   Where  the  legislature  has
    framed the national law to  different  effect  and  after  a  conscious
    decision to make a  reservation  from  the  recommendation,  it  cannot
    constitute a very compelling circumstance.

31. The  alternative  measure  mentioned  by  Mr  Bryce  derives  from  the
    respondent's Immigration Directorate Instructions  (IDI's)  chapter  13
    which prescribes that initial leave under article 8  be  limited  leave
    for a period of 30 months.  Mr  Bryce  suggested  that  this  would  be
    significantly lesser than the appellant's  previous  status,  depriving
    him of his previous security, and so  would  be  in  keeping  with  the
    proportionality principle of interfering only  to  the  minimum  extent
    necessary.  However, that outcome could only arise once  the  appellant
    had shown that he falls into an exception provided within the statutory
    scheme, which he has failed to do.

32. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
    decision is remade by answering the public interest question in  favour
    of the respondent.  Interference with the appellant's right to  respect
    for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).  Questions
    (a) and (b) are answered in favour of the appellant but  questions  (c)
    and (d) (either of which is decisive) are answered  against  him.   His
    appeal, as originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

33. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            19 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




