
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00596/2015
     IA/32106/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 December 2017                           |On 21 February 2018            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR AGRON XHEPA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As appears on the case numbers, this is a conjoined appeal dealing both
    with a decision in relation to the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations  2006  (2006  No  1003)  and  a  deportation  appeal.   The
    appellant is the Secretary of State who appeals against a determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart promulgated on  11  September
    2017 following a hearing on 24 August 2017.

 2. For the sake of continuity we shall refer to  Mr  Agron  Xhepa  as  the
    appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a national of Albania who was born on  23  June  1976.
    His appeal arises under Reg. 26 of the  2006  Regulations  against  the
    decision dated 16 September 2015.  We have applied the 2006 Regulations
    rather than the 2016 EEA Regulations.  He arrived in the United Kingdom
    in 1999 and made various  claims,  some  of  which  were  unsuccessful.
    However, we  are  concerned  with  the  consequences  that  follow  the
    appellant being sentenced by the Dutch authorities to a  period  of  30
    months' imprisonment of which  he  served  fifteen.   The  offence  was
    committed in 2013.  He had served his sentence  by  11  September  2014
    when he lawfully re-entered the United Kingdom  following  a  grant  of
    entry clearance to him by the British authorities.  The  judge  recited
    the relevant provisions. Regulation 21 provides:

         (1)  In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
         health.


         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.


 4. Thereafter the Regulations go on to say that the decision  must  comply
    with the principles of proportionality.  It  was  this  task  that  the
    judge was required to  carry  out  in  his  consideration.   The  judge
    correctly decided that the appellant was entitled to a permanent  right
    of residence and therefore had the  benefit  of  the  higher  level  of
    protection afforded by its being required to be  established  that  the
    decision to remove him had to be made  on  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security.

 5. The relevant offence being an offence which was  committed  in  Holland
    was an offence in relation to which  there  were  none  of  the  normal
    reports which would be available in the case of an offence committed in
    the United Kingdom, such as  probation  reports,  an  OASys  Report  or
    similar reports dealing  with  the  risk  of  reoffending.   The  judge
    however did have the benefit of the remarks  which  were  made  by  the
    sentencing judge in the Amsterdam District Court on 13  December  2013.
    The  offence  was  one  of  wilfully  trading  in  approximately  5.169
    kilograms of cocaine.  He was arrested on 18  June  2013  and,  in  the
    course of sentencing, the judge said:

         "[The appellant] has made himself culpable by transporting  cocaine
         in a quantity that was suitable  for  further  distribution.   Hard
         drugs and trading therein pose a serious  threat  to  society,  not
         only because it is a threat to public health, but also because  the
         criminality that  goes  hand  in  hand  with  the  distributing  of
         narcotics is induced further.   All that [the appellant]  has  made
         subservient to his drive for fast financial profit".

 6. It appears that the prosecuting counsel had suggested a sentence of  40
    months' imprisonment.  In the event, the judge imposed one of 30 months
    with the effect that, in  accordance  with  Dutch  law,  the  applicant
    served only fifteen months.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was well aware of  the  equivocal  stance
    adopted by the appellant  as  to  the  nature  of  the  offending.   In
    paragraph 77 of the determination, he recorded:

         "It is unclear  whether  the  appellant  accepts  his  guilt.   The
         evidence suggests that he is only remorseful of the consequences of
         conviction, there is no challenge to the fact that he was convicted
         of a serious offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment.  That
         is one of the purposes  of  imprisonment  and  can  be  a  powerful
         deterrent against future offending."

    No challenge is made to that broad approach.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also  had  in  mind  that  there  was  an
    earlier illegal entry.  He also said this in paragraph 77:

         "As regards his illegal entry, he made a  voluntary  departure  and
         obtained entry clearance to return as a  family  member.   He  also
         obtained  entry  clearance  and  returned  after   completing   his
         sentence."

 9. Paragraph 79 is crucial:

         "There is no suggestion that the appellant has  been  arrested  and
         prosecuted in the UK.  He  has  produced  a  certificate  from  the
         authorities in Albania  that  confirms  he  is  not  known  to  the
         authorities there.  As he was not convicted in the UK there  is  no
         probation  or  OASys  Report  that  might  assess   the   risk   of
         reoffending.  The Dutch prosecutor sought a sentence of  40  months
         but the court decided not to exceed to their request.  There is  no
         evidence before me  that  he  has  been  involved  in  any  further
         criminal activity and the evidence was the only  offence  albeit  a
         serious one.  There is no evidence before me that the appellant has
         a propensity to reoffend or of a  threat  to  the  public  that  is
         genuine and present."

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to deal with  proportionality  in
    paragraph 80 as an alternative finding.  It must be said at this  stage
    that the family life of the  appellant  had  developed  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his Polish wife and Polish daughter is of some materiality
    in the assessment made by the judge:

         "The appellant's only family  in  the  UK  is  his  wife  a  Polish
         national who has been exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK  for  a
         substantial period of time and his daughter N who is now age 9.   N
         is also a Polish national. N has been diagnosed with ADHD.  She has
         delayed speech and mild hearing loss.  The mother described her  as
         being like a 5-year-old in behaviour.  This was confirmed by Lucyna
         Maria Dul whom I found to be honest  and  straightforward.   It  is
         also confirmed by the  medical  evidence  and  the  observation  of
         independent social worker Shulamit Greenstein in her  report  dated
         16 June 2016."

    Once again no challenge is made to those findings.

11. The nub of the challenge made by the Secretary of State is the  judge's
    findings in relation to paragraph  89  of  the  determination.   Having
    dealt with the overall position the First-tier Tribunal Judge turns  to
    the basis upon which the appellant was granted entry clearance  by  the
    British Embassy following the completion of his sentence.  She says  in
    considering whether the best interest of the appellant's child and also
    his family life should outweigh the public interest:

         "I also have regard to the  fact  the  appellant  was  given  entry
         clearance to join  his  wife  and  child  by  the  British  Embassy
         following the completion of his sentence.  The  Presenting  Officer
         confirmed that the conviction was disclosed in his application.  It
         is difficult to comprehend why a public interest should require the
         appellant's deportation several years after his release when he was
         allowed to re-enter the country immediately following his sentence.
          The fact of his conviction is not enough.   Any  risk  would  have
         been greater in September 2013 than [at] the date of decision.  Had
         the appellant not applied for a residence card it is likely that he
         would be still living with his wife and child."

12. This is the principal, in our  judgment  the  only,  viable  ground  of
    appeal presented by the Secretary of State.  The basis of the challenge
    is that it is said that  the  judge  relied  upon  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been given entry clearance to join his wife and child  by
    the British Embassy as being affirmative evidence  that  there  was  no
    public interest in preventing the appellant's  entry  into  the  United
    Kingdom.  That was, indeed, a matter which the judge  was  entitled  to
    take into account.  It would be, on the  face  of  it,  perverse  if  a
    decision to grant him entry clearance, notwithstanding the fact that he
    had a conviction, was subsequently followed by a decision to refuse him
    a residence card, acknowledging his  right  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, on the basis that he had that same conviction which the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had deemed insufficient to prevent his entry.

13. The way it is put in the grounds of appeal is that, as is obvious  from
    the start of the judgment, the appellant was sentenced  to  30  months'
    imprisonment in Holland for the relevant  offence.   The  Secretary  of
    State then goes on to say that, whilst the appellant  was  serving  his
    prison sentence, he applied to the ECO on 27 June  2014  for  a  family
    permit.  In doing so, the appellant was asked in question 33.

         "Do you have any criminal  convictions  in  any  country  including
         spent/unspent convictions and traffic offences?"

    to which he replied

         "Yes.  [Details] 18 June 2013 Convicted drug offences, 15  months."



    It is said that the grant of entry clearance was made on the basis of a
    wilful (or at least if it was  not  wilful,  it  was  an  actual)  mis-
    statement in that his true sentence was double that declared.

14. There is  an  immediate  difficulty  with  challenging  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge's  determination  on  that  score   and,   indeed,   in
    challenging it before us in the Upper Tribunal.   The  document  of  27
    June 2014 is still not before the Tribunal.  More importantly,  it  was
    not before the First-tier Tribunal.  Nor was there  a  suggestion  made
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the grant of  entry  clearance  was
    made on the basis of a material  misrepresentation.   What  we  see  in
    paragraph 89 of the determination is simply that the Presenting Officer
    confirmed that the conviction was disclosed in his application.  It was
    on this basis that the judge properly concluded

         "It is difficult to  comprehend  why  the  public  interest  should
         require the appellant's deportation several years after his release
         when he was allowed to re-enter the country  immediately  following
         his sentence."

15. There can be no material mistake or misdirection on  the  part  of  the
    judge if he was not alerted to the fact that the  application  made  in
    June 2014 was made on the basis of a material mis-statement.

16. It  does  not  entirely  end  there  because  we  have  before  us  the
    application dated December 2014, some six months after the material mis-
    statement.  This is what the applicant said in the application that  he
    made for a permanent residence card:

         'The applicant was absent from 13 June 2013 to 11  September  2014.
         He was serving a 15 month custodial  sentence  in  the  Netherlands
         [8.3] ... The nature  of  the  offence:  possession  of  drugs  ...
         Sentence given: 30 months  -  15  months  served.  Released  on  11
         September 2014 [9.2].'

    He then repeats that by saying [also 9.2] in  answer  to  the  question
    'What was the period of imprisonment?'

         '30 months but 15 months served.'

17. Now all this was said in an application at which time no allegation had
    been made against him that he had misstated the position  in  his  June
    2014 application.  He was not therefore alerted to the allegation  that
    he was being  dishonest  in  that  earlier  application.   It  remains,
    therefore, a startling piece of evidence that some six months later, he
    clearly revealed the entire truth about that conviction.

18. That however may be by-the-by because, in our judgment,  it  cannot  be
    said that the judge erred in law in failing  to  take  into  account  a
    document that was not before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  that  is,
    the application 27 June 2014 and which was not, in terms, raised by the
    Presenting Officer.   He,  so  it  is  said  in  paragraph  89,  merely
    confirmed that the application for the conviction was disclosed in  his
    application.  For that reason alone, this appeal must fail on ground 1.



19. There are other reasons why we consider that the judge was  right.   It
    is said that the judge reached a wrong conclusion in  relation  to  the
    serious risk of reoffending and that it was sufficient that the offence
    was committed and the appellant either had  not  plainly  accepted  the
    offence or indeed denied the offence and that these factors alone  were
    sufficient evidence that there was a serious risk and harm  to  society
    such as to trigger the threshold for his removal or the  refusal  of  a
    residence card.

20. In our judgment, it does not follow that  to  be  equivocal  about,  or
    indeed deny, guilt is sufficient in itself to establish that there is a
    risk of reoffending.  It is perfectly true that  the Secretary of State
    is in a difficult position in relation to offences which are  committed
    outside the jurisdiction because such offences may only be recorded  by
    a single line in the record which is kept internationally (or at  least
    across  Europe)  in  relation  to  criminal  offenders.   The  European
    documentation may be very limited and may not address the issue of risk
    of reoffending but that does not mean that it is not  a  burden  placed
    upon the Secretary of State to establish that there is such a  risk  if
    she alleges it.

21. The risk of reoffending is not established merely because an  appellant
    did not accept his guilt, otherwise in every case  of  a  'not  guilty'
    plea, that alone would be enough  to  say  that  there  is  a  risk  of
    reoffending because the offender has not  squared  up  to  the  offence
    which is put against  him.   That  cannot  on  its  own  be  sufficient
    evidence to establish a risk of reoffending.  Were it to be evidence at
    all, it must be taken in the context that for this appellant it  was  a
    single offence.  He cannot be treated as a repeat offender which builds
    up a picture of an individual who has a propensity to reoffend and  is,
    therefore, likely to do so in the future.  Nor is  there  the  sort  of
    evidence that one often has in such  cases,  when  looking  at  British
    documentation, that the individual was short of cash and decided to use
    the easy  way  out  by  committing  a  criminal  offence,  drawing  the
    inference that, if he were in similar difficulties in  the  future,  he
    would also turn to crime.  Such a simple relationship of  offending  to
    risk is not one which is open to us, on the facts  of  this  case.   It
    would be pure speculation.  In those circumstances we are not satisfied
    that ground 2 is established.

22. Ground 3 is predicated upon the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  being  in
    error.  Inevitably, the proportionality exercise will have been  skewed
    if the judge failed to give appropriate weight to the public  interest.
    This goes back to ground 1.  For the reasons we have given,  we  reject
    the Secretary of State's submission  that  the  judge  was  wrong.   It
    follows that we also find  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached  a
    sustainable finding of fact  in  relation  to  the  proportionality  of
    permitting the appellant to remain with  his  wife  and  child  in  the
    United Kingdom.

23. Accordingly we dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State and  record
    that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error on a point of law  and  her
    determination of the appeal shall stand.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                      Date: 19 February 2018

