

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: DA/00970/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Monday 4 January 2016                      |On Tuesday 12 January 2016   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR V M C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Collins, Counsel

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. In the interests  of
protecting the privacy of the Appellant and  his  family,  I  continue  that
anonymity direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.  The Secretary of State  appeals  against  a
       decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malone  promulgated  on  30
       September 2015 ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
       against the Secretary of State's decision dated  13  May  2014  that
       section 32 UK Borders Act 2007  applies  and  making  a  deportation
       order against him on  the  same  date.   Permission  to  appeal  was
       granted on 27 October 2015 by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Landes.  The
       matter comes before me to determine whether the First-Tier  Tribunal
       Decision involved the making of an error of law.


    2. The background facts so far as it is necessary  to  recite  them  at
       this stage are that the Appellant  who  is  a  national  of  Jamaica
       arrived in the UK in 2002  as  a  visitor  aged  twenty  years.   He
       married a British citizen in 2002 and the couple had a son.  He  was
       given indefinite leave to remain as a spouse in April 2004.  In July
       2004, he fathered a son by another British woman.  In July 2008,  he
       divorced his wife.  In November 2013, the Appellant was convicted of
       conspiring  to  supply  Class  A  drugs  and  was  given  concurrent
       sentences  of  three  years  each.   The  Appellant  is  now  in   a
       relationship with another British citizen, Ms B.  That  relationship
       began in 2012. They lived together shortly  before  the  Appellant's
       imprisonment and following his release in April 2015.  Ms B has  two
       minor children, CA who is aged fifteen years and AB who is aged five
       years.  The Appellant also claims to continue to enjoy  family  life
       with his two sons from his marriage and  previous  relationship  who
       are now aged twelve years and eleven years respectively.

    3. The Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights  grounds,
       finding that the effect of  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  be
       unduly harsh on Ms B.  He expressly did not find that the effect  on
       any of the Appellant's children would be unduly harsh or that  there
       would  be  any  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   Appellant's
       reintegration in Jamaica.

    4. The Respondent raised four grounds of challenge.  By ground one  the
       Respondent challenges the basis  on  which  the  Judge  allowed  the
       appeal.   Having  found  that  the  Appellants  could  not   satisfy
       paragraphs 399(a) or (b) or paragraph 399A of the Rules,  the  Judge
       went  on  to  consider   whether   there   were   "very   compelling
       circumstances" to prevent deportation in accordance  with  paragraph
       398.  However, the Judge then went on to decide,  as  I  have  noted
       above, that the deportation of the Appellant would be  unduly  harsh
       for Ms B applying section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act  2002  ("section  117C")  before  finally  deciding  that
       deportation would be disproportionate and allowing the appeal on the
       basis that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the
       law or the Immigration Rules.  The confusion  in  that  approach  is
       obvious and stems from what is  accepted  to  be  an  error  of  law
       because the Judge adopted the wrong Rules ie those in force prior to
       28 July 2014.  Mr Collins accepted that this was an error  but  said
       it was not a material error (and Mr Duffy appeared to agree) on  the
       basis that the application of section 117C would lead  to  the  same
       conclusion (although Mr Duffy of course  submitted  that  it  should
       lead to the opposite conclusion to the one reached).  In  the  grant
       of permission, First-Tier Tribunal Judge Landes recognised that  the
       Judge had arguably adopted the wrong Rules but indicated that ground
       one was misconceived because section 117C would  lead  to  the  same
       result.  Mr Duffy confirmed therefore that he did  not  pursue  that
       ground (although he continued to submit that the Judge  applied  the
       wrong Rules which is clearly right following YM (Uganda) v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292).


    5. The issue is therefore whether there is any  error  of  law  in  the
       Judge's finding that the effect of the Appellant's deportation on Ms
       B is unduly harsh applying section 117C.  The Respondent attacks the
       Judge's finding on three grounds.  Firstly, she says that the  Judge
       has failed to give adequate reasons why the effect would  be  unduly
       harsh.   Secondly,  she  says  that  the  public  interest  is  only
       superficially considered.  Thirdly, she says that the  Judge  failed
       to have proper regard to the factors in  section  117.   That  third
       issue is probably subsumed (as Judge Landes recognised in the  grant
       of permission) in the first two grounds.

      Submissions

    6. Mr Duffy submitted that this case  is  a  very  typical  one  of  an
       Appellant who is in a relationship with a partner and  children  and
       is to be deported because he has committed criminal offences.  There
       are no other obviously unusual factors in this case.  The Judge  did
       not consider whether  the  impact  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
       Appellant's family in any meaningful way.  In his  consideration  of
       the public interest, the Judge began at [71] with a finding that the
       public interest did not require deportation before going on  to  set
       out the reasons for that finding.  He appears to have pre-judged the
       outcome before considering the public interest.

    7. Mr Collins pointed me to the conflict  between  the  Upper  Tribunal
       decisions of Secretary of State for the Home Department v KMO [2015]
       UKUT 00543 (IAC) and Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v
       MAB [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) in relation to the appropriate  test  to
       assess what is unduly  harsh.   The  former  is  authority  for  the
       proposition that when assessing whether deportation is unduly  harsh
       the Tribunal should have regard to the seriousness  of  the  offence
       and balance that against the impact.  The case of  MAB  propounds  a
       test which is perhaps best described as a  threshold  test,  on  the
       basis that the public interest is considered to be already  balanced
       by paragraph 398  of  the  Rules  and  Section  117C  based  on  the
       seriousness of the offence by reference to the length  of  sentence.
       Mr Duffy naturally relied on KMO and said  that  I  should  consider
       whether the Judge erred by failing to consider  the  seriousness  of
       the Appellant's offending.  Mr  Collins  said  that  the  issue  was
       whether the impact on Ms B would be excessive and he relied on  what
       was said in MAB  about  the  meaning  of  "unduly  harsh"  as  being
       inordinately or excessively severe or bleak.  He submitted that  the
       Judge's finding that the impact would be at  that  level  is  to  be
       found at [65]  of  the  Decision  and  that  adequate  reasons  were
       provided for that finding at [70] to [75]. The Judge  accepted  that
       Ms B would be "devastated" if the Appellant were deported.


    8. Mr Collins pointed out that the public interest  was  considered  at
       [72] to [80] and what the Judge there  considered  was  whether  the
       public interest impacted on his finding about the level of impact on
       Ms B  such  as  to  render  deportation  proportionate.   The  Judge
       considered section 117C(5) which is the  relevant  section  in  this
       case.  As the case of Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) makes
       clear, the Judge was not required to expressly consider every aspect
       of section 117.  Although Mr Collins accepted that  section  117C(1)
       and (2) were not  specifically  mentioned,  he  contended  that  the
       seriousness of the offence was considered particularly  at  [48]  to
       [49] and that the Judge had in mind the  importance  of  the  public
       interest in enforcing deportation by reference to the  case  law  at
       [77] to [78].  He accepted that deterrence was not mentioned in  the
       section at [72] to [80] but pointed me to [49] where the  Judge  had
       noted the "public abhorrence" of offences relating to  drugs.    The
       Judge also took into account the risk of re-offending  by  reference
       to the OASyS report [47].  This was said to  be  a  low  risk.   The
       Respondent has not produced any evidence to counter that assessment.
        The Judge also cited the Judge's sentencing remarks at  [51]  which
       made clear that the Appellant's role in the conspiracy was a  lesser
       one.


    9. Mr Collins pointed out that there was no challenge to  the  findings
       of fact or to credibility of the Appellant or his  witnesses.   This
       was a challenge to the weight given to the various factors  and  the
       Judge's proportionality  assessment.   In  circumstances  where  the
       Judge had considered all relevant matters, there was no basis for me
       to interfere with his findings.

   10. In reply, Mr Duffy accepted that the Judge had made a  finding  that
       the effect on Ms B would be "unduly harsh"  at  [65]  but  submitted
       that there was no reasoning attached to that finding.  This  finding
       appeared to be based only on the fact that the Appellant  and  Ms  B
       are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  Nothing is said about
       what makes deportation harsher in this case than in any  other  case
       where there is such a relationship.   As to the public interest,  Mr
       Duffy pointed out that [73] looked only at the offence itself.  This
       would be an error of law in itself.

   11. At the end of the hearing, I indicated that I reserved  my  decision
       whether there is an error of law in the Decision and  would  provide
       that decision and my reasons in writing which I now go on to do.  If
       I were to find an error of law, both  parties  indicated  that  they
       were content for me to re-make the  decision  by  reference  to  the
       evidence before me unless I considered that further oral evidence or
       submissions were required in which case  the  parties  were  content
       that the decision should be re-made following a further  hearing  in
       this Tribunal.  There would be no need for remittal.

    Decision and reasons


   12. The difficulty with the Decision in this case is the adoption by the
       Judge of the wrong set of Rules which makes the reasoning harder  to
       follow.  By adopting the wrong set of Rules, the  Judge  has  fallen
       into error by looking for "very  compelling  circumstances"  in  the
       section of the Decision  at  [32]  to  [59].   Both  representatives
       agreed however that this error of law was not material  because  the
       Judge went on to consider the case applying section 117C at [60]  to
       [78] before reaching his conclusion at [80] that  deportation  would
       be disproportionate.  I cannot though ignore what is said at [32] to
       [59] when considering the Judge's  finding  that  deportation  would
       have an unduly harsh effect on Ms B.


   13. It is clear that the Judge was very impressed by  the  witnesses  in
       this case, particularly Ms B and her mother, Mrs B.  Their testimony
       about the Appellant's character and  the  very  strong  relationship
       between the Appellant and Ms B  appears  to  be  the  focus  of  the
       Judge's finding that deportation would be unduly harsh.   The  Judge
       notes, for example,  at  [43]  the  evidence  from  Ms  B  that  the
       Appellant is her "rock", her "life" and that the  two  years  during
       which he had been in prison had opened up an "immense void".   Ms  B
       has been in a previous relationship which was violent [44] and  that
       too appears to have influenced the Judge's  findings.   It  is  that
       evidence which finds its way into  the  finding  at  [65]  that  the
       effect of the Appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh and  the
       reasoning which follows in that paragraph and [66] to [67]. In order
       to understand the basis of the Judge's reasoning, it is necessary to
       set those paragraphs out in full:-


      "[65]      After careful consideration I have come to the  conclusion
           that the effect the Appellant's deportation would have on [Ms B]
           would be unduly harsh.  She told me the Appellant was  "The  man
           of my life" and that she loved him "with all her heart".   I  am
           satisfied  those  statements  were  not  mere  platitudes.   Her
           statements were backed up by the prison visit logs I had.   They
           showed [Ms B] visiting the Appellant two or three times a  month
           at all four prisons in which he served his sentence.
      [66] The Appellant and [Ms B] have been living together for  a  short
           period, but they have been in a relationship since 2012.  Before
           the Appellant went to prison, they had daily  contact,  although
           they were living in separate properties.  I accept that  [Ms  B]
           had an unfortunate experience in  her  last  relationship.   She
           entered into the relationship with the  Appellant  when  he  was
           here legally and when he had no "relevant"  convictions  as  the
           sentencing judge observed.  The Appellant was sentenced as a man
           of good character.
      [67] He has shown himself to be  a  model  partner  and  has  had  an
           extremely beneficial effect on [Ms B's] children.   Her  parents
           happily blessed her relationship with  the  Appellant.   [Ms  B]
           told me she would be devastated if the Appellant were  deported.
           I accept that statement.  The devastation would have an  adverse
           effect on her ability to work and care for  her  children.   She
           would be emotionally bereft.  That her last relationship was  so
           unsatisfactory makes this one with the Appellant  all  the  more
           important."




   14. The Judge reinforces his reasoning about the impact on Ms B at  [69]
       to [70] in the following terms:-
           "[69] In coming to my conclusion I have very much borne in  mind
    [Mrs B's] words:
                 '[Ms B] is our third child, she is a very caring person who
                 wears her heart on her sleeve.  [Ms  B]  is  hard  working,
                 determined and very ambitious, all qualities  that  we  are
                 very proud of.
                 However, she has experienced a lot of disappointment in her
                 life and has been let down by those that  she  has  trusted
                 the most.  The effect of these let downs have been hard  to
                 watch over the years as parents, but the way in  which  she
                 continues to  look  ahead  and  remain  positive  is  truly
                 inspirational...
                 [VC] is a good man and we have welcomed him into our family
                 like a son, he too is very caring and generous to all...
                 The impact this is having on [Ms B],  the  girls  and  also
                 [VC's] son is a very  negative  one  and  this  worries  me
                 greatly'
           [70] In my judgment,  devastation  is  an  appropriate  word  to
           describe  what  would  happen  to  [Ms  B]  on  the  Appellant's
           deportation, given her history as described by her mother.  I do
           not consider she deserves that fate.  I regard  the  effect  the
           Appellant's deportation  would  have  on  her  as  being  unduly
           harsh."


   15. As noted above, the Judge also accepted the evidence  he  was  given
       also about the Appellant's character, that he is a "good man" and "a
       worthwhile individual".   The  findings  at  [45]  to  [50]  of  the
       Decision find their way into the Judge's  assessment  under  section
       117C at [68] where the Judge says:-


           "[Ms B] is convinced the Appellant will not re-offend.   I  find
           the chances of his doing so to be minimal.  I  accept  he  is  a
           good man and that the index offence was wholly out of character.
            If permitted to stay, the Appellant would be employed as  [sic]
           [Ms B] would be able to experience the security and happiness  a
           young woman and mother like her should experience.  In contrast,
           the situation she would find herself in  without  the  Appellant
           would be unduly harsh.  All the people who  would  suffer  as  a
           result of the Appellant's deportation are British citizens."


       As Mr Collins points out, the  Respondent  has  not  challenged  the
       credibility of the evidence in this case.


   16. It is of course though highly relevant that the Appellant  has  been
       convicted of a criminal offence and a serious one  involving  drugs.
       Whether the test of what is "unduly harsh" is one  which  imports  a
       proportionality balance against the seriousness of  the  offence  or
       not, a consideration of the public interest has to find its place in
       any assessment of whether deportation is  proportionate.    However,
       once again, the Decision needs to be looked at as a whole.  True  it
       is that the passage of the Decision beginning at [71] starts off  as
       a finding that the public interest does not require the  Appellant's
       deportation and what follows  sets  out  the  consideration  of  the
       public interest.  Read in that way, the Decision might suggest  that
       the Judge has reached his conclusion  without  properly  considering
       the public interest which must form part of that  assessment.   That
       must though be read in the context of what precedes it.


   17. At [49] the Judge records that the index offence was a very  serious
       one which involved a conspiracy to supply Class A drugs over  a  two
       week period.  The  Appellant  provided  his  co-defendants  on  four
       occasions with a vehicle and actually  drove  it  on  two  of  those
       occasions.  As I have noted at [8]  above,  the  Judge  records  the
       Respondent's  submission  that  offences  involving  drugs   involve
       "public  abhorrence".   The  Judge   notes   that   there   was   no
       recommendation  for  deportation  and  that  the  sentencing   Judge
       regarded the Appellant's  role  as  lesser  than  that  of  his  co-
       defendants and found that there were no aggravating factors  in  his
       case.  The Judge notes at [45] that the Appellant  behaved  well  in
       prison and followed several courses.  He also notes that  the  OASyS
       report rates his risk of re-offending as "low".   Although,  as  the
       Respondent points out, the Appellant entered into  the  relationship
       with Ms B and her family at around the same  time  as  the  offences
       which were committed in May and June 2012 so that the evidence of Ms
       B and Mrs B about the risk of reoffending can only be given  limited
       weight, the Judge was entitled to have regard to the  OASyS  report.
       There is  no  other  formal  evidence  dealing  with  the  risk  the
       Appellant might pose.  Although  the  overall  conclusions  of  such
       reports are sometimes of limited value in their assessment of  risk,
       in this case, the narrative of the report  supports  the  conclusion
       and the Judge's finding of low risk and stresses the  importance  of
       Ms B's support of the Appellant to the risk  of  the  Appellant  re-
       offending in future.


   18. Even if the Judge has proceeded on the basis that deportation  would
       have an unduly harsh effect on Ms B  without  consideration  of  the
       public interest applying section 117C(5) as a threshold question  ie
       the MAB approach, what follows the finding at [71] does amount to  a
       proper consideration of the public interest before the conclusion is
       reached  at  [80]  that  deportation  would   be   disproportionate.
       Although the public  interest  is  summarised  in  relation  to  the
       criminal offending at [73] quite  shortly,  the  Judge  has  clearly
       considered the public interest in deportation at [77]  and  [78]  as
       follows:-


      "[77]      In coming  to  my  decision,  I  have  borne  in  mind  SS
           (Nigeria),  At paragraph  54,  Laws  LJ  stated:  'The  pressing
           nature of the public interest here is vividly  informed  by  the
           fact  that  by  Parliament's  express  declaration  the   public
           interest  is  injured  if  the  criminal's  deportation  is  not
           effected.  Such a result could in my judgment only be  justified
           by a very strong claim indeed'
      [78] In paragraph 58, the learned Lord Justice identified the 'public
           interest  in  the   appellant's   deportation'   as   'extremely
           pressing'.  I have had regard to the dicta of  Sales  LJ  in  AJ
           (Angola) to the effect that the seriousness of the offence  must
           not be brushed aside.  As I have recorded above, in general  the
           public rightly abhor offences of the nature of that committed by
           the Appellant."


   19.  I am satisfied that the Judge there has proper regard to the public
       interest and is not merely paying lip service  to  it.   That  deals
       also with the Respondent's  challenge  to  the  Judge's  failure  to
       consider sections 117C(1) and (2) because the Judge  has  considered
       those aspects within that reasoning albeit not expressly directed to
       those sections. The Judge is clearly aware of  the  public  interest
       imperative in deportation and the need for a strong claim to counter
       it.  The Judge has here found that there is such a strong claim.   I
       might not have reached the same conclusion as did the Judge  but  he
       heard the evidence from the witnesses  which  I  did  not.   He  was
       clearly impressed by what he found was evidence of  the  devastating
       impact on Ms B if the Appellant were to be deported.  It  cannot  be
       said that the word "devastating" is not adequate to  encompass  what
       was said by the Tribunal in MAB to be needed for deportation  to  be
       unduly harsh.  The Judge set out his reasons for so finding and  the
       Decision cannot be impugned as irrational for lack of reasons or for
       failure to consider relevant material.


   20.  For  the  sake  of  completeness  and  notwithstanding  Mr  Duffy's
       submissions on  the  issue,  I  have  also  considered  whether  the
       application of the  wrong  Rules  in  this  case  makes  a  material
       difference.  The Rules in their post 28 July 2014 form  are  not  in
       precisely  the  same  form  as  section  117C(5).   In   particular,
       paragraph 399(b) of the July 2014 Rules refers to the need  for  the
       relationship to be formed at a time when a person's status  was  not
       unlawful  or  precarious  and  a  requirement  that  the  effect  of
       deportation be unduly harsh  in  terms  of  the  deportee's  partner
       accompanying  him  to  his  home  country.   The  former  finds  its
       equivalent in section 117B(4) which the Judge did not  consider  and
       the latter is properly encapsulated  in  section  117C(5)  but  this
       option was not explored in the Decision.  However, in this case  the
       Judge notes at [66] that the Appellant was  here  legally  when  the
       relationship was formed in 2012.  He had indefinite leave to  remain
       and that was not revoked until the deportation order in May 2014.  I
       note also at [72] the Judge's finding that there was no question  of
       the Appellant's family members (which there includes Ms B) going  to
       live in  Jamaica.   This  is  not  considered  in  the  Respondent's
       decision (although that proceeds on the  basis  of  there  being  no
       genuine, subsisting relationship) but  also  and  more  importantly,
       this does not form  the  basis  of  challenge  in  the  Respondent's
       grounds. Indeed, the Respondent's grounds at [2](g) and (h)  proceed
       on the basis that Ms B would remain in the UK without the Appellant.
       I am therefore satisfied that the error of law  which  clearly  does
       exist in the Decision is not material.





DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

I do not set aside the Decision


Signed           [pic] Date   8 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
