

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00035/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2013                            |On 12 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE MITTING
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN

                                   Between

                            DELER KHEDER HOSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Frost, TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Little about the appellant could be said with any certainty.  What  can
    be said with sufficient certainty to be a useful starting point is that
    he is an Iraqi citizen of Kurdish origin and is probably aged  32.   He
    did arrive in the United Kingdom before he claimed asylum on 8 February
    2001 and there is no reason to disbelieve the account that  has  always
    been understood, that he arrived clandestinely on or about  1  February
    2001.  Beyond that little of his history or past circumstances  can  be
    established with any degree of certainty.  We are aware, and  state  at
    the outset that what we are looking for is not certainty  or  even  for
    facts to be found on the balance of probabilities but  whether  or  not
    there is a reasonable likelihood that  what  he  has  said  in  various
    accounts given over the years is true.

2.   He has always  claimed  to  have  belonged  to  a  wealthy  land-owning
    Kurdish family.  He originally said that the family lived in a  village
    called Chiwa Saro in a rural part of the region of Khosnaw in territory
    controlled since the first Iraq war  by  the  then  Kurdish  autonomous
    authority and now Kurdish Regional Government in a  part  of  Kurdistan
    near to the border with Iran.  The claim which he made for  asylum  was
    rejected by the Secretary of State by a letter dated 17 May 2001 and on
    appeal by the Adjudicator in Determination and Reasons  promulgated  on
    29 July 2003.

3.   His case then was that  his  family  had  become  involved  in  a  land
    dispute with a neighbouring family in 1989, that is to say when he  was
    8, as a result of which they left their land and moved to Rania in 1994
    or 1997.  Rania is a small town to the east of Erbil and north west  of
    Sulaymaniyah in Sulaymaniyah province.

4.   He said that on 1 June 1999  his  father  was  shot  and  killed  while
    driving a car in which he was travelling as a passenger.   He  too  was
    shot and clubbed and left for dead.  He was sent to a private  hospital
    where the bullet was removed.  Later his kidney became infected and  he
    lost a kidney.  He said he then left Iraqi Kurdistan on 1 January 2001.



5.   The basis of his claim for asylum was  that  he  and  his  family  were
    being oppressed by  a  powerful  PUK  commander,  Anwar  Betwata.   The
    Adjudicator was not satisfied that the appellant had been or  would  be
    subject to persecution for a Refugee Convention reason or would  be  at
    risk of death or ill-treatment sufficient to engage Article 3 ECHR.  He
    found that the appellant had exaggerated his account and  could  safely
    be returned.

6.    In paragraph 8 of his Determination and  Reasons  he  dealt  with  the
    incident in which the appellant claimed that he and his father had been
    shot and noted that no medical evidence had been  put  forward  on  his
    behalf to substantiate his claim that he had  been  shot  and  severely
    injured except for a letter from a nurse practitioner  addressed  to  a
    Housing Manager which said that he was currently suffering from  asthma
    and medical and psychological  problems.   He  said  that  he  was  not
    assisted by the absence of supporting medical evidence.

7.   Alerted to that very significant omission one might have expected  that
    the two highly competent firms of solicitors who have  since  conducted
    the appellant's case would have rectified the omission.  They have  not
    done so.  Consequently we are in precisely the same position as was the
    Adjudicator ten years ago of considering an assertion that someone  has
    received a serious physical  wound  which  must  have  left   signs  of
    internal scarring detectable by an MRI scan, of external scarring where
    the bullet entered and was removed; but thee is no such  evidence.   By
    itself that surprising omission might not have  been  determinative  or
    anything approaching it but as we shall explain that is  not  the  only
    difficulty which the appellant faces.

8.   His asylum claim having  been  refused  and  his  appeal  dismissed  no
    action was taken to remove him.  That is unsurprising in the  light  of
    the second Iraq war and of the internal disturbance that then followed.
     He said he formed a relationship with a British woman in 2005 and went
    through an Islamic ceremony of marriage with her but did not  undertake
    a civil ceremony.  A son was born to her who may or may not  have  been
    his son.  He at one time asserted with confidence that he was.

9.   Of more relevance for the present purposes he also committed a  serious
    criminal offence on 5 August 2007, wounding a man  with  a  knife  with
    intent to cause grievous bodily harm contrary  to  Section  18  of  the
    Offences against the Person Act 1861.  He was tried by a judge and jury
    and convicted on 14 March  2008.   He  was  sentenced  to  five  years'
    imprisonment on 10 December 2008.  His relationship  with  the  British
    woman then ceased although he said that she was willing to allow him to
    maintain contact with the son. Nothing turns on  that  now  because  no
    part of his case today or in recent years has  been  that  he  must  be
    permitted to remain in the United Kingdom to sustain  his  relationship
    with that boy.

10.  On 16 January 2009 the Secretary of State  notified  the  appellant  of
    his liability to automatic deportation under Section 32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  On 18 July 2009 the appellant made a fresh claim for
    asylum.  He was interviewed on 11 December 2009.  In that interview  he
    claimed, as far as we can tell for the first time to have been born  in
    Gwer, a town near Mosul, in the part of Kurdistan then and now, insofar
    as it is under anyone's control, controlled by the  Central  Government
    of Iraq.  His claim was refused on 6 December 2010.  On 2 December 2010
    a deportation order was served on him.  He appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a Determination and Reasons promulgated on  4  May  2011,
    the First-tier Tribunal panel dismissed his appeal.

11.  The basis of his claim to international protection  had  changed.   Its
    origin remained in part at least a feud with  another  family  but  the
    feud was very different from that originally described.  The family was
    that of Jalal Talabani, the 6th President of Iraq.  The  oppressor  was
    not Anwar Betwata but Anwar Beg Talabani, President Talabani's brother.
     The feud started with a demand  for  money  which  was  refused.   The
    appellant's father and uncle killed one of Jalal  Talabani's  brothers,
    not Anwar Beg.  He described how at some stage, he does not say when or
    by what means,  his  family  then  found  itself  in  Gwer.   That  was
    understood, perhaps misunderstood by the panel, to be a suggestion that
    his family had moved to Gwer.  The family then he said moved  to  Rania
    in 1997 not to escape the land feud that he  had  previously  described
    but because of an entirely different  feud  involving  an  uncle.   The
    uncle had married a Yazedi woman.  A  Yazedi  military  commander  then
    killed his uncle's wife and was  in  turn  killed  by  members  of  the
    appellant's family.  The Iraqi regime issued a warrant for his family's
    arrest, hence their flight to Rania.
12.  The flight  to  Rania  however  created  a  difficulty  for  him  which
    required explanation.  His account was that his father and  grandfather
    were senior Ba'athist figures, in other words supporters of the  Saddam
    regime.  Consequently the last place that one  might  contemplate  that
    they would seek refuge was the area  controlled  by  the  then  Kurdish
    autonomous authority.   A complex  explanation  was  proffered  to  the
    effect that Rania was,  although  under  the  control  of  the  Kurdish
    militias, nevertheless a small town away from Erbil and Sulaymaniyah in
    which it was easier to remain out of the way than had the family  moved
    to either of those two towns.

13.  The appellant maintained that his father was killed and he was  injured
    in Rania, in 1999, as before although his description  of  the  precise
    circumstances in which that event occurred differed in details from his
    earlier  account  and  contained  features  which  led  the  panel   to
    disbelieve it.

14.  Consistent with his new account that the original  feud  was  with  the
    Talabani family he gave evidence that the killers were PUK  supporters,
    by necessary implication associates or subordinates of  Jalal  Talabani
    and Anwar Beg Talabani.  He also said that earlier  in  1994  a  family
    member had been held by them for ransom.  He explained the  reason  for
    the drastic change in his account.  The interpreter who  on  behalf  of
    the Home  Office  had  translated  his  answers  at  the  first  asylum
    interview on 15 May 2001 had told him not to  mention  Jalal  Talabani,
    for fear that the UK authorities who collaborated with the PUK would in
    consequence deport him.  He claimed to have learned in  2003  that  the
    interpreter was the son of a PUK general and that was why he  had  been
    told to advance the account, which by necessary inference he  must  now
    accept to have been false.   He  did.   He  raised  a  further  bar  to
    removal, the threat which he said would be posed to him by  the  family
    of the man who had participated in the stabbing of which they were both
    convicted on 5 August 2007.  No further mention of that has  been  made
    in this hearing.  He relied then, but not now on his wish to remain  in
    contact with his son in the United Kingdom.  He maintained also that he
    was not guilty of the crime of which he had been convicted.

15.  He also relied on three medical report prepared between July  2010  and
    April 2011 in which he said he was diagnosed  as  suffering  from  post
    traumatic  stress  disorder,  a  major  depressive  episode,  psychotic
    symptoms and some form of epilepsy.  He maintained that the  facilities
    for medical treatment in the Kurdish regional zone were inadequate  and
    that he posed a risk of suicide if deported.

16.  The panel disbelieved his account of his and his  family's  experiences
    in north Iraq.  It rejected his explanation for the change  of  account
    and concluded that whatever difficulties he had faced in Iraq they were
    not for a Refugee Convention reason.  It concluded that  there  was  no
    satisfactory evidence that he was at any risk from the  family  of  his
    fellow criminal.  It held that facilities for protection from  ordinary
    criminal conduct were available from the  authorities  in  north  Iraq,
    implicitly at least in the KRG, and that  medical  facilities  for  the
    management of his condition existed  there.   In  the  light  of  those
    findings  it  concluded  that  he  was  not  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection under  Article  15C  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/E.   It
    concluded that he enjoyed no family life in the United Kingdom and that
    the interference with his private life  was  justified,  implicitly  at
    least, in furtherance of the legitimate aim of the prevention of  crime
    and disorder.  By order of Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on 13 March  2012
    the panel's decision was set aside and directions were set for  hearing
    before us.   It  was  common  ground  and  in  any  event  Judge  Coker
    determined that the panel had made  an  error  of  law.   Our  task  is
    therefore on  the  material  which  was  available  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that which  has  been  produced  in  addition  to  us,  to
    determine whether or not the Secretary of State's decision to deport is
    or is not sustainable.

17.  We have been presented with a third detailed  witness  statement  dated
    15 January 2013 which expands upon  the  account  advanced  before  the
    panel.  The explanation for the first untrue statement was that he  was
    told by "Alam", who was not a Home Office interpreter as he  previously
    said, but an interpreter  retained  by  his  then  solicitors,  not  to
    mention anything to do with Jalal Talabani and also not to mention  the
    incident involving the Yazedi woman because "he may end up moving on to
    what  happened  with  the  Talabani  family".   Consistently  with  his
    December 2009 interview, the appellant now maintains that he  was  born
    on 2 April 1981 in Gwer where his family had a house and land and where
    he went to school for two years.  He said that his family did not  have
    a house in Chiwa Saro and that he did not  live  there,  all  that  had
    happened was that they had owned land there.  He claimed to  have  been
    issued with an identification card in Mosul.  He said that he had spent
    "years" in Gwer.  The problems with the PUK "were going  on  for  years
    before we left Gwer for Rania... Talabani and his family were trying to
    extort money from my family because we were quite  wealthy".   He  also
    said that the Peshmerga demanded food and money "during the  time  that
    we lived in Gwer".  The account which he now gives suggests that he had
    spent his childhood in Gwer.  He stated  explicitly  that  he  and  his
    family had to flee Gwer in 1997 because of the incident  involving  the
    Yazedi woman and because a warrant had been issued by  the  then  Iraqi
    authorities for the arrest of  his  relatives  because  his  uncle  had
    killed an Iraqi officer during a gunfight at the wedding of  the  uncle
    to the Yazedi woman, the wedding at which she too had been killed.   He
    said that it was during his time in Gwer that his uncle had killed  one
    of Jalal Talabani's brothers - some time between 1985  and  1989  -  he
    thought 1987.  In fact  the  objective  evidence  referred  to  at  the
    detailed and helpful report of Dr George  is  that  that  killing  took
    place in 1987 although Dr George was of course not able to say who  the
    killers were.

18.  The contrast between his current account and his  original  account  is
    striking, not  least  because  he  says  he  was  not  then  given  the
    opportunity to check through and respond  to  the  answers  which  were
    recorded  in  his  first  asylum  interview.   In  fact  a  typewritten
    "response" was prepared in which his account was set out.  It  contains
    the following:

         "In 1989 when I was a child my family got into trouble with another
         family from a different clan about family tribal land.  Before 1995
         someone from the other family was killed, however this did not have
         anything to do with our family but because  of  this  dispute  they
         blamed us for  his  death.   The  animosity  between  the  families
         dragged on for several years.  When the Kurdish  forces  took  over
         power in north  Iraq  in  1995  which  was  our  area  the  Kurdish
         authorities might to make peace between our families.  However  the
         other family refused to make peace before we paid them a ransom."

     He then goes on to describe the  payment  of  the  ransom  and  further
    troubles which his brother  experienced  at  the  hands  of  the  other
    family. He then goes on to describe in detail  the  escalation  of  the
    land dispute which led ultimately to interference with the water supply
    to the land.

19.  That was his response to the answers that were  recorded  as  given  in
    the interview.  He states expressly that in 1995 he was living  in  the
    area controlled by the Kurdish authorities.  By  necessary  implication
    he also states that that was the area in which he and  his  family  had
    their home "which was our area".

20.  We have set out the various accounts that he has given over  the  years
    about why he fled Kurdistan and what had happened to him before he  did
    to demonstrate beyond possibility of argument that he must, in at least
    part of the accounts he has given, have lied and done so  deliberately.
    For  that  reason  we  approach  any  account  given  by  him  of   his
    circumstances before he arrived in the United Kingdom with  scepticism.



21.  He faces however a further difficulty.   He  undoubtedly  suffers  from
    mental problems.  He has been examined by  eminent  psychiatrists  over
    the years including recently on  at  least  three  occasions  Professor
    Katona.  In a report dated 21 April  2013,  not  that  long  after  the
    detailed witness statement on which he  now  relies,  Professor  Katona
    records that he asked him why he had come to the United  Kingdom.   The
    answer was, "many things happened I had been ill a long time,  I  don't
    remember what happened to me".  Professor Katona went on to  note  that
    he had presented to the mental health team in 2005 as  having  paranoid
    beliefs and thoughts that people were out to harm him.  He  noted  that
    in February 2008 he was "suffering from memory problems and  not  being
    able to remember much".  He also noted that, on two occasions on  which
    he had administered cognitive tests to him, he had scored 8 or 9 out of
    28, a level  that  indicated  significant  cognitive  impairment.   The
    condition was fluctuating, because on an occasion in between those  two
    tests, on which he had administered the same test, his score had  risen
    to 18 out of 28, indicating mild to moderate impairment only.

22.  Further, it is common ground that the appellant is illiterate  and  yet
    he claims to come from a wealthy family.  We do not know  enough  about
    the standards to which wealthy families in Kurdistan aspire to be  able
    to discern with confidence what their  attitude  to  the  education  of
    their children might be but it is at least an  oddity  which  raises  a
    query about his general account.

23.  Taking  all  of  those  things  together,  the  established  lies,  the
    dramatic variations in the accounts given, the implausible  explanation
    for the change  of  accounts  involving  as  it  does  the  astonishing
    coincidence that the Kurdish interpreter was the son of a  PUK  general
    and told him not merely to  conceal  what  he  had  to  say  about  the
    Talabani but also about what had happened at the wedding, together with
    his demonstrated inability to remember anything, all satisfies us  that
    we cannot conclude  to  the  standard  of  reasonable  likelihood  that
    anything bar the fact that he is an Iraqi citizen of Kurdish origin who
    arrived in this country in February 2001, might be true.  We simply  do
    not know.  To that low standard we believe it to be  more  likely  that
    "our area" was within that which  is  now  controlled  by  the  Kurdish
    Regional Government than in or near Mosul.

24.  For those reasons, like the Adjudicator  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel, we reject his claim to asylum  and  to  humanitarian  protection
    under Article 15C.  We are not satisfied  that  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that there is a real risk that he will be exposed
    to ill-treatment of a kind sufficiently serious  to  engage  Article  3
    ECHR.

25.  Two further issues remain.  It is said  that  he  poses  a  significant
    suicide risk.  It is also said that the mental difficulties from  which
    he undoubtedly suffers which were outlined by the panel in  the  second
    decision are such that he could  not  receive  the  treatment  that  he
    requires for them in the KRG.  We accept  the  evidence  of  Dr  George
    citing the UNHCR that the facilities for the treatment  of  psychiatric
    conditions in the KRG are "limited and  reportedly  insufficient".   We
    accept that, all other things being  equal,  Professor  Katona  and  Dr
    Pourgourides, whose report is dated 27  November  2013,  are  right  in
    concluding that his mental health requires treatment of  a  kind  which
    can be provided for him in the United Kingdom but  which  there  is  no
    reason to expect will be provided for him, at any rate to a  sufficient
    standard, in the KRG.  We accept also that he has said that in the past
    that he has attempted to commit suicide although we have no evidence to
    that effect.  We accept that there is some suicide risk and that it  is
    at least possible that in the KRG the management of that risk  will  be
    less capable  than  it  might  be  in  the  United  Kingdom.   But  his
    circumstances get nowhere near those which even in the case of  someone
    who was not to be deported for having committed a serious  crime  would
    prevent removal.  It is now settled law both in the United Kingdom  and
    in Strasbourg that in the case of a physical condition  the  Convention
    state in which a person is temporarily resident cannot be  required  to
    assume the healthcare burden of managing that condition and  that  even
    in circumstances in which life may be shortened by the lack of  medical
    care in the receiving country,  it  is  nonetheless  proportionate  and
    legitimate to remove the individual - see N and the UK [2008]  47  EHRR
    885).  Similar reasoning must apply to mental  conditions  as  well  as
    physical conditions.  Accordingly the fact  that  psychiatric  services
    are "limited and reportedly insufficient" in the KRG cannot  by  itself
    prevent removal, still less deportation.  As far as  the  suicide  risk
    goes the risk here is in our judgment  not  sufficient  to  engage  the
    United Kingdom's responsibility under Article 2 of the ECHR.   Further,
    neither Professor Katona nor Dr Pourgourides  comment  upon  the  steps
    that can be taken while the appellant is  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    during removal  to  eliminate  or  severely  limit  the  risk.   It  is
    unfortunate that they have not done so and  accordingly  we  have  been
    obliged to draw upon evidence given in other cases.  Where there  is  a
    very serious risk of suicide, eminent psychiatrists have expressed  the
    opinion  that  it  can  and  should  be  managed  by  round  the  clock
    observation.  Facilities for this exist in mental hospitals.  There  is
    no reason in principle why similar  arrangements  should  not  be  made
    within the immigration  detention  estate  in  the  period  immediately
    before removal or deportation.  In extremis, although we do  not  claim
    for this any expert psychiatric support, physical restraints  could  be
    used, in addition to the removal of ligatures and other items by  which
    an individual might harm themselves, to avoid the risk that they  will.



26.  In the end we have to stand back from all of the factors that  we  have
    attempted to analyse to reach a conclusion on the basic proportionality
    issue.  This is not a case in which the new  Immigration  Rules  taking
    effect  from  9  July  2012  play  a  part.   The   assessment   is   a
    straightforward Article 8/3 assessment.  In our judgment it is  clearly
    proportionate for the United Kingdom to  deport  to  a  territory  from
    which the appellant almost certainly comes, the KRG in the interests of
    the prevention of crime and the maintenance of  order  consequent  upon
    his conviction in 2007.

27.  In reaching that judgment we have, as will be  apparent  from  what  we
    have said, assumed that the appellant will  be  deported  to  the  KRG.
    Were that not to be the case it would have been  necessary  for  us  to
    have undertaken a detailed assessment of  the  circumstances  currently
    obtaining in the rest of Iraq of which Dr George speaks and about which
    this Tribunal and the Court of Appeal have pronounced in recent  years.
    We are not however concerned with the mechanics of removal to  the  KRG
    nor with the fact that the appellant does  not  have  any  identity  or
    other document which establishes, as of now, his right to reside in the
    KRG.  These are matters for negotiation between the British  Government
    and the KRG.   Our  judgment  is  given  on  the  assumption  that  the
    opportunity to negotiate his return exists and that if the KRG  accepts
    that he can be returned there, then none of the risks of which we  have
    spoken could prevent his lawful deportation.  We do not  regard  as  in
    the  slightest  degree  a  realistic  obstacle   to   deportation   the
    possibility that he might have been born in the region of  Mosul,  both
    because it seems to us that on the material which  we  have  considered
    that is very unlikely, but also because if the KRG accept his return to
    the territory controlled by them, the theoretical possibility  that  he
    might be required to go to Mosul to get a  ration  card  will  be  just
    that, a theoretical possibility that will play no part  in  reality  in
    what will happen to him.

28.  For all of those reasons this appeal from the decision of the panel  is
    dismissed.





Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Mitting
