
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00270/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 December 2019                  |On 6 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                  the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ADRIAN LUKASZ PAWLIKOWSKI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Rea, of Rea Law.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The  respondent,  whom  I
    shall call "the claimant", is a national of Poland, who appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal against a deportation order made against him on  12
    January 2018.  Judge Farrelly allowed his appeal.


 2. The facts are, for the most part, not in  dispute.   The  claimant  was
    born in June 1990.  His parents, both Polish nationals, are  separated;
    they both live in the United Kingdom.  The claimant first came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2008.  He  did  not  obtain  work,  and  returned  to
    Poland.  He came back to the United  Kingdom  in  September  2015.   He
    worked until January 2016 and then from June 2016 until June 2017.   He
    has also worked more recently: there are payslips showing work from  20
    July 2018 to 5 October 2018.


 3. He met a Polish woman living in the United  Kingdom.   She  has  a  son
    whose father is Polish and also lives  in  the  United  Kingdom.    The
    claimant and she began to cohabit when she became pregnant: twins  were
    born on 4 November 2016.  The relationship was  soon  in  difficulties.
    They are not now living  together.   The  evidence  of  the  claimant's
    contact with his twin daughters and with his former  partner's  son  is
    very far from clear, but there is no evidence  of  close  or  necessary
    contact.


 4. The claimant has a long criminal record.  There is  an  account  of  at
    least six convictions in Poland  in  the  period  8  July  2009  to  30
    November 2011, including robbery, assault, theft,  fraud,  perjury  and
    drugs  offences.   The  penalties  include  a  sentence  of  two  years
    imprisonment, a sentence of ten  months  imprisonment,  a  sentence  of
    eight  months  imprisonment  suspended  for  four  years,   and   other
    penalties.  His record also shows failure to comply with the  terms  of
    bail or probation, and the revocation of release on parole as  recently
    as June 2015.


 5. On discovery of his criminal  record,  the  Secretary  of  State  wrote
    advising them that he was  liable  to  deportation.   He  responded  by
    letter dated 16 November 2017 to the effect that he had a  partner  and
    twins by her and that he was acting as a stepfather  to  his  partner's
    son: he said that he cared for the children when she was at  work.   In
    fact it appears that he was charged with assault of his partner in  the
    summer of 2017 and was admonished; part of the terms for  the  disposal
    of that offence involved a requirement that he  have  no  contact  with
    her.  That order was still in force in November 2017  when  he  was  in
    contact with her, in breach  of  the  terms  of  his  undertaking.   He
    pleaded guilty to assaulting  her  and  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment of 163 days, apparently including some sanction for breach
    of bail.  I do not have any official details of this offence, but Judge
    Farrelly records that:


         "The appellant has sought to play down the incident by blaming  his
         lawyers for pressurising him into pleading guilty and suggesting he
         accidently had his hands on his former partner's neck."


 6. The respondent did not accept that the claimant was in the relationship
    he claimed with his partner: there was  no  evidence  that  any  family
    members were dependent upon him.  The deportation order  was  made  and
    signed.


 7. In the course of his appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  claimant
    provided documentary evidence  relating  to  the  births  of  his  twin
    daughters.  No details were provided about his stepson.   There  was  a
    statement of support from his mother, with whom he was  living.   There
    was no statement from his former partner.  As I have already indicated,
    the evidence about his contact with the children was somewhat vague.


 8. Judge Farrelly decided that the claimant had only the lowest  level  of
    protection afforded under the EEA regulations.  He  set  out  the  law,
    correctly in my view as follows:


         "21.  The burden of proving that a  person  represents  a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently [serious]  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society under Regulation 21(5)(c)  of  the
         EEA Regulations [2016]  rests  on  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
         standard of proof is the balance of probabilities (see Arranz  (EEA
         Regulations - deportation - test) [2017] UKUT  00294  (IAC)).   The
         decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct  of  the
         appellant which must represent a genuine, present and  sufficiently
         serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
         society.   The  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
         proportionality.   Previous  criminal  convictions   do   not,   in
         themselves, justify the  decision.   I  must  have  regard  to  the
         appellant's age, state of health, family  and  economic  situation.
         Relevant also is the appellant's  length  of  residence  in  United
         Kingdom and his integration as well as the extent of his links with
         Poland."


 9. In making his decision, the judge first noted the offences  in  Poland,
    which he said "did not indicate any  great  planning  or  premeditation
    [but] they  are  serious  and  repetitive  and  resulted  in  custodial
    sentences".  He then said that he accepted Mr Rea's contention  that  a
    distinction could be made between his offending in Poland  and  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That is a reference to Mr Rea's  submissions,  but  in
    noting those submissions the judge did not give any indication of  what
    Mr Rea's basis for the distinction was.  In any event, the judge  makes
    it clear what his assessment of the United Kingdom offences  was.   The
    first offence was "following an argument with his partner";  the  judge
    makes no further comment on it.  As to the second  offence,  the  judge
    said that it was more serious; the claimant had sought to play down the
    incident by blaming his lawyers;  it  was  aggravated  because  it  was
    committed on bail and the judge specifically indicated that he did  not
    accept that the claimant did not understand the conditions of his bail.
     The judge also pointed out that the domestic nature  of  the  violence
    was an aggravating factor.  He then said this:


         "However, there is no evidence of premeditation.  There is  nothing
         to indicate drink or drugs was a contributing factor.  Further, the
         wider public was not affected."


10. The judge went on to deal with family matters.  He noted that there was
    no letter of support from the claimant's partner, an omission  that  he
    described "significant".   There  was,  as  I  have  indicated,  little
    evidence of his contact with the children other than the claimant's own
    statement that he "sees" them  every  day:  the  judge  says  that  the
    claimant's mother's statement  supports  that,  although  in  fact  her
    assertion was that he sees them almost daily".  The judge concluded "on
    balance, I am prepared to accept that he does see  his  children."   He
    commented  that  the  interests  of  the  children  are  of   paramount
    consideration and that "it is in their interests to know their father":
    meaningful contact would end if the appellant returned to Poland.


11. The judge then said that he bore in mind the  claimant's  age  and  the
    fact that he had been in employment.  He concluded that  there  was  no
    evidence of any real integration in the United Kingdom.   The  claimant
    does not understand English. There is no evidence  of  any  involvement
    with anyone outside the Polish community.  The judge then continued  by
    repeating  that  there  was  a  distinction  between   the   claimant's
    criminality in Poland and his offences here.  He said that time elapsed
    since the commission of the offences was to be taken into account.   He
    repeated what he had said in relation to the second offence, but  added
    "I do  accept  the  point  made  that  the  appellant  now  appreciates
    offending can equate to removal".  The judge said that he accepted  the
    claimant had no family support in Poland, but added that he  could  see
    no reason why the claimant could not re-establish himself there but  "I
    accept the appellant's only family are here  and  he  sees  his  future
    here".  The judge concluded as follows:


         "I have taken all these factors into account.  I am  influenced  by
         the  appellant's  age  and  the  distinction  drawn   between   the
         convictions in Poland and those here.   His  immediate  family  are
         here and he has children.  He is not engaged  in  criminality  here
         affecting the wider public.  The offences  here  were  spontaneous.
         Their domestic nature is aggravating but does explain the  context.
         On  balance,  I  find  that  the  appellant's  deportation  is  not
         justified."


    Thus, he allowed the appeal.


12. The grounds of appeal challenge the judge's conclusion on a  number  of
    bases.  First, they  submit  that  the  judge  failed  to  justify  the
    distinction  he  made  between  the  convictions  in  Poland  and   the
    convictions in the United Kingdom.  Secondly, the judge failed to  take
    into account the claimant's seeking to minimise the seriousness of  his
    convictions and his failure to accept responsibility  of  his  actions.
    In those circumstances,  the  judge  erred  in  his  finding  that  the
    claimant does not pose  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to the fundamental interests of society.  Finally, there was  no
    real basis in the evidence before the judge to show that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to deport the claimant.


13. At the hearing before me Mr Clarke relied on the grounds.   He  queried
    the relevance of some  factors  which  the  judge  took  into  account,
    including  the  assertion  that  the  United  Kingdom   offences   were
    spontaneous and that they were not influenced by drink  or  drugs.   He
    submitted that the judge appeared to have relied  particularly  on  the
    distinction between the Polish  and  the  United  Kingdom  offences,  a
    matter of which he gave no explanation.  Further, he had not  indicated
    why the claimant's criminality did not affect the wider public.   There
    was clearly a risk to others.  So far as proportionality is  concerned,
    the true position, according  to  Mr  Clarke  was  that  there  was  no
    evidence of care to any child and that contact could be  maintained  by
    phone or videophone from Poland.


14. Mr Rea submitted that Mr  Clarke  was  simply  trying  to  reargue  the
    appeal.  There were only three convictions in the United  Kingdom.   In
    Mr Rea's view the claimant was not a danger to the public.  There was a
    distinction between the Polish and  the  United  Kingdom  offences,  in
    particular because of the period of time  since  the  Polish  offences.
    Further, the offences in the United Kingdom were, as  Mr  Rae  put  it,
    "only" against his partner.  Mr Rea accepted that there might  be  said
    to be flaws in Judge Farrelly's decision, but they were not  sufficient
    to show that he was not entitled to reach the assessment he did, or  to
    justify setting that decision aside.


15. I approach this matter with great  caution.   It  was  for  the  First-
    tribunal Judge to assess the evidence and to reach a  judgment  on  the
    issues posed by the Regulations.  It would be quite wrong for me to set
    his decision aside solely on the basis that I did not agree  with  him.
    In  my  judgment,  however,  the  difficulties  with  Judge  Farrelly's
    judgment go much more  deeply  than  that.   Although  he  relied  very
    heavily on a supposed distinction between the claimant's criminality in
    Poland and his criminality in this country, most of the matters that he
    mentioned in identifying the distinction were  similarities.   Further,
    it was quite wrong to reach the conclusion that the appellant was not a
    danger to the public simply on the basis that his  offence  of  assault
    was against his partner.  There was no evidence of that.  Further,  the
    judge wholly failed to take into account that both in  Poland  and  the
    United Kingdom there are offences of failing to comply with  orders  of
    the Court.  In these circumstances I accept  the  submission  that  the
    judgment shows that the judge failed to take properly into account  all
    the material before him in relation to the claimant's offending.  I set
    Judge Farrelly's decision aside  and  I  remake  the  decision  on  the
    claimant's appeal.


16. Although there is no additional evidence formally  before  me,  I  note
    that in the course of his submissions Mr Rea referred to two additional
    relevant facts.  First, his view was that the claimant was in prison in
    Poland up to about the time he  left,  in  summer  of  2015.   That  is
    relevant, because  it  reduces  any  credit  that  the  claimant  might
    otherwise have for keeping out of trouble after his offences in 2011 or
    2012.  Secondly, Mr Rea told me that although  the  claimant  sees  his
    former partner's son (who is not related to him), he does not  see  his
    own children, the twin girls.


17. The claimant has, as I have said, a  considerable  criminal  record  in
    Poland.  He has also committed offences here.  The  offences  here  are
    not in my judgment properly distinguishable from those in  Poland.   In
    particular, he has  continued  to  be  demonstrably  violent,  and  has
    continued to decline to accept the  judgments  of  the  Courts  and  to
    comply with orders made against him.  As the law of  Scotland  properly
    recognises, that violence is committed in  a  domestic  context  is  an
    aggravating factor.  There is in my judgment no reason to suppose  that
    the claimant's propensity to violent  crime  is  confined  to  his  ex-
    partner, or that, even if it were, he should now be regarded as  not  a
    danger to the public.  On the contrary, it appears to me  that  on  his
    record of offending in Poland,  continued  as  it  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the Secretary of State's case is clearly made out.  He is, and
    remains, a person who by his offending has shown that he  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society: the interest in question is  that  of
    other members of society in being able to conduct their  lives  without
    risk of the claimant's criminality, and the interest of  society  as  a
    whole that those taking the benefits of living in society  comply  with
    the law and orders made for the purposes of  the  restraint  of  crime.
    The risk is evidently genuine and present:  the  most  recent  offences
    show that.  In my judgment the claimant's history also shows  that  the
    threat is sufficiently serious to merit his removal.


18. The decision must be proportionate.  The position is that the  claimant
    is a national of Poland.  There is no reason to suppose that he  cannot
    reintegrate himself in Poland.  He has been in the United Kingdom for a
    relatively short time, for only part of which he has worked.   He  does
    not speak English.  He has contact with his mother  but  not  with  his
    children.  The only other contact of which there  is  any  evidence  is
    with a child who is not related to him by blood or  by  any  subsisting
    quasi matrimonial relationship.  The claimant's age, state  of  health,
    family, economic situation, length of residence in the  United  Kingdom
    and  integration  do  not  begin  to   suggest   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to remove him.


19. For these reasons, which are essentially those advanced before me by Mr
    Clarke, I substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.

















                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 03 March 2020
