
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00451/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  29 May 2013                                 |On 8 August 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                CHESTER SMITH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer instructed by Owen Stevens Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  C  M  Phillips  and  Mr  D  R  Bremmer  JP)
    dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  make  an
    automatic deportation order by  virtue  of  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 on the basis that he is a foreign  criminal  as  there
    defined and his removal  is  conducive  to  the  public  good  for  the
    purposes of Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The appellant is a Jamaican citizen born in 1974 and currently 39 years
    old. He has been in the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  until  the  present
    events since some time in 2002,  initially  as  a  student  nurse.   In
    February 2003 he married Tia Louise Ward,  a  British  citizen  and  in
    January 2004 he was granted leave to remain as the spouse of a  settled
    person.  On 16 January 2006 he was granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    as the dependent spouse of his wife.  He remains married to Tia  Louise
    Ward and he now has a number of children both within  and  without  the
    marriage.

 3. So far as known (and as set out at paragraph 28 of the determination he
    is not entirely sure of the number  himself)  the  appellant  has  four
    children with three women and stands as stepfather to  a  fifth  child,
    his wife's son from a  previous  relationship.   The  appellant's  four
    natural children mentioned in these proceedings are a daughter, J-R  S,
    born in October 2006 to his wife; and three sons by different women, RS
    born in December 2003 from a relationship with SS, a  British  citizen;
    NT born in December 2005 from a relationship with ST; and TH,  the  son
    of SH born in October 2010.  The existence of TH was not  disclosed  to
    the respondent or the appellant's wife until  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  There may be others.  The appellant has treated as a child of
    the family his wife's older son J, who  has  little  contact  with  his
    natural father, and he stands in the relationship of stepfather to that
    child.

 4. After examining in detail the complex web of relationships between  the
    appellant, the mothers of his children and the children themselves, the
    First-tier Tribunal said this:

         "75. ... There is evidence  before  us  that  was  not  before  the
             respondent that  tends  to  show  that  family  life  was  not
             established prior to the appellant's  incarceration.   Against
             the background of the findings set out below, we find that the
             appellant has failed to discharge the onus of proof on him  to
             show on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  family  life  is
             established."

 5. There was no such submission in the  respondent's  closing  submissions
    and neither the respondent nor the appellant was given the  opportunity
    to comment on the conclusion which the Tribunal appears to have reached
    of its own motion.  The Secretary of  State  accepted  throughout  that
    family life existed at least between the appellant  and  his  wife  and
    their child J-R S.  Family life is presumed to exist between parent and
    child and between husband and wife and should be viewed from the  point
    of view of all family members as noted by Baroness Hale of Richmond  in
    Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 at paragraph 4:

         "4. ... To insist that an appeal  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         Tribunal consider only the effect upon other family members  as  it
         affects the appellant, and that a judicial review brought by  other
         family members considers only the effect upon the appellant  as  it
         affects them, is not only artificial  and  impracticable.  It  also
         risks missing the central point about family life,  which  is  that
         the whole is greater than the sum  of  its  individual  parts.  The
         right to respect for the family life of one necessarily encompasses
         the right to respect for the family  life  of  others,  normally  a
         spouse or minor children, with whom that family life is enjoyed."

 6. On the facts found, the evidence of bonds of affection existing between
    the appellant, his  wife,  their  child  and  his  stepson  undoubtedly
    amounts to family life and the First-tier Tribunal did not set out  any
    cogent reason for finding to the contrary.  The Tribunal's reasons  are
    inadequate  and  appear  to  relate  to  the  appellant's  extramarital
    activities.  The parties were not given the opportunity to  comment  on
    this  novel proposition.  We indicated to  the  parties  that  we  were
    satisfied that there was an error of law in the determination,  as  set
    out in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraphs 90.2 and 90.3:

         "2. A finding might only be set aside  for  error  of  law  on  the
         grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable  in  the
         Wednesbury sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly  unsupported  by  the
         evidence.

         3. A decision should not be set aside  for  inadequacy  of  reasons
         unless the adjudicator failed to identify and  record  the  matters
         that were critical to his decision on material issues,  in  such  a
         way that the IAT was unable  to  understand  why  he  reached  that
         decision."

 7. Two other errors of law were also posited by Mr Lemer, in  addition  to
    the principal error of reasoning  on  private  and  family  life.   The
    second error for which he contended was that the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal as to the impact of deportation on the  children,  which  came
    exclusively from their mothers, had been misdescribed in  paragraph  98
    of the determination:

         "98. ... There is  no  evidence  before  us  that  the  appellant's
             presence is needed to prevent the  children  from  being  ill-
             treated, maintained financially, their health and  development
             being impaired or their care other than  safe  and  effective.
             Further offending in the United Kingdom by the appellant would
             be  disrupted  in  the  lives  of  his  United  Kingdom  based
             children.

         99.  It was not argued that the appellant has a strong private life
             based on strong social cultural ties with the United  Kingdom.
             It was submitted that  he  does  not  have  family  ties  with
             Jamaica although we find that he has.  The ECO  was  urged  on
             the basis of the impact that the appellant's removal will have
             upon the three British  children  that  his  Article  8  claim
             relies upon.  We have considered proportionality on the  basis
             that Article 8 is engaged  by  the  appellant's  private  life
             including the fact that he has four  or  five  United  Kingdom
             based children by  four  or  five  different  partners  and  a
             stepson.

         100. Although the skeleton argument states that  the  intention  is
             that the appellant's exclusion should be permanent this is not
             what is set out in the refusal.  Automatic deportation carries
             a minimum of ten years' exclusion.  However it is noted in the
             refusal that the appellant is entitled to apply at any time in
             order to have his deportation revoked."

    The statement at paragraph 98 does not as argued by Mr Lemer amount  to
    a statement that there was no evidence of family life at all before the
    Tribunal and we are not satisfied that the determination  contained  an
    error of law in that respect.

 8. The third error of law of which Mr Lemer sought to convince us was  the
    Tribunal's examination of the submission in the skeleton argument  that
    the appellant would be permanently excluded, whereas in  fact,  as  the
    Tribunal pointed out, exclusion is for ten years and there is  a  power
    to apply to have the exclusion removed, albeit on  the  facts  of  this
    appeal it is unlikely that such an  application  would  succeed.   That
    error is not made out; it is accepted that the Tribunal was right  that
    the exclusion would be for ten years, not for life, and  was  revocable
    in certain limited circumstances unlikely to apply to this appellant.

 9. We therefore were not satisfied by the two subsidiary  proposed  errors
    of law but we do consider that the failure to treat the appellant,  his
    wife and their children as having family and private life together  was
    an error of law.

Materiality

10. The question is whether that error was material to the outcome  of  the
    appeal.  The  material  facts  in  that  respect  as  set  out  in  the
    determination were these.

          a) The appellant was convicted of a very serious  offence  on  21
             April 2010 being part of a six-person conspiracy  to  apply  a
             significant quantity of class A drugs, for which he received a
             sentence of six years imprisonment.  It is not contended  that
             that is not a serious offence within the  meaning  of  Section
             32.

          b) During his time in prison, the appellant was punished for  one
             offence, where he was found  with  a  mobile  phone  which  he
             claimed  to  be  keeping  for  a  friend  ;  he  accepted  his
             punishment.  Whilst in prison (with one  lapse)  he  had  been
             well  behaved  and  taken   advantage   of   the   educational
             opportunities, obtaining further qualifications as set out  in
             certificates provided.

          c) The appellant is not himself a drug user, his supply of  drugs
             was simply a business venture.  He has been here for over  ten
             years.  In addition to whatever he made from his drug  selling
             activity, the appellant worked in the United  Kingdom,  buying
             old cars and fixing them up to sell, and before that he had  a
             catering business.

          d) The details of his  relationships  with  his  two  known  sons
             outside the marriage are  set  out  at  paragraph  16  of  the
             determination and it appears that his wife has accepted  those
             children,  just as he accepted her older child Jaydon.  It was
             his wife who brought  the  known  children  to  visit  him  in
             prison, including those from his other relationships.

          e) The appellant supported his known children financially and was
             named as a contact on their school  records,  including  those
             born outside marriage, with the exception  of  the  child  TH,
             whose existence was revealed at the  hearing.   The  appellant
             had financial resources in the United Kingdom which  he  could
             not explain, and neither could his wife.

          f) The appellant worked in Jamaica until he was almost  30  years
             old, first as a bus conductor  and  then  as  an  upholsterer,
             living with an uncle. He  has  returned  there  several  times
             since arriving in the United Kingdom in  2001.   He  took  his
             stepson Jaydon to visit Jamaica, when Jaydon was about 4 or 5.



          g) The appellant claimed to be unsure whether he still had family
             in Jamaica but given the overwhelming,  unchallenged  negative
             credibility findings by the First-tier Tribunal, that Tribunal
             placed no weight on that and found that he did still have both
             links and probably family in Jamaica.  We consider  that  they
             were entitled to draw that conclusion.

11. The offence, although a first offence, was a  very  serious  one.   Our
    attention was drawn to the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in SS
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    550 in which Lord Justice Laws, Lady Justice Black and Mr Justice  Mann
    reviewed the proper balance  between  proportionality  and  the  public
    interest in deportation cases involving children.   Lord  Justice  Laws
    giving the lead judgment, said this at paragraphs 46-47:


         "46. Thus while the authorities demonstrate that there is  no  rule
             of exceptionality,  they  also  clearly  show  that  the  more
             pressing the public interest in removal  or  deportation,  the
             stronger must be the  claim  under  Article  8  if  it  is  to
             prevail. This antithesis,  in  my  judgment,  catches  in  the
             present  context  the  essence  of  the  proportionality  test
             required by Article 8(2).


         (3) SUMMARY


         47.  It is worth drawing these general considerations together. (1)
             The principle  of  minimal  interference  is  the  essence  of
             proportionality: it ensures that the ECHR right in question is
             never treated as a token or a ritual, and thus guarantees  its
             force. (2) In a child case the right in question (the  child's
             best interests)  is  always  a  consideration  of  substantial
             importance.   (3)   Article   8   contains    no    rule    of
             "exceptionality", but the more pressing the public interest in
             removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim  under
             Article 8 if it is to prevail. (4) Upon the  question  whether
             the  principle  of  minimal  interference  is  fulfilled,  the
             primary decision-maker enjoys a variable margin of discretion,
             at its broadest where  the  decision  applies  general  policy
             created by primary  legislation.  This  approach  strikes  two
             balances: the balance  between  public  interest  and  private
             right, the search for which "is inherent in the whole  of  the
             [ECHR]..." (see, amongst many statements to the  same  effect,
             Sporrong v Sweden (1982) 5 EHRR 85,  paragraph  69);  and  the
             constitutional balance between judicial power and the power of
             elected  government,  and  in  particular  the  power  of  the
             legislature."


    Turning to the question of the deportation  of  foreign  criminals  and
    noting that the source of  the  policy  is  primary  legislation,  Lord
    Justice Laws stated at paragraph 48 that:


         "48. With these considerations in mind I may turn to the particular
             case of the deportation of foreign criminals  under  the  2007
             Act. Where such potential deportees have raised  claims  under
             Article 8, seeking to resist deportation  by  relying  on  the
             interests of a child or children having British citizenship, I
             think with respect that insufficient attention has  been  paid
             to the weight to be attached,  in  virtue  of  its  origin  in
             primary  legislation,  to  the  policy  of  deporting  foreign
             criminals.  ..." [Emphasis added]


    He then set out various recent cases in which he considered  that  that
    balance had not been properly struck continuing at paragraph 53:


         "53. The importance of the moral and  political  character  of  the
             policy shows that the  two  drivers  of  the  decision-maker's
             margin of discretion - the policy's nature and  its  source  -
             operate in tandem. An  Act  of  Parliament  is  anyway  to  be
             specially respected; but all the  more  so  when  it  declares
             policy of this kind. In this case, the policy is  general  and
             overarching. It is circumscribed only by five carefully  drawn
             exceptions, of which the first  is  violation  of  a  person's
             Convention/Refugee  Convention  rights.  (The  others  concern
             minors,  EU  cases,  extradition  cases  and  cases  involving
             persons subject to orders under  mental  health  legislation.)
             Clearly, Parliament in the 2007 Act has  attached  very  great
             weight to the policy as a well justified  imperative  for  the
             protection of the public and to reflect  the  public's  proper
             condemnation of serious wrongdoers. Sedley LJ was with respect
             right to state that "[in the case of a 'foreign criminal'  the
             Act places in the proportionality scales  a  markedly  greater
             weight than in other cases"....


         55.  ...Proportionality, the absence of an  "exceptionality"  rule,
             and the meaning of "a primary  consideration"  are  all,  when
             properly understood, consonant with the force to  be  attached
             in cases of the  present  kind  to  the  two  drivers  of  the
             decision-maker's margin of discretion: the policy's source and
             the policy's nature, and in particular  to  the  great  weight
             which the 2007 Act attributes to the  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals."                                          [Emphasis
             added]



12. Lady Justice Black and Mr Justice Mann  both  concurred  with  what  Mr
    Justice Mann described as that "masterful  analysis"  by  Lord  Justice
    Laws.  Mr Justice Mann added the following useful guidance:


         "62. In this appeal counsel for the appellant  placed  considerable
             emphasis on the need for the Tribunal to satisfy itself as  to
             the interests of the child in  such  a  way  as  suggested  an
             inquisitorial  procedure.  I  agree  with  Laws  LJ  that  the
             circumstances in  which  the  Tribunal  will  require  further
             inquiries to be made, or evidence to be obtained,  are  likely
             to be extremely rare.  In  the  vast  majority  of  cases  the
             Tribunal will expect the relevant interests of the child to be
             drawn to the attention of the decision-maker by the individual
             concerned. The decision-maker would then make such  additional
             inquiries as might appear to him or her to be appropriate. The
             scope for the Tribunal  to  require,  much  less  indulge  in,
             further inquiries of its own  seems  to  me  to  be  extremely
             limited, almost to the extent that I find it hard  to  imagine
             when,      or      how,      it      could       do       so."
               [Emphasis added]

13. What we draw from SS (Nigeria) is that  very  great  weight  should  be
    placed on the statutory provision  for  the  automatic  deportation  of
    foreign criminals, and the  public  interest,  where  a  serious  drugs
    offence has been committed resulting in a long sentence, and  secondly,
    that as pointed out by Lord Justice Mann, it is for  the  appellant  to
    draw to the attention of first of all the decision maker and later  the
    Tribunals, any circumstances which  he  considers  to  have  sufficient
    countervailing weight to make his removal disproportionate.

Discussion

14. The facts in the case of SS (Nigeria) are not dissimilar  to  those  in
    the present case, in that there was a child in the United  Kingdom  who
    lived with its mother and was not to  be  expected  to  return  to  the
    appellant's country of origin.   The  appellant  SS  was  convicted  of
    peddling class A drugs and the Upper Tribunal found  that  he  had  the
    potential to present a real risk to members of the public  and  society
    in general, due to the effect of those drugs.  He appeared to have been
    selling drugs on the street while he had a very young son at home.   It
    is right to note that SS was not in the United Kingdom lawfully as  the
    present appellant had been and that on the  other  hand  he  had  fewer
    children than this appellant appears to have.  There is nothing else in
    the factual matrix which materially separates the position of  SS  from
    that of the present appellant.

15. The Tribunal in the present  appeal  erred  in  failing  to  treat  the
    appellant's relationship with  his  wife  and  at  least  some  of  his
    children as family life.  However it directed itself to the Razgar test
    and considered the rather limited evidence before it relating  to  each
    of the children, their  relationships  with  their  mothers  and  their
    relationships with the appellant.  On the basis of that evidence,  even
    had the Tribunal directed  itself  correctly  as  to  the  family  life
    element, we consider that the it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to
    conclude,  as  it  did,  that  in  relation  to  an  offence  of   this
    seriousness, the public interest  as  set  out  in  statutory  form  in
    Sections 32 and 33 of  the  2007  Act,  was  more  than  sufficient  to
    outweigh the various personal relationships which the appellant had  in
    the United Kingdom and in particular those with his family members.

16. The Tribunal found as a fact, and was entitled so  to  find,  that  the
    appellant still had social and cultural links to Jamaica, as indeed  do
    some of his family members and some of the mothers of his children  and
    that the public interest outweighed all of his social and family  links
    in the United Kingdom to such an extent that his removal to Jamaica was
    not disproportionate.  Despite the error of law that we have  set  out,
    we do not consider in the light of SS (Nigeria) that  another  Tribunal
    could or would come to any other decision than that which  was  reached
    by the present Tribunal and accordingly the error is  not  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal and we uphold the original determination.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. We do not set aside the decision.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
