
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00189/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester CJC             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 13 September 2019                |On: 17 September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                CHRISTIAN [O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Karnik, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, has appealed against a  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 29 May  2019,  in  which  it
       dismissed his appeal against a decision of the  respondent  dated  25
       March 2019 to  deport  him  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regs').  The appellant  is
       the spouse of a Dutch national exercising Treaty rights in the United
       Kingdom ('UK').

    2. The decision to deport is based upon the  appellant's  conviction  of
       conspiring to supply a Class A drugs on  13  February  2015  and  his
       sentence of imprisonment of nine years.

    3. The decision of the  FTT  is  detailed,  comprehensive  and  in  many
       respects carefully drafted.   However,  near  the  beginning  of  the
       decision at [12] the FTT said this:

           "the burden  of  proof  on  every  factual  issue  lies  on  the
           appellant, and the standard of proof required is the balance  of
           probabilities".

    4. At the hearing before me Mr Tan accepted that it was an error of  law
       to place the burden of proof on the appellant.  The central issue  to
       be determined,  as  noted  by  the  FTT  at  [23],  was  whether  the
       appellant's deportation is justified on grounds of public policy  for
       the purposes  of  regulation  21  of  the  2016  Regs.   Arranz  (EEA
       Regulations - deportation - test: Spain) [2017] UKUT 294 (IAC)  makes
       it clear that the burden  of  proving  that  a  person  represents  a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
       fundamental  interests  of  society  such  that  his  deportation  is
       justified on grounds of public policy, rests on the respondent.

    5. As noted by  the  Upper  Tribunal  ('UT')  in  Arranz,  although  the
       overarching EU Directive is silent as to burden of proof, there is  a
       binding general principle that the  burden  of  seeking  to  restrict
       rights conferred by the Directive should lie  on  the  member  state.
       The UT said this at [43]:

           "We consider that, logically, the  reasoning  of  the  Court  of
           Appeal in Rosa, which was concerned with a decision which  would
           require the removal of the Appellant from  the  United  Kingdom,
           extends to exclusion and removal decisions made under Regulation
           19. We can identify nothing in the Directive, the Regulations or
           in principle impelling to a  different  assessment.  It  follows
           that the legal burden  rested  on  the  Secretary  of  State  of
           establishing, on the balance of probabilities, that the  removal
           of the Appellant from the United Kingdom was justified on public
           policy grounds."

    6. Although Mr Tan accepted that the legal burden of proof rested on the
       respondent, he submitted that in substance and when the  decision  is
       read as a whole, there was no material error of law because  the  FTT
       would have come to the same conclusion.

    7. It has therefore not been disputed that the FTT's first reference  to
       burden of proof - in [12] of its decision - in relation to regulation
       21 of the 2016 Regs is incorrect.  The  misstatement  here  that  the
       appellant bore the burden of proof, the standard being the balance of
       probabilities is unambiguous and unqualified. It is not  remedied  in
       any other part of the decision.  I note that the FTT considered  that
       the appellant had the burden of proof "on every factual issue".   The
       question of whether the appellant's threat is  genuine,  present  and
       sufficiently serious involved a mixed factual and legal assessment. I
       acknowledge that in [23] the FTT makes  reference  to  removal  being
       "justified".  It is of course necessary to consider the  decision  of
       the FTT as a whole,  rather  than  in  isolated  fragments.  The  FTT
       nowhere refers to the respondent bearing a burden of proof.   Nowhere
       in the decision does the FTT use language to indicate that it is  for
       the respondent to establish that the threat posed by the appellant is
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious, and for her to justify the
       measure.  The burden of proof  is  referred  to  again  at  [20]  but
       entirely in the context of Article 8 of the ECHR, and therefore  does
       not assist.  There is therefore no use of explicit language that  can
       properly be construed as a recognition of the respondent's burden  of
       proof under the 2016 Regs, sufficient to correct the misstatement  of
       the burden of proof in [12] of the decision.  Reading the decision as
       a whole, I are satisfied that the essential thrust  of  the  critical
       passages is that the appellant had not persuaded  the  FTT  that  his
       removal was not satisfied on grounds of public policy.

    8. The FTT has made many straightforward findings of fact that appear to
       me to logically follow from the evidence available  to  it  including
       the finding that the appellant has a propensity to reoffend  and  his
       family have been able to cope reasonably well whilst he has  been  in
       prison.  However, I cannot be certain that these findings would  have
       been made, if the FTT had properly directed itself to the  burden  of
       proof.  Although the appellant faces an uphill task, this  is  not  a
       case in which it can properly be said that there could  only  be  one
       outcome or the FTT would inevitably have reached the same conclusion.
        One of the appellant's children has special  needs.   The  appellant
       himself  appears  to  suffer  from  serious   medical   difficulties.
       Significantly, the appellant's risk of reoffending has been  assessed
       to be low by the probation officer.  Whilst a judge  is  entitled  to
       reach a different view on this matter, there remains the  possibility
       that if the correct burden of proof is applied a  judge  might  agree
       with the probation officer's assessment.   For  those  reasons  I  am
       satisfied that the FTT  has  made  a  material  misdirection  in  law
       regarding the burden of proof and the findings need to be remade.

Disposal

    9. Both representatives agreed that in the event that I found  that  the
       accepted misdirection as to the burden  of  proof  is  material,  the
       decision should be remade by the FTT.  I have had regard to para  7.2
       of the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement and the  nature
       and extent of the factual findings required in remaking the decision,
       and I have decided that this is an appropriate case to remit  to  the
       FTT.

Decision

   10. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a  material  error  of
       law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

   11. The appeal shall be remade by FTT de novo,  by  a  judge  other  than
       Judge Tully.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer    Dated: 13 September 2019
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
