
                                  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00377/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2021                           |On 2 March 2021               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SHARMARKE YARYARE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr M Singh, OISC Level 3 representative from One
Immigration


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has  not
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("the  appellant")
         has been granted permission to appeal against the decision of Judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal Birk ("the judge"),  promulgated  on  20
         November 2019, allowing the appeal of Mr  Sharmarke  Yaryare  ("the
         respondent") against the appellant's decision dated 15 July 2019 to
         make a deportation order against the respondent in accordance  with
         regulations 23(6)(b) and 27 of the Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area)  Regulations  2016  and  the  appellant's  refusal   of   the
         respondent's human rights claim, contained in the same document.

      2. The respondent is a national of the Netherlands, born on  1  August
         1994. He maintains that he entered the UK in May 2000 when  he  was
         almost 6 years  old.  In  a  decision  dated  6  January  2019  the
         respondent's mother was issued with a document confirming that  she
         had a permanent right of residence in the  UK.  According  to  this
         decision she was deemed to  have  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
         residence in the UK on 2 October 2018.

      3. On 9 January 2019 the  respondent  was  convicted  of  offences  of
         conspiracy to commit violent disorder  and  affray,  both  offences
         having occurred on 30 April 2015. On 13 February 2019 he received a
         sentence of 19 months imprisonment in respect of the conspiracy  to
         commit violent  disorder  offence  and  6  months  imprisonment  in
         respect of the  affray,  making  a  total  sentence  of  25  months
         imprisonment.

      4. On 12 March 2019 the appellant notified  the  respondent  that  she
         intended to make a deportation order against him. On 15  July  2019
         the appellant decided to make a deportation order and, in the  same
         document, refused the appellant's human rights claim. The appellant
         availed himself of his right of  appeal  both  in  respect  of  the
         decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  under  the   Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016  Regulations")
         and the refusal of his  human  rights  claim  (under  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The bundles of documents prepared both by  the  appellant  and  the
         respondent   contained,   amongst   other    things,    educational
         certificates, qualifications, awards and  other  education  related
         documents (including those issued by Student  Finance  England  and
         the Student Loans Company and the University of Derby) relating  to
         the respondent, bank statements, Register of Electors letters  from
         the local  authority,  and  documents  from  Education  Maintenance
         Allowance addressed to either the respondent  or  the  respondent's
         parent or guardian, and Housing Benefit  and  Council  Tax  Support
         documentation relating to the appellant's  mother  (but  mentioning
         the respondent), all of which covered a range of dates from 2005 to
         2019, and most of which were addressed to the residence occupied by
         the respondent, his mother and her other children. The respondent's
         bundle also contained statements from the  respondent,  his  mother
         and his siblings to the effect that the respondent had  lived  with
         his mother all his life, that he was dependent on her and had never
         worked, and that he had lived continuously in  the  UK  since  2000
         apart from short holidays. The judge heard oral evidence  from  the
         respondent and his mother.


      6. Having summarised the  submissions  from  the  representatives  and
         having set out the relevant legal framework  the  judge  found,  at
         [19], that there was:

             "... sufficient and ample evidence from  independent  sources,
             such as educational institutions and  the  local  council,  to
             establish that the [respondent] is extremely  likely  to  have
             been present in the UK since 2000 to the present date. This is
             evidenced by  his  educational  record  which  shows  that  he
             entered schooling by 2.9.02. Upon completion of  his  A-levels
             he went to University for a 2-year HND course and he  withdrew
             on 19.1.17. The offences that he was convicted  of  he  states
             took place in 2015 but that he was not charged until  21.6.18.
             There is no evidence to challenge the chronology. I find  that
             it is highly unlikely that his  mother  would  have  left  him
             behind  when  she  came  to  the  UK.  The  [respondent]  has,
             therefore, been continuously resident in the UK for well  over
             10 years."

      7. At [20] the judge stated:


             "I find that the [respondent] has always been a dependent upon
             his mother. I find that he has always resided at his  mother's
             address, which is conceded by the [appellant]. I find that his
             mother  has  exercised  Treaty  rights.  I   find   that   the
             [respondent] has not worked and so has always been financially
             dependent upon his mother. The issue  of  insurance  therefore
             does not arise. There is documentary evidence from  the  local
             authority in respect of housing benefit and council tax  which
             supports that he was until his imprisonment  he  was  [sic]  a
             student living at home."


      8. At [21] the judge found that the respondent had a  high  degree  of
         integration in the UK given that he arrived around the age of 6 and
         was now (at the date of the hearing) 25 years old. The judge  noted
         that the respondent spoke English, that all of  his  education  had
         taken place in the UK and all his friends and social contacts  have
         been based in the UK. The  judge  found  that  the  respondent  was
         significantly culturally,  educationally  and  socially  integrated
         into  UK  society.  At  [23]  the  judge  did  not  find  that  the
         intervening period of imprisonment had been  sufficiently  long  in
         length to break the strong  integration  that  the  respondent  had
         established in the UK.


      9. At [24] the judge found that the respondent was part of the  family
         unit consisting of his mother and his 3 younger siblings. The judge
         noted that the respondent's father had not  been  present  for  the
         majority of his life and she accepted  as  credible  that,  as  the
         eldest child, the respondent had been involved in looking after and
         bringing up his siblings and had acted as the male figure  head  of
         the family. The judge found that there was consequently  more  than
         the usual level of emotional and financial dependency  between  the
         adult  members  of  his  family  and  himself  due  to  his  family
         circumstances.

     10. At [25] and [26] the judge found that the respondent  was  entitled
         to the 'imperative grounds' level of protection. At [28] the  judge
         noted that the  respondent  had  expressed  some  remorse  for  his
         criminal behaviour but that he had not been on relevant courses  to
         addresses difficulties or the motivation behind his offending,  and
         he had not displayed any real insight into his  criminal  offending
         in either his oral or written evidence. Noting that the  respondent
         was still living at his mother's address and that his  family  were
         not a  protective  or  preventative  factor  as  he  committed  his
         offences when he lived with them, the judge found  that  there  was
         "still a genuine threat that he may  commit  further  offences  and
         challenge the public security of society." At [29] the judge found,
         with respect to proportionality, inter alia,  that  the  respondent
         had a very lengthy record of residence in the UK  and  had  a  very
         high degree of  integration.  The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
         respondent's family were all in the UK and that he had no links  at
         all with the proposed country of return. At [30] and [31] the judge
         found that, although there was a genuine and  serious  threat  from
         the respondent, take into account his entitlement  to  the  highest
         tier of protection and that he did not have a record of  persistent
         serious offending, and given that he had not  displayed  a  blatant
         disregard for society, and in light of the absence of  a  break  or
         discontinuation  in  his  integration,  the  threat  posed  by  the
         respondent was not sufficiently or significantly serious  to  cross
         "the high threshold."


     11. At [33] the judge engaged in Article 8 ECHR assessment  and  found,
         based on her findings of fact, that the respondent's  circumstances
         did outweigh the public  interest  in  his  removal  and  that  his
         removal would breach Article 8. The judge allowed the appeal  under
         the EEA Regulations and on human rights grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     12. The grounds noted that the appellant was 24 years old by  the  time
         his mother acquired a right of permanent residence and that he  had
         been removed from his university course in January 2017 due to non-
         attendance. The grounds contend that the judge failed to  refer  to
         any evidence that the respondent was a family member of his  mother
         as set out in regulation 7(b)(ii) of the 2016 Regulations and  that
         the evidence in the respondent's bundle failed to demonstrate  such
         dependency.  The  grounds  content  that  the  respondent  did  not
         therefore  benefit  from  any  enhanced  protection  and  that  his
         deportation was justified given the judge's  consideration  of  the
         respondent's propensity to reoffend.


     13. It is important to note that the  grounds  did  not  challenge  the
         Article 8 ECHR assessment made by the judge. There was no challenge
         in the grounds to the judge's decision  allowing  the  respondent's
         appeal against the appellant's refusal of his human  rights  claim.
         There was no application to amend the grounds of  appeal  following
         the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  or  during  the  course  of
         directions issued to the parties in light of the Covid-19 pandemic.
         The absence of any challenge to the judge's decision in respect  of
         the respondent's human rights appeal was expressly confirmed by  Ms
         Pettersen at the outset of the remote 'error of law'  hearing.  The
         only issue therefore before me, as accepted by  both  parties,  was
         whether the judge erred in her assessment of the EEA appeal.

     14. In her oral submissions Ms Pettersen relied on the written  grounds
         and submitted that, given the  respondent's  age  when  his  mother
         obtained her right of permanent residence, he was not dependent  on
         her. Ms Pettersen confirmed that the appellant's challenge  to  the
         judge's decision was only based on the adequacy of reasons given by
         the judge with reference to the issue of dependency.

Discussion

     15. I confirm again that there has been no  challenge  to  the  judge's
         decision in respect of the Article 8 human rights claim. The  grant
         of permission was based solely on the EEA decision  and  there  has
         been no application at any stage to amend  the  grounds  so  as  to
         challenge the decision allowing the appeal against the  refusal  of
         the respondent's human rights claim.


     16. The grounds were narrow in focus and only  challenged  the  judge's
         assessment as to whether the respondent  was  a  dependent  on  his
         mother so that he could be  considered  a  family  member  for  the
         purposes  of  article  7(b)(ii)  of  the  2016   Regulations,   and
         consequently whether  he  was  entitled  to  the  highest  tier  of
         protection. No  issue  has  been  raised  at  any  stage  with  the
         respondent's entitlement to the highest tier  of  protection  other
         than with respect to his dependency on his mother. In light of  the
         Supreme Court decision in SSHD (Appellant) v Franco Vomero  (Italy)
         (Respondent) [2019] UKSC 35, if the judge was entitled to find that
         the respondent  was  a  dependent  of  his  mother  while  she  was
         exercising Treaty rights  for  the  period  until  she  obtained  a
         permanent right of residence, the  respondent  himself  would  have
         obtained a right of permanent residence  and,  given  that  he  had
         continuously resided in the  UK  since  2000,  he  would  meet  the
         requirements in regulation 27(4)(a) of the 2016 Regulations.


     17. The grounds of appeal,  amplified  by  Ms  Pettersen's  commendably
         brief and concise oral submissions, essentially  contend  that  the
         judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
         respondent was dependent on his mother given that he turned 21 on 1
         August 2015. The grounds contend that the judge failed to refer  to
         any evidence in support of her conclusion on  dependency  and  that
         the  evidence  contained  in  the  respondent's  bundle  failed  to
         demonstrate dependency.

     18. The test  for  assessing  dependency  as  understood  in  the  2016
         Regulations is now well established following the Court  of  Appeal
         decision in Lim v Entry Clearance Officer Manila  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
         1383. Elias LJ held, at [32]:

             In my judgment, the critical question is whether the  claimant
             is in fact in a position to support himself or not, and  Reyes
             now makes that clear beyond doubt,  in  my  view.  That  is  a
             simple matter of fact. If he can support himself, there is  no
             dependency, even if he is given financial material support  by
             the EU citizen. Those additional resources are  not  necessary
             to enable him to meet his basic needs. If, on the other  hand,
             he cannot support himself from his own  resources,  the  court
             will not ask why that is the case, save perhaps where there is
             an abuse of rights. The fact that he chooses not to get a  job
             and become self-supporting is irrelevant.

     19. Any support that is provided by the respondent's  mother  therefore
         only needs to be 'material' or 'necessary' to enable  him  to  meet
         his essential needs  (see  Lim,  at  [25]  &  [32];  see  also  the
         Secretary of State's Policy Guidance 'Extended  family  members  of
         EEA Nationals, version 7.0, published for Home Office staff  on  27
         March 2019, which states,  "The  applicant  does  not  need  to  be
         dependent on the  EEA  national  to  meet  all  or  most  of  their
         essential needs. For example, an applicant is considered  dependent
         if they receive a pension which  covers  half  of  their  essential
         needs and money from their EEA national sponsor  which  covers  the
         other half.").


     20. Although the judge did not make express  reference  to  Lim,  I  am
         satisfied she applied the principles identified in that  authority.
         Contrary  to  the  grounds,  the  judge  demonstrably  referred  to
         evidence  supporting  her  conclusion  that  the   respondent   was
         dependent on his mother. This is readily  apparent  from  [19]  and
         [20] of the judge's decision, set out above at paragraphs 6  and  7
         of this decision. The judge was  rationally  entitled  to  conclude
         that the respondent continued to be a dependent of his mother after
         he turned 21 given that the respondent had never worked  and  lived
         at home. The judge's conclusion was further supported by  reference
         to the documents in the appeal bundles prepared  by  both  parties.
         All the documents addressed to the  respondent  were  sent  to  the
         residence occupied by  his  mother  and  his  siblings.  There  was
         nothing in any of the documents to  indicate  that  the  respondent
         lived separately or that he had ever been  employed.  Although  the
         respondent  had  received  a  maintenance  loan  this  was  for   a
         relatively small amount and, as he  maintained  in  his  statement,
         this was not enough to enable him to  support  himself.  The  judge
         properly identified the evidential basis supporting her  conclusion
         on dependency  and  she  gave  legally  adequate  reasons  for  her
         conclusion. I consequently find that the grounds of appeal are  not
         made out.




Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of an error on a point of law.

The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed.

For the avoidance of doubt, the First-tier Tribunal's decision allowing  the
appeal on human rights grounds stands, as  does  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.


D.Blum

Signed                                  Date 10 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

