
IAC-FH-NL-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00726/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 April 2015                     |On 10 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                anwaar ul haq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and is of the Ahmadi faith.   He
    appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  by   First-tier
    Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge  Buckwell  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent of 14 April 2014 to make a deportation order
    by virtue of s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  On 15 April 2013  the
    appellant had been convicted for possession or use of a fake instrument
    for which he was sentenced to one year's imprisonment.

2.   The FtT Judge did not accept the appellant's claim that in Pakistan  he
    had been subjected to ill-treatment from religious  extremists  because
    of his faith.

3.   The first ground alleges that the judge failed to make findings  on  an
    important piece of evidence, namely a letter from the Ahmadiyya  Muslim
    Association (AMA) which confirmed both that due to his religion and his
    ownership of a school he faced problems in Pakistan  and  that  he  had
    undertaken sur place activities  in  the  UK.   This  was  said  to  be
    contrary to the guidance given  in  MN  &  Others  (Ahmadis  -  country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).

4.   The appellant's second ground alleged that the  judge  failed  to  make
    proper findings on the appellant's post arrival sur place activities.

5.   The third ground argued that the judge failed to make findings  on  the
    appellant's fear that in Pakistan he would lose his religious freedom.

6.   Fourthly, it was submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's explanation for his delay in leaving Pakistan after he  had
    been issued a visa.

7.   Fifthly, it was contended that the  judge  was  wrong  to  count  as  a
    reason for not  finding  the  appellant  credible  that  the  documents
    misspelt "Sheikhupuru".

My assessment

8.   I consider that the first ground is made out.  The AMA letter had  been
    addressed by the respondent when she made her decision to  deport.   It
    is true that the judge noted the existence of this letter at  paragraph
    5 and submissions regarding it at paragraphs 5, 18 and 23.  However, in
    contrast to findings he did make on other documents dealing with school
    registration, he said nothing at all about the AMA letter.  Further, it
    is clear that what he had  before  him  was  not  one,  but  three  AMA
    letters, dated 8 July 2013, 20 August 2013 and 14 November  2014.   The
    latest  letter  made  reference  to  the  appellant  having  undertaken
    proselytising activities in Pakistan and in the UK.

9.   Mr Khan sought to submit that this error on the part of the  judge  was
    made all the more  serious  by  the  fact  that  the  NM  case  clearly
    considered significant weight should be attached  to  AMA  letters.   I
    consider that a misreading of NM but in any event the then President of
    the Upper Tribunal, Mr Justice  Blake,  in  the  reported  case  of  AB
    (Ahmadiyya  UK:  letters)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  511   (IAC),   makes
    abundantly clear at paragraph 44 that AMA letters being accorded weight
    was a function of the extent to which they gave significant information
    and the extent to which the AMA was able to explain the source  of  the
    information given in the letter, how the source is  able  to  speak  to
    such matters and what records are kept of the activities referred to in
    the letter.  In light of the AB criteria the first two letters from the
    AMA were quite deficient.  Whilst  the  latest  letter  still  did  not
    comply with all these criteria it was much more specific  and,  because
    it had not been before the respondent at the date of decision,  it  was
    all the more incumbent on the FtT Judge to  make  findings  on  it.   I
    would observe that I am very surprised Mr  Khan,  who  represented  the
    appellant before Judge Buckwell, failed to draw the AB decision to  the
    judge's  attention.   Had  he  done  so,  the  judge  may  have  better
    understood the importance of focused attention on the contents  of  AMA
    letters.

10.  Be that as it may,  the  judge's  error  in  relation  to  this  letter
    undermines his credibility assessment.  The fact  that  as  the  second
    ground accurately submits the judge's determination also fails to  make
    specific findings on the appellant's sur  place  activities,  compounds
    the error.  I need not deal with the other grounds.

11.  I do not say for  a  moment  that  Mr  Hopkin  is  wrong  to  point  to
    significant problems with the appellant's documentation, including  the
    AMA letters.  Given what is said in the latest letter it  is  difficult
    to understand why the AMA were prepared to present a different  picture
    in the two earlier letters.  But these puzzles  are  properly  left  as
    matters to be explored at a  further  hearing.   The  determination  is
    vitiated by legal errors that necessitates it being set aside.

12.  Prior to reserving my  decision  I  canvassed  with  the  parties  what
    course of action I should take in the event I decided (as  I  have)  to
    set aside the decision.  Mr Khan urged that I remit it; Mr Hopkin asked
    that I direct that the case be retained in the Upper Tribunal and  that
    I also direct that the judge's findings in respect of  the  appellant's
    past experiences in Pakistan be preserved.  I rule against Mr Hopkin on
    both points.  The judge's  failure  to  make  proper  findings  on  key
    documents, namely the AMA letters, renders quite unsafe the findings he
    made about the appellant's past experiences.  Further, that error meant
    in effect that the appellant had not had  a  hearing  at  which  proper
    opportunity was afforded him to establish his credibility.  If  I  were
    to retain it in the Upper Tribunal there would be additional delay.

13.  For the above reasons I am satisfied  that  the  proper  course  is  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other
    than Judge Buckwell.  The  letter's  decision  remains  relevant  as  a
    record of the evidence given by the appellant, but none of his findings
    of fact are to be preserved.

Notice of Decision

14.  For the above reasons:

    The FtT Judge materially erred in law.

    I direct that the case be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
