
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00345/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 3rd October 2016                 |On: 8th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Marcel Sandu
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms. C. Fletcher, Counsel instructed by Sharma Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Romania date of birth 13th October 1971.
    On the 6th June 2016 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Wellesley-Cole)
    dismissed his appeal against a decision to deport him  under  s5(1)  of
    the Immigration Act  1971,  made  with  reference  to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The Appellant  was  granted
    permission to appeal against that decision on  the  4th  July  2016  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald.

 2. The decision to deport the Appellant was made on the 22nd  April  2015.
    The Secretary of State had been  made  aware  that  the  Appellant  had
    numerous criminal convictions in Romania, and at least one  in  France.
    The Respondent took the view that there  was  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society in the Appellant's continued presence in the United Kingdom.
     Although the  Appellant  had  been  convicted  of  offences  including
    deception,  fraud  and  theft,  the  decision  focussed  on   his   two
    convictions for the trafficking and pimping of women (and in one case a
    minor) for the purpose of sexual exploitation.  The refusal letter said
    this:

         "23. Trafficking has a harrowing effect on  the  mental,  emotional
         and physical wellbeing of the victims,  usually  women  and  girls,
         ensared in its web. Beyond the physical abuse, trafficking  victims
         suffer extreme emotional  stress,  including  shame,  grief,  fear,
         distrust and suicidal thoughts.

         24.  Sex trafficking promotes societal breakdown by removing  women
         and girls from the  families  and  communities.  Trafficking  fuels
         organised crime groups  that  usually  participate  in  many  other
         illegal activities, including  drug  and  weapons  trafficking  and
         money laundering.  Sex trafficking burdens public  health  systems,
         erodes government authority, encourages widespread  corruption  and
         threatens the security of vulnerable populations".

 3. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant
    placed reliance on the following evidence and submissions:

      a) He had arrived in the UK in August 2009;

      b) He has had several jobs since he came, including  at  the  date  of
         hearing, leafleting;

      c) His teenage daughter (aged 18) was now resident in the UK;

      d) He is unwell, suffering from severe diabetes that has  resulted  in
         him having his toe amputated and  experiencing  problems  with  his
         vision;

      e) He expressed remorse for his crimes;

      f) He has been rehabilitated. In support of this contention he  placed
         particular reliance on a letter from his lawyer in  Romania,  a  Mr
         Lucian,  who  writes  that  under  the  Romanian  constitution  the
         Appellant can now apply for a court declaration to the effect  that
         he is rehabilitated, having been convicted of no further crimes  in
         Romania.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found as follows. It was not persuaded that the
    Appellant was rehabilitated, and that there was a genuine  threat  that
    he  may  commit  another  criminal  offence.  In  its   assessment   of
    proportionality the Tribunal noted the evidence about  the  Appellant's
    ill-health and his relationship with  his  daughter.  Now  18,  she  is
    training to be a nurse in the UK.  The  Tribunal  recognised  that  the
    Appellant had done some work since he arrived in the UK and that he did
    therefore contribute to the economy. It was not however  accepted  that
    his removal would be disproportionate. The Tribunal assessed  that  the
    Appellant had lived most of his life  in  Romania  and  there  were  no
    obstacles to his return there. He could work towards his rehabilitation
    in Romania.  The Tribunal dismissed the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and  on  Article  8  grounds,
    essentially applying the same reasoning to both matters.

    The Appellant's appeal

 5. The grounds are that the First-tier Tribunal has  materially  erred  in
    approach as follows:

      a) The Tribunal erred in law in its  focus  on  the  Appellant's  past
         convictions, contrary to the Regulations and the caselaw,  see  for
         instance Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ 1245 in which it was held that
         public revulsion at past crime had no part to  play  in  a  forward
         looking assessment of risk;

      b) The finding that the Appellant was not rehabilitated and  continued
         to pose a risk ran contrary to the Tribunal's own finding that  the
         Appellant had not committed any offences since 2013, the fact  that
         he had pleaded guilty on each occasions and  the  letter  from  the
         lawyer which stated in terms that he was  considered  rehabilitated
         under Romanian law;

      c) The Tribunal erred in placing insufficient weight on the fact  that
         the  Appellant  has  committed  no  offences  in  the  UK,  and  is
         exercising treaty rights here.

 6. At the hearing Ms Fletcher submitted a skeleton argument in  which  she
    raised issues relating to Article 8 ECHR. Ms Isherwood objected to this
    on the basis that this point was not raised in the  grounds.  I  agreed
    and declined to hear submissions on this matter. Apart  from  the  fact
    that the Secretary of State had not been put on notice  and  permission
    had not been granted on that basis, it was very difficult to see how  a
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 would in these circumstances
    yield a different result from one conducted under the Regulations.

    My Findings

 7. The central complaint made is that the Tribunal did not  look  properly
    at the evidence of rehabilitation. Ms Fletcher makes three points,  all
    of them equally without merit.

 8. First, she points  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  pleaded  guilty
    whenever he was convicted. She submits that this was good  evidence  of
    his acceptance of responsibility and remorse.  In some cases  that  can
    be true.   One only has to look at the chronology to see that it  is  a
    correlation not justified on the evidence in this  case.  On  the  23rd
    January 2001  the  Appellant  was  convicted  at  Iasi  Tribunal  of  a
    deception offence, and received a  suspended  sentence.   I  accept  Ms
    Fletcher's assertion that he pleaded guilty on  that  occasion.    Just
    over a year later he was convicted by the same Tribunal of  trafficking
    and deception. He pleaded guilty.  He  received  a  sentence  of  three
    years' imprisonment. On the 18th March  2014,  he  found  himself  back
    before the same Tribunal.  Again,  he  pleaded  guilty,  this  time  to
    offences including trafficking and coercion, pimping, and trafficking a
    minor.  He cannot long have  been  out  of  prison  when  he  committed
    further trafficking offences, because on the  10th  July  2006  he  was
    convicted - again on a guilty plea -  of  the  same  and  sentenced  to
    eleven years in prison. It is evident from the foregoing that the  four
    guilty pleas that the Appellant  entered  in  criminal  proceedings  in
    Romania do not appear to have indicated genuine contrition or  remorse.
    In light of that it is hardly surprising that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was not prepared to treat the last of the set - a guilty plea to  theft
    and fraud charges in France in 2013 - as evidence  that  he  would  not
    offend again.

 9. The second point that was made about risk rests on a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's Romanian lawyer. Ms Fletcher submits that the Tribunal  was
    bound to give substantial weight to this letter, which  confirmed  that
    he was now eligible to be declared 'rehabilitated' under Romanian  law.
    The basis of that declaration  would  be  the  fact  that  he  has  not
    committed any further offences in Romania since his last conviction  in
    2006.   I find that this would be  a  significant  fact,  but  for  two
    matters. The first is that the Appellant appears to have  left  Romania
    within a month of his early release from prison, and made  his  way  to
    the UK. The second is that he has been convicted of a further  offence:
    he was apparently drawn to commit fraud and aggravated theft whilst "on
    holiday" in France in 2013.   In those circumstances there  can  be  no
    error in the Tribunal viewing the lawyers letter with  some  degree  of
    circumspection.

10. Finally there was the fact that the Appellant has not been convicted of
    anything since that court appearance in France  in  2013.   This  is  a
    matter  that  was  expressly  recognised  by  the   Tribunal   in   its
    determination. It was not a matter which was capable of displacing  the
    very substantial concerns raised by his conduct overall.

11. There was no error in law in the Tribunal's finding that this Appellant
    continued to pose a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat.

12. As to proportionality the matters of  the  Appellant's  health,  family
    ties and work in the UK were all expressly considered. The Tribunal was
    entitled to conclude, on the evidence before it, that this man who  had
    spent the vast majority of his years in Romania was best  rehabilitated
    there.  In this regard the determination notes  that  he  continues  to
    speak fluent Romanian whereas he required an interpreter in English  in
    order to take part in the proceedings.

13. One other matter that arose  during  hearing  -  although  not  in  the
    grounds - concerned the Appellant's length of residence in the  UK.  Ms
    Fletcher asserts that the Appellant had accrued a  permanent  right  of
    residence as a result of  his  continuous  five  years  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the Regulations.  She  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to consider this matter, and so whether  the  Appellant
    has attracted an enhanced  level  of  protection.    I  note  that  the
    Respondent  contests  the  claim  on  other  grounds  but  I  think  it
    sufficient to note that the Appellant cannot possibly have accrued such
    a period of continuous residence, since we know that  in  2013  he  was
    committing crimes in France.




    Decisions

14. The grounds  are  not  made  out  and  the  appeal  is  dismissed.  The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

15. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           17th October 2016

