
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00606/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 September 2016                      |On 4 October 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Mohammed [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Paxton instructed by South West Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge O'Brien) allowing the appeal of Mohammed [A] against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State taken on 1 December 2015  to  deport
    him under regs 19(3) and 21 of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006
    (SI 2006/1003 as amended) (the "EEA Regulations").

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Introduction

 3. The appellant, who was born on 2  April  1997,  is  a  citizen  of  the
    Netherlands.  He came to the UK in January 2002  with  his  mother  and
    siblings.  His father came to the UK in May 2002 but did not live  with
    the appellant or the family until around April 2014. The appellant  was
    4 years old when he came to  the  UK  and  he  has  been  educated  and
    attended school and college in the UK until around April 2014.  He was,
    at the date of the hearing, just short of his 19th birthday.

 4. Between 20 November 2013 and 18 March 2015, the appellant was convicted
    on five occasions of eight offences.  Apart from the last offence,  the
    appellant  did  not  receive  a  custodial  sentence.   These  offences
    included possession of a bladed object in a public place, resisting  or
    obstructing a police constable, burglary and theft  of  a  non-dwelling
    and possession of cannabis.   The  final  offence  was  that  of  being
    concerned in the supply of a class A controlled  drug,  namely  cocaine
    and heroine.  He pleaded guilty to that offence at  the  Bristol  Crown
    Court on 16 April 2015 and on 12 October  2015  was  sentenced  to  two
    years' detention in a Youth Offenders' Institution.

 5. On 22 October 2014, the appellant was notified of his liability  to  be
    deported.  On 1 December 2015, the Secretary of State decided to deport
    the appellant as an EEA national on grounds of public policy under regs
    19(3)(b) and 21 of the EEA Regulations.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant
    argued that his deportation  could  not  be  justified  under  the  EEA
    Regulations and under Art 8 of the ECHR.   Having  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not be deported under the EEA  Regulations,  the  judge
    (Judge O'Brien) made no decision in relation to Art 8 and no matter  in
    relation to Art 8 was raised before me.

 7. Before Judge O'Brien,  the  appellant  argued  that,  as  he  had  been
    resident in the UK for over ten years since  2002,  he  could  only  be
    removed on the basis of 'imperative  grounds  of  public  security'  by
    virtue of reg 21(4)(a) of the EEA Regulations.  His offending  did  not
    fall into that category.  In addition, the appellant argued that he had
    acquired a permanent right of residence under reg  15  as  the  "family
    member" of his father who had been exercising treaty rights as a worker
    in the UK between 17 June 2002 and 12 September 2008.  As a  result  of
    his five years' residence on that basis, and therefore his  acquisition
    of a permanent right of residence, the appellant argued that  (even  if
    the  "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  protection  was   not
    applicable to him) he could only be deported  if  there  were  "serious
    grounds of public policy or public security" (see reg 21(3)).

 8. Judge O'Brien accepted both the  appellant's  primary  and  alternative
    arguments.

 9. First, at para 25 the judge found that the  appellant  had  established
    ten years' continuous residence and that  the  "imperative  grounds  of
    public security" basis for deportation applied but that the appellant's
    offending could not satisfy that requirement.  He said this:

         "25.     However, the Appellant is an EEA national.  He  has  lived
             in the United Kingdom continuously since 2002, over 14  years.
             Therefore, he can only be removed from the United  Kingdom  on
             imperative grounds of public security.  In  my  judgment,  the
             Appellant's case falls well short of satisfying that test.  It
             follows that the Respondent's decision  would  contravene  his
             rights under the 2006 Regulations."

10. Secondly, as regard the appellant's claim to have a permanent right  of
    residence,  Judge  O'Brien  accepted  that  his  father  had  been   in
    continuous employment between 17 June 2002 and 12 September  2008  and,
    as a result of that, the appellant  as  his  "family  member"  who  had
    resided in the UK during that period had acquired a permanent right  of
    residence and, assuming the  'imperative  grounds'  provision  did  not
    apply, he could only be deported on "serious grounds of  public  policy
    or  public  security"  and  that  the  appellant's  offending  was  not
    sufficiently serious  and  his  present  level  of  risk  of  harm  not
    sufficiently high to satisfy that requirement.  The judge said this:

         "26.     In any event, the Appellant's father has acquired a  right
             of permanent residence by virtue of continuous employment with
             Faccenda Foods from 17 June 2002 until 12 September 2008.   It
             follows that the  Appellant  has  also  acquired  a  right  of
             permanent residence as a family member who has resided in  the
             United Kingdom continuously for at least 5 years.   Therefore,
             the Appellant can only be removed from the United  Kingdom  on
             serious grounds of public policy or public  security.   Again,
             in my judgment, the Appellant's offence is not so serious, and
             his present level of risk  of  harm  is  not  so  high  as  to
             constitute  serious  grounds  of  public  policy   or   public
             security."

11. As a consequence, Judge O'Brien allowed the  appellant's  appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on a number of grounds.

13. First, the judge had failed in  applying  the  "imperative  grounds  of
    public security" test to determine whether the appellant had during the
    period of his residence had "comprehensive  sickness  insurance".   The
    basis of that ground appears to be an argument that the appellant  must
    establish that he was exercising treaty rights as a student  which,  by
    virtue of reg 4(1)(d)(ii) would  require  him  to  have  "comprehensive
    sickness insurance" in order to be a qualified person.

14. Secondly, the Secretary of State argued that the judge had  been  wrong
    to find that the  appellant  had  established  a  "permanent  right  of
    residence" since his mother had never been a qualified  person  and  he
    had not been living with his father.

15. Finally, the Secretary of  State  argued  that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to carry out an assessment of proportionality.

16. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 18  May  2016,  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Reeds)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

17. On 14 March 2016, the appellant submitted a rule 24 notice  seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision.

18. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

                 1. The issues

19. At the outset of the hearing, I drew to the representatives'  attention
    the decision of the Supreme Court on 27 July 2016 in the case of SSHD v
    Vomero [2016] UKSC 49 in which the  court  referred  to  the  Court  of
    Justice (CJEC) a number of questions concerning the application of  the
    enhanced protection provision in Art 28(3)(a) of the Citizens Directive
    (Directive 2004/38/EC).  That is the provision transposed into domestic
    law in reg 21(4)(a) setting  out  the  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security" ground for removal.  Whilst some discussion ensued as to  the
    content of the Supreme Court judgment  and  its  implications,  neither
    representative invited me to adjourn this appeal pending  the  decision
    of the CJEC on that reference.

20. Having considered the questions referred and the existing case law,  in
    particular the CJEC's earlier decision in MG  v  SSHD  (Case  C-400/12)
    [2014] 2 CMLR 40, I am confident that the law  that  I  must  apply  to
    determine this appeal is clear and it is not  necessary  to  await  the
    CJEC's decision on the reference.

21. The principal issue in this appeal is whether the judge was correct  in
    law to conclude  that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  the  enhanced
    protection from deportation set out in reg 21(4)(a) and, if he was,  to
    conclude in para 25 of his decision that the appellant's offending  did
    not fall within it.  I did not understand Mr McVeety, on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State, to argue with any conviction  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to conclude that the appellant's offending did  not  fall  within
    the  "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  if  that  ground  was
    applicable.

    2. The regulations in summary

22. It is well recognised that decisions to remove or deport EEA  nationals
    or their family members, when based on "public policy, public  security
    or public health grounds" must comply with the requirements of  reg  21
    (reflecting Arts 27 and 28 of the Citizens Directive).

23. Regulation 21 provides as follows:

         "21. (1) In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
                decision taken on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                security or public health.


         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
                with a permanent right  of  residence  under  regulation  15
                except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                security.


         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
                grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-




                (a)    has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                    period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                    decision; or


                (b)    is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                    is necessary in his best interests, as provided  for  in
                    the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the
                    General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th  November
                    1989.


         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
                or public security it shall, in addition to  complying  with
                the preceding paragraphs of this  regulation,  be  taken  in
                accordance with the following principles-


                (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality;


                (b)     the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned;


                (c)    the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                    represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
                    threat affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                    society;


                (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                    which relate to considerations of general prevention  do
                    not justify the decision;


                (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                    themselves justify the decision.


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
                policy or public security in relation to  a  person  who  is
                resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must  take
                account of considerations such as the age, state of  health,
                family and economic situation of the  person,  the  person's
                length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  person's
                social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom  and
                the extent of the person's links with his country of origin.


         (7)  In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of  public
                health-


                (a)    a disease that does not have  epidemic  potential  as
                    defined by the relevant instruments of the World  Health
                    Organisation(a) or is not a disease to which section  38
                    of the Public Health (Control of  Disease)  Act  1984(b)
                    applies (detention  in  hospital  of  a  person  with  a
                    notifiable disease) shall not constitute grounds for the
                    decision; and


                (b)    if the person concerned is  in  the  United  Kingdom,
                    diseases  occurring  after  the   three   month   period
                    beginning on the date on which he arrived in the  United
                    Kingdom shall not constitute grounds for the decision.


24. It is well recognised that reg 21 sets out a  hierarchy  of  protection
    from removal or deportation  applicable  to  EEA  nationals  and  their
    family members (see, e.g., LG (Italy) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  190  at
    [14] per Carnwath LJ).

25. The base level is that a decision must  be  taken  on  the  grounds  of
    "public policy, public security or public health".

26. An intermediate level of  protection  applies  where  a  person  has  a
    "permanent right of residence" under reg 15 when  a  decision  must  be
    taken on "serious grounds of public policy or public security".

27. The highest level of protection, sometimes referred to as  a  level  of
    'enhanced protection', applies, inter alia, where a decision  is  taken
    in respect of an  EEA  national  who  has  resided  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of at least ten years prior to the relevant  decision
    when that decision must be based upon  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security".

28. Regulation 21 sets out the basis upon which a decision  must  be  made,
    inter alia, requiring  that  the  individual's  personal  conduct  must
    represent "a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society" (see reg  21(5)(c));  that
    the decision must be based upon the personal conduct of the  individual
    (see reg 21(5)(b)) and a person's previous criminal convictions do  not
    in themselves justify the decision (see  reg  21(5)(e));  the  decision
    must comply with the "principle of proportionality" (see reg  21(5)(a))
    and in taking the relevant decision account must be taken of a range of
    considerations, including the individual's age, state of health, family
    and economic situation, length of residence in the UK, their social and
    cultural integration in the UK and the extent of links with the country
    of origin (see reg 21(6)).

    3. Imperative grounds of national security

29. I turn now to consider the principal issue of  whether  the  judge  was
    correct to apply the "imperative grounds of  public  security"  in  reg
    21(4)(a) of the EEA Regulations.

30. By its terms, that provision requires the  EEA  national  to  establish
    that he "has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of
    at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant  decision".   The  relevant
    decision in respect of the appellant is the decision to deport him made
    on 1 December 2015.  The appellant has been resident in  the  UK  since
    January 2002 when he arrived here with his mother and siblings.  On the
    face of it, therefore, "prior to the relevant decision", the  appellant
    had been resident for a period of  around  thirteen  years  and  eleven
    months.  Why can it be said,  therefore,  that  the  appellant  is  not
    entitled to the protection of reg 21(4)(a)?  There  are  two  principal
    arguments.

31. First, counting back from the  date  of  decision  (namely  1  December
    2015), the appellant's period of residence has been broken by a  period
    of imprisonment between March 2015 (when he was remanded  in  custody),
    followed by his sentence on 12 October 2015 which amounts to  a  period
    of some eight or nine months' imprisonment.  Further, so  the  argument
    goes,  that  period  of  imprisonment  deprives  the  appellant  of   a
    "continuous period" of residence of "at least ten years" prior  to  the
    deportation decision on 1 December 2015.

32. Secondly, in order to rely upon the highest level of protection in  reg
    21(4)(a)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  the  appellant  must  first   have
    established a permanent right of residence under  reg  15  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  In this appeal, the Secretary of State submits  that  the
    judge was wrong to find, in para 26  of  his  determination,  that  the
    appellant had established a permanent right  of  residence  based  upon
    being a "family member" of his father whom the  judge  accepted  was  a
    qualified person i.e. an EEA national exercising treaty rights  between
    17 June 2002 and 12 September 2008.

33. To these principal arguments, the Secretary of  State  in  her  grounds
    adds a further argument.  That is that  the  appellant  must  not  only
    establish a period of ten years' continuous residence but  it  must  be
    residence in accordance with the EEA Regulations and, it is  said,  his
    residence as a student required him to  establish  that  he  was  self-
    sufficient in order to have a right of residence that  can  potentially
    amount to ten years' continuous residence.

    The effect of imprisonment

34. There is no doubt that the period of "ten years'" residence must  be  a
    continuous period "prior to the relevant decision", namely  1  December
    2015.  The assessment must, therefore, be made by looking back  from  1
    December 2015 (see SSHD v MG (Case C-400/12) [2014] 1 WLR 2441 (CJEC)).



35. Although there is some doubt as to whether periods of imprisonment  may
    be taken into account to aggregate periods of residence so as to arrive
    at a total of ten years' "continuous" residence (see the  reference  to
    the CJEC by the Supreme Court in SSHD v Vomero, Q(2)(b) at  [28]),  the
    appellant does not have to rely on such an aggregation in this case.

36. Prior to his imprisonment in March  2015,  the  appellant  had  already
    acquired a period of residence in excess of ten years which, subject to
    the issues of whether he had a prior permanent right of  residence  or,
    if  not,  at  least  lawful  residence  under  the   EEA   Regulations,
    potentially allowed the appellant to establish a continuous  period  of
    ten years' residence up to 1 December 2015 providing that the period of
    imprisonment between March 2015 and 1 December 2015 did not  in  itself
    break the "integrative" link established by the  appellant's  residence
    between 2002 and March 2015.

37. In MG, the CJEC did not suggest that any period of  imprisonment  would
    necessarily break the integrative links established by a period  of  at
    least ten  years'  residence  prior  to  the  imprisonment.   Were  the
    position otherwise, the highest level of protection in reg 21(4)(a)  of
    the EEA Regulations would, in practice, never have any relevance  to  a
    deportation  decision  based  upon  an  individual's  offending.    Any
    decision to deport an individual would, out of  necessity,  arise  only
    after the conviction and (for these purposes)  the  imposition  of  the
    term of imprisonment.  If any period of imprisonment could prevent  the
    establishment of a period of ten years' continuous residence  prior  to
    the decision, in practice, there always would be a break.  That is not,
    however, the law.  At para 39 of its judgment, the  CJEC  set  out  the
    applicable approach as follows:

         "Article 28(3)(a) of  Directive  2004/38  must  be  interpreted  as
         meaning that a period of imprisonment  is,  in  principle,  capable
         both of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence  for
         the purposes of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the  decision
         regarding the grant of the enhanced protection provided  for  there
         under, even where the person concerned resided in the  host  Member
         State for the ten years prior to imprisonment.  However,  the  fact
         that that person resided in the host Member State for the ten years
         prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration  as  part  of
         the overall assessment required in order to determine  whether  the
         integrating links previously forged with the host Member State have
         been broken." (emphasis added)

38. Consequently, the CJEC left open  the  possibility  that  a  period  of
    imprisonment,  following  a  ten-year  period  of  residence  prior  to
    imprisonment,  may  not  break  the  continuity  of  the   individual's
    residence such that at the date of decision it can still be  said  that
    there is a ten-year period  of  continuous  residence.   The  issue  is
    whether the period of imprisonment is such as to break the "integrative
    links previously forged with the host Member State" (see [36]).

39. That was the Upper Tribunal's understanding of the CJEC's  ruling  when
    the case of MG returned to the Upper Tribunal  following  reference  to
    the CJEC (see MG (Prison - Article 28(3)(a) of the Citizens  Directive)
    Portugal [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC)).

40. Although the Supreme Court  in  Vomero  referred  a  number  of  issues
    concerning the application of Art 28(3)(a) of  the  Citizens  Directive
    (the equivalent of reg 21(4)(a)), it did not, in my judgment, cast  any
    doubt upon the proper application of the CJEC's decision in MG on  this
    issue as understood by the  Upper  Tribunal.   Indeed,  previously  the
    Court of Appeal in the case of Warsame v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  16  (at
    [9]-[10]) had accepted the Secretary of State's  concession  that  this
    was the proper approach applying MG.

41.  The  correct  resolution  of  the  first  principal  issue  does  not,
    therefore,  lead  necessarily  to  the  appellant  not  being  able  to
    establish the required ten years' continuous  residence  prior  to  the
    date of the deportation decision and therefore exclude reliance on  the
    enhanced protection of the "imperative grounds of public security" test
    in reg 21(4)(a).

    Is a permanent right of residence required?

42. However, the second principal issue, read together with the  additional
    refinement  in  the  grounds,  might  affect  the  application  of  reg
    21(4)(a).  On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  McVeety  submitted
    that the judge had been wrong, in  the  alternative,  to  approach  the
    issue of the appellant's deportation as an EEA national with a right of
    permanent residence and that therefore the "serious grounds  of  public
    policy or public security" test - the intermediate test - in reg  21(3)
    applied.  Whilst that was a freestanding argument made by  Mr  McVeety,
    if good, it might affect the appellant's reliance upon the  "imperative
    grounds of public security" test if establishing a permanent  right  of
    residence was a pre-requisite  as.  Properly  understood,  there  is  a
    progression in the levels of protection with  the  enhanced  protection
    only being applicable after ten years to individuals who  have  already
    established the immediately prior level of protection because they  had
    a right of permanent residence.

43. Whether a right of permanent residence is a  pre-requisite  to  relying
    upon reg 21(4)(a), was the principal issue referred to the CJEC by  the
    Supreme Court in the Vomero case (see Q1 at [27]).  The  Supreme  Court
    noted that a majority of its constitution  favoured  the  view  that  a
    right of permanent residence was not  needed  in  order  to  enjoy  the
    enhanced protection under reg 21(4)(a) but a minority  of  the  court's
    constitution considered the position "at least unclear" (see [27]).

44. The outcome of that  reference  cannot,  in  my  judgment,  affect  the
    outcome of this appeal because  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  was
    correct to find that the appellant did in fact have a  permanent  right
    of residence.

45. Regulation 15(1)(a) states that a person will acquire a permanent right
    of residence if he or she is:

         "An  EEA  national  who  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
         accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period  of  five
         years; ..."

46. The appellant is an EEA national.  The question is, therefore,  whether
    he has resided in the UK in accordance with the EEA Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years.

47. Regulation 14(2) provides for the 'extended right of  residence'  to  a
    family member of a qualified person in the following circumstances:

         "a family member of a  qualified  person  residing  in  the  United
         Kingdom under paragraph (1) or of an EEA national with a  permanent
         right of residence under regulation 15 is entitled to reside in the
         United Kingdom for so long as he remains the  family  member  of  a
         qualified person or EEA national."

48. The appellant is a  "family  member"  of  his  father  who  is  an  EEA
    national.  The appellant is a family member by virtue  of  reg  7(1)(b)
    which states that a person shall be treated "as the  family  member  of
    another person" when they are:

         "Direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who are
         -


         (i)  under 21; or


         (ii)     dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner; ..."


49. The appellant is the direct descendent of his father and he has at  all
    times been under the age of 21.  He falls within reg 7(1)(b)(i).  There
    is no need for him to be dependent of his father in order to qualify as
    a "family member" under reg 7(1)()(ii).

50. In  his  determination,  Judge  O'Brien  found  in  para  26  that  the
    appellant's  father  was  a  qualified  person  in  that  he  had  been
    continuously employed in the UK between 17 June 2002 until 12 September
    2008.  That finding is not challenged.  In fact, the appellant's father
    acquired a permanent right of residence under reg 15(1)(a)  himself  as
    he had resided in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  five  years  in
    accordance with the EEA  Regulations  because,  as  a  worker,  he  had
    enjoyed the 'extended right of residence' under reg 14(1) for a  period
    of 5 years by 17  June  2007.   Therefore,  on  the  face  of  it,  the
    appellant fell within reg 14(2) and  resided  lawfully  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations from at least 17 June 2002.  If so,
    like his father, he acquired a permanent right of residence on 17  June
    2007.

51. Mr McVeety, however, submitted that the appellant could  not  establish
    the five years' continuous residence in accordance with reg 14(2) as  a
    "family member" because he was not living with his  father  during  the
    relevant period.  Mr McVeety accepted that where spouses separated  the
    non-EEA spouse remained a "family member" with  a  right  of  residence
    under reg 14(2) even when they did  not  live  together.   However,  he
    sought to distinguish the appellant's  situation  on  the  basis  that,
    unlike the hypothetical spouses, the appellant had never lived with his
    father at least until April 2014.

52. Regulation 14(2) does not require  that  the  "family  member"  of  the
    qualified person or person with a permanent right of  residence  should
    reside together (see PM (EEA - spouse - "residing with")  Tukey  [2011]
    UKUT 89 (IAC) applying Diatta v Land Berlin (Case C-267/83) [1985]  ECR
    567).  Regulation 14(2) simply requires that both reside in the UK and,
    of course, the EEA national remains a qualified person or  retains  his
    right of permanent residence and the "family member" remains his family
    member.  Consequently, the separated spouse of  an  EEA  national  will
    continue to have a right of residence under reg 14(2) even  after  they
    have separated,  and  therefore  do  not  continue  to  live  together,
    provided they remain a family member of a qualified person  or  an  EEA
    national with a permanent right  of  residence  and  both  continue  to
    reside in the UK (see PM; see also Amos v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  552  at
    [24])).

53. In my judgment, the appellant's situation as a  "family  member"  based
    upon him  being  a  direct  descendant  under  21  cannot  properly  be
    distinguished.  In fact, of course, the judge did not seek to doubt the
    evidence of the appellant's mother that even prior to  the  appellant's
    father moving in with the family in April 2014,  "he  had  remained  in
    contact with the children" (see para 10 of the determination).   In  my
    judgment, therefore, once the appellant's father came  to  the  UK  and
    commenced work he was an EEA national and a qualified person based upon
    his employment.  That began, on the judge's findings, on 17 June  2002.
    Thereafter, the appellant had a  right  of  residence  as  his  "family
    member"  under  reg  14(2).   Once  five  years  had  passed  and   the
    appellant's  father  had  been  in  continuous  employment   then   the
    appellant's father acquired a permanent right of  residence  under  reg
    15(1)(a).  That was on 17 June 2007.  At that point, the appellant also
    acquired a permanent right of residence under reg 15(1)(a) as he was an
    EEA national who had resided in the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

54. The appellant has remained in the UK since that  date  and  has,  as  a
    result, continued to have a permanent  right  of  residence.   The  EEA
    Regulations allow for the loss of that  permanent  right  of  residence
    only through an individual's absence from the UK for a period exceeding
    two consecutive years (see reg 15(2)).  The appellant  has  never  been
    absent and, even if by analogy, that  provision  could  be  applied  to
    periods of imprisonment, it would be restricted to imprisonment  of  at
    least two years.  By the date of  decision  to  deport  the  appellant,
    namely 1 December 2015, the appellant  had  only  been  in  prison  for
    between eight and nine months.  He has, therefore, since 17  June  2007
    enjoyed a permanent right of residence in the UK.

55. Even if, therefore, the enhanced protection afforded by reg 21(4)(a) is
    progressive and built upon an individual previously  having  protection
    from deportation on  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public
    security" because he has a permanent right of residence, this appellant
    meets that criterion.

56. It is not necessary, therefore, to  consider  whether  the  ten  years'
    continuous residence required for reg 21(4)(a) could  comprise  periods
    when  an  individual  is  not  residing  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations.  Further, there is nothing in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    written ground which sought to  criticise  the  judge  for  not  having
    considered whether the appellant was lawfully resident  under  the  EEA
    Regulations as a student without considering  whether  he  was  at  all
    times self-sufficient.  The appellant's basis for residing  in  the  UK
    under the EEA Regulations was and is, as  I  have  just  set  out,  not
    dependant upon him being a student but rather on him  being  a  "family
    member" of his father.

    Application of reg 21(4)(a) to the facts

57. Where, then, does that leave the judge's finding in para  25  that  the
    appellant cannot be removed because the "imperative grounds  of  public
    security" test in reg 21(4)(a) is not met.

58. The judge did not give any consideration as to whether  the  period  of
    imprisonment  between  March  2015  and  1  December  2015  broke   the
    "integrative link" established  by  the  appellant  by  his  continuous
    period of lawful residence prior to his imprisonment from, at least  17
    June 2002 as a family member of a qualified person or on the  basis  of
    his own permanent right of residence since 17  June  2007.   That  was,
    undoubtedly,  an  error  because,  as  MG  makes  plain,  a  period  of
    imprisonment can (but need not necessarily) break  a  prior  period  of
    continuous residence of ten years such that an individual does not fall
    within reg 21(4)(a).  But, in my judgment, on the basis of the evidence
    and the judge's findings, any such error was not  material.   The  only
    possible conclusion that the judge could  have  reached  was  that  the
    short period of eight to nine months'  imprisonment  in  2015  did  not
    break the established integrative links that the appellant had  in  the
    UK.

59. The appellant had been in the UK since he was 4 years old.  His  family
    - his parents and siblings - live in the UK.  He  has  attended  school
    and college in the UK and  his  whole  life  is  here.   There  was  no
    evidence before the judge that the appellant has any  continuing  links
    with the Netherlands.  He had, himself, acquired a permanent  right  of
    residence which, in itself, is highly indicative  of  integration.   At
    the time of his imprisonment, the appellant had lived in the UK for the
    entirety of his childhood.  At the date of imprisonment, he was just  a
    few weeks short of his 18th birthday.  That  was  a  period  of  almost
    thirteen years.  There was no other rational decision open to the judge
    other than to conclude that the short period  of  imprisonment  between
    March 2015 and the date of decision, namely 1  December  2015  did  not
    break  the  integrative  link  established  by  the  appellant's  prior
    thirteen years of lawful residence under the EEA Regulations  including
    a permanent right of residence since June 2007.

60. As a consequence, the judge was correct to decide  that  the  appellant
    could only be deported on the basis of "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security".

61. Mr McVeety, as I have already indicated, did not seek to argue with any
    conviction that the appellant's offending  history  would  justify  his
    deportation on "imperative grounds of public security".  He was  right,
    in my judgment, not to do so.

62. The CJEC provided some guidance on the scope of the "imperative grounds
    of  public  security"  test  in  PI  v  Oberb�rgermeisterin  der  Stadt
    Remscheid (Case C-348/09) [2012] Imm AR 917.  The  CJEC  said  this  at
    [18]-[23]:

         "18.     As regards public security, the  Court  has  already  held
             that this covers  both  a  Member  State's  internal  and  its
             external security (Tsakouridis, paragraph 43 and the  case-law
             cited).

         19.  According to the Court, it follows from the wording and scheme
             of Article 28(3) of Directive 2004/38 that, by subjecting  all
             expulsion measures in the cases referred to in that  provision
             to the existence of 'imperative grounds' of public security, a
             concept which is considerably stricter than that  of  'serious
             grounds' within the meaning of  Article  28(2),  the  European
             Union legislature clearly intended to limit measures based  on
             Article 28(3) to 'exceptional circumstances', as  set  out  in
             recital 24 in the preamble  to  that  directive  (Tsakouridis,
             paragraph 40).

         20.   The  concept  of  'imperative  grounds  of  public  security'
             presupposes not only the  existence  of  a  threat  to  public
             security, but also that such a threat  is  of  a  particularly
             high degree of seriousness, as is reflected by the use of  the
             words 'imperative grounds' (Tsakouridis, paragraph 41).

         21.  It should also be noted  that  European  Union  law  does  not
             impose on Member States a uniform scale of values  as  regards
             the assessment of  conduct  which  may  be  considered  to  be
             contrary to public security (see, by  analogy,  Case  C-268/99
             Jany and Others [2001] ECR I-8615, paragraph 60).

         22.  Article 28(3) of Directive 2004/38  provides  that  imperative
             grounds of public  security  are  to  be  'defined  by  Member
             States'.

         23.   While  Member  States  essentially  retain  the  freedom   to
             determine  the  requirements  of  public  policy  and   public
             security in accordance with their national  needs,  which  can
             vary from one Member State to another  and  from  one  era  to
             another, particularly as justification for a  derogation  from
             the fundamental principle of free movement of  persons,  those
             requirements must nevertheless  be  interpreted  strictly,  so
             that their scope cannot be  determined  unilaterally  by  each
             Member State without any control by the  institutions  of  the
             European Union (see, inter alia, Case C-33/07 Jipa [2008]  ECR
             I-5157, paragraph 23, and Case C-434/10 Aladzhov [2011] ECR I-
             0000, paragraph 34).

63. In PI, the  relevant  offences  were  ones  of  serious  sexual  abuse,
    assault, coercion and rape and the victim was the  8-year-old  daughter
    of the individual's former partner.  He was sentenced to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of seven years and six months.

64. The CJEC accepted that the appellant's offending could fall within  the
    concept of "imperative grounds of public security" at para  [33].   The
    CJEC recognised that sexual abuse and sexual exploitation  of  children
    could, if the offence disclosed "particularly serious characteristics",
    fall within the "imperative grounds of public security" criterion.  The
    court noted that there must  be:  "a  particularly  serious  threat  to
    another fundamental interest of society,  which  might  pose  a  direct
    threat to the calm and public security of the  population".   The  CJEC
    recognised that it was not necessary for the context of  the  offending
    to be that the individual belonged to a group or that the activity  was
    part of a criminal organisation.

65. Here, the appellant's index offence  was  undoubtedly  a  serious  one,
    namely being concerned in  the  supply  of  class  A  drugs,  involving
    cocaine and heroin.  In his sentencing remarks,  the  sentencing  judge
    stated that the appellant's role was in preparing the  drugs  within  a
    flat knowing they were intended  for  sale.   Applying  the  Sentencing
    Council  guideline,  the  judge   considered   that   the   appellant's
    involvement fell somewhere between the lowest level of a "lesser"  role
    and the intermediate category of a "significant" role.   The  appellant
    was, however, not acting alone and was,  therefore,  part  of  a  joint
    activity  with  others.   The  judge's  sentencing  remarks   give   no
    indication as to the scope or nature of the overall  activity.   Before
    Judge O'Brien, there was no OASyS report but there was  an  email  from
    the appellant's Offender Manager stating that  the  appellant  posed  a
    "medium risk of serious harm and high risk of re-offending".  The basis
    for this assessment is, in the  absence  of  an  OASyS  report  briefly
    stated by the offender manager.  The risk of serious harm was  not,  it
    seems, based upon the current offence (see  Offender  Manager's  report
    p.1).  The appellant had, of  course,  previous  convictions  including
    possessing a knife in a public place but had never been subject to  any
    term of imprisonment in  respect  of  those  earlier  offences.   Their
    seriousness, absent any other information,  has  to  be  seen  in  that
    light.

66. Whilst I accept, as the CJEC indicates in PI, that offences  of  sexual
    abuse or violence against children could, potentially, fall within  the
    "imperative  grounds  of  public  security",  even  if  there  was   no
    organisation or trafficking involved, each case must  necessarily  turn
    upon an assessment of the seriousness of the offending and  whether  it
    affects the "calm and physical security" of the population.   Likewise,
    drug  dealing  can  potentially  fall  within   this   category.    The
    appellant's offending, however, is very much at the lower end  of  drug
    offending albeit of a serious nature involving class  A  drugs.   There
    was no evidence that the appellant was not involved in the  importation
    or large-scale distribution of class A drugs.  His role, as  the  judge
    pointed out, was very much at the  lower  end  of  the  guidelines  for
    sentencing for supply.  There was no OASyS report and the judge clearly
    took into account the Offender Manager's  report  and  the  appellant's
    conduct in prison, including a number of adjudications and that he  had
    not undertaken rehabilitative courses  (see  paras  9  and  24  of  the
    determination).  It is clear that the  "warnings  for  poor  behaviour"
    were concerned with behaviour involving  delays  at  lock-up  time  and
    relatively  minor  acts  of  defiance  or  disobedience  (see  Offender
    Manager's report p.2).

67. Mr McVeety  accepted  that  he  had  some  difficulty  in  arguing  the
    appellant fell within the 'imperative grounds of public security' test.
    In truth, there  was  not  an  abundance  of  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's offending and post-conviction behaviour  put  before  Judge
    O'Brien.   In my judgment, the appellant's offending,  though  serious,
    comes nowhere near falling within the rubric of "imperative grounds  of
    public security".  Applying the approach of the  CJEC  in  PI  set  out
    above (and at [24]-[32]), this was not a case of an offence or offences
    of a "particularly high degree of seriousness" such that the  appellant
    posed "a direct threat  to  the  calm  and  physical  security  of  the
    population" (see [29]).  Neither the  established  enterprise  nor  the
    appellant's involvement brings his offending, even having regard to any
    future risk of offending, within the  heightened  ground  required  for
    deportation in reg 21(4)(a) of the EEA Regulations.

68. For these reasons, the judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal
    under reg 21(4)(a) did  not  involve  a  material  error  of  law  and,
    therefore, stands.

69. In the light of that conclusion, it is unnecessary to consider  whether
    the appellant's deportation could  be  justified  under  reg  21(3)  on
    "serious grounds of public policy" alone.

Decision

70. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision to deport him  under  regs  19(3)
    and 21 of the EEA Regulations did not involve a making of or a material
    error of law and stands.

71. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.




                                 Signed

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                 Date 4 October 2016
