
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00928/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th December 2014                            |On 19th January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               ibrahim serwan
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Grimshaw
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 10th September 2014.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born  on  16th  December  1985.   He
    arrived in the UK on 11th September 2001 and claimed  asylum.   He  was
    refused but granted four years' exceptional leave to remain until  11th
    February 2006.  On 21st January 2004 he was convicted of wounding  with
    intent  to  do  grievous  bodily  harm  and  sentenced  to  42  months'
    imprisonment.  The  sentencing  judge   made   a   recommendation   for
    deportation. The appeal against the decision to deport was dismissed on
    2nd September 2005.

 3. Following the court's ruling  in  HH  (Iraq)  [2008]  UKAIT  00051  the
    appellant was notified in January 2009 that his case would be reviewed.
     On 16th June 2011 the deportation order was withdrawn.

 4. A fresh decision was made on 30th April 2014 rejecting the  appellant's
    claim for asylum and leave to remain on human rights grounds.   On  the
    same day he was informed of a decision to make a deportation order  and
    that removal directions would be set to Iraq.

 5. The respondent applied Section 72 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. She noted that the appellant had not responded to  the
    opportunity given to him to rebut the presumption that he  would  be  a
    danger to the community if he were to remain  in  the  UK.   Given  the
    seriousness of the conviction, she considered that the presumption  had
    not been rebutted.

 6. The judge began her considerations of Section 72 with an examination of
    the remarks of the sentencing judge.  The  appellant  had  no  previous
    convictions save for, in 2008, he accepted a caution for the possession
    of cannabis.

 7. He had pleaded not guilty to the charge of causing grievous bodily harm
    with intent on the grounds that he was acting  in  self  defence.   The
    sentencing judge concluded that the appellant had grossly  over-reacted
    in first stabbing the victim with a bottle and then  slashing  his  arm
    causing injuries three inches deep. She  took  into  account  the  pre-
    sentencing report from the social worker based in the  Youth  Offending
    Team which suggested that he continued to deny that he carried a  knife
    on the occasion that he inflicted grievous bodily harm  on  the  victim
    which raised concerns regarding  his  truthfulness  and  perception  of
    response options.  She said that in general she believed that he  would
    not pose a risk to the community but the injuries were so serious  that
    the appellant must have retaliated with some ferocity and therefore, in
    similar circumstances, would be such a risk.

 8. The judge wrote as follows:

         "There is no further material before me to assist in my  assessment
         of risk.  Given the lack of insight on the part  of  the  appellant
         into his role and responsibility for his offending behaviour and in
         the absence of any supporting information to the contrary I am  led
         to the conclusion that he has not rebutted the presumption that his
         continued presence in the UK constitutes a danger to the community.
          As I have upheld the Section 72  certificate  the  appeal  on  the
         grounds that the appellant's expulsion from the UK would breach his
         Refugee Convention rights must fail."

 9. With respect to the risk on return she said that the country background
    information before  her  was  troubling  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the contested areas  of  Iraq  should  be  considered  as
    meeting  the  circumstances  of  internal  armed  conflict.   She   was
    satisfied that in those areas an individual was likely to face  a  real
    risk of serious harm and it followed that the appellant  could  not  be
    expected to return to his home area of Kirkuk or any of  the  contested
    areas on account of the general security situation.

10. She had not been directed to any  evidence  which  would  lead  her  to
    disagree with the respondent. The security situation in Baghdad has not
    changed significantly since the Tribunal concluded that the  degree  of
    indiscriminate violence characterising the conflict in Baghdad was  not
    of such a level  as  to  breach  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  Furthermore the  appellant  is  an  Iraqi  Kurd  and  could
    reasonably be expected to relocate within the KRG.

11. So far as Article 8 was concerned she applied the Section 117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She accepted that he was
    in a genuine, warm and loving relationship with Ms Iqbal, and with  his
    own son and that he acts as a father to Ms Iqbal's daughter.  It  would
    not be unduly harsh for Ms Iqbal and the children to remain in  the  UK
    without the  appellant.   The  relationship  was  of  relatively  short
    duration - they did not begin to cohabit until October 2012.  Paragraph
    399 of the Immigration Rules did not apply; she was unable to find  the
    appellant's position to be exceptional or compelling.

12. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

13. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in its assessment of certification under Section  72
    and its finding that he was a danger to the community, and  had  failed
    to take into account the specific risk factors and  the  reasonableness
    of relocation. She  had  not  considered  the  best  interests  of  the
    children as a primary consideration and omitted material  factors  when
    assessing Article 8 including the delay in issuing a deportation order.



14. The appellant was 15 years old when he arrived in the UK and  committed
    the offence whilst a minor.  He was released from detention in December
    2005.  The judge referred  to  a  pre-sentence  report  from  2004  and
    ignored relevant evidence including evidence postdating it.   In  Judge
    Hall's determination of 2005 there is reference to letters  of  support
    from staff at HM Y01 Portland and  a  number  of  character  references
    postdating the criminal sentence including for his voluntary work  with
    adults requiring support with mental health and learning  difficulties.



15. The Tribunal's focus on the denial of the use of a knife, as opposed to
    a broken bottle, fell into the same error as that identified  in  AM  V
    SSHD [2012] Civ 1634:

         "Unhappily, experience tells us that contrition is no guarantee  of
         reform, any more than personal pride is a bar to rehabilitation.  A
         man who faces expulsion from his family might persuade himself that
         he was not guilty after all, but that does not mean that he  cannot
         resolve never to place himself in a position of  temptation  again.
         I recognise that  in  the  case  of  persistent  sexual  offending,
         particularly against children, it is  commonly  understood  that  a
         refusal by an  offender  to  accept  guilt  reveals  an  entrenched
         attitude of mind towards sexual offences which enhances the risk of
         repeat offences.  This was not a sexual case.  I  do  not  consider
         that the UT was correct  to  take  such  a  firm  view  about  this
         appellant's  risk  of  re-offending  based  solely  upon  its   own
         assessment of the implications  of  the  appellant's  denial.   The
         appellant had undoubtedly committed a very serious offence.  He had
         been employed to act as a driver for a  man  who  was  supplying  a
         substantial quantity of class A drugs recently  imported  into  the
         United Kingdom.  He was not however an  organiser  or  manager  and
         there is no evidence that his involvement  was  greater  than  that
         which emerged at this trial.   Rehabilitation  is  often,  but  not
         exclusively, accompanied by a full confession."

16. Furthermore the fact that the respondent had taken ten years to issue a
    valid deportation order and five years post HH (Iraq) to review whether
    to issue a deportation  order  did  not  indicate  that  she  seriously
    considered him a danger to the community.  There  was  evidence  of  an
    incident where the appellant's home window was smashed by his partner's
    family whilst his partner was inside and despite this  provocation,  he
    did not react adversely.  The judge did not explain why  this  was  not
    evidence in his favour.  Furthermore,  the  judge  did  not  take  into
    account the whole of the sentencing remarks  recorded  by  Judge  Hall,
    which indicated that he was not a danger to  the  community,  including
    the acceptance by the judge that the attack was not unprovoked  and  he
    was not actively looking for trouble.

17. In failing to take into account relevant  considerations  and  in  over
    reliance on the issue of denial the Tribunal erred in law.

18.  The  Tribunal  also  erred  in  its  assessment  of  risk  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Article 3 grounds.  It  was  accepted  that
    the contested areas including Kirkuk now meant that the appellant faced
    a real risk of serious harm in his  home  area.   She  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that relocation to Baghdad or the KRG  was
    safe or reasonable.  It was argued that as a Sunni Muslim he  would  be
    at risk of sectarian violence in Baghdad, which is escalating, but  the
    evidence was not referred to in the determination.   The  Secretary  of
    State accepted that being a Sunni Muslim was an enhanced risk  category
    as was being a Kurd in a local minority.  It was  not  good  enough  to
    rely on the previous CG case when it had already been accepted that the
    situation had changed so dramatically and the key findings  in  the  CG
    case were no longer valid.  Furthermore the appellant was  particularly
    vulnerable since he had left Iraq when 15 years old in the  Saddam  era
    and had no experience  of  living  in  the  present  era  of  sectarian
    violence and civil war.  It was accepted that he had no family in  Iraq
    which meant that he  would  be  especially  vulnerable  in  Baghdad  or
    elsewhere.  The judge failed to properly assess the  reasonableness  of
    relocation with respect to the KRG and did not deal with  the  argument
    that the appellant would have  to  relocate  without  his  partner  and
    children because the area of relocation is simply  unsafe  for  British
    citizens.

19. Finally the judge erred in respect of her consideration of  Article  8,
    in particular did not properly assess the  factors  in  Maslov  and  in
    particular the Respondent's delay  in  making  the  valid  decision  to
    deport.

20. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Landes on 8th October 2014.

21. On 16th October 2014 the Secretary of State  served  a  Reply,  stating
    that the  judge  had  limited  evidence  on  which  to  carry  out  the
    assessment of risk and his continual denial indicated that he was not a
    person who  could  be  trusted.   The  findings  on  family  life  were
    reasoned.

Submissions

22. Mr Siddique relied on his grounds.  The judge had failed to  take  into
    account all material considerations, in particular the minority at  the
    age of the offence, character evidence in the respondent's  bundle  and
    the fact that there had been no re-offending in the last ten years. The
    appellant had adduced evidence to rebut the presumption that he  was  a
    danger to the community.  He had committed a single  offence  11  years
    ago when he was 17.  There was no premeditation.   There  was  powerful
    evidence that he no longer presented any danger  in  that  he  had  not
    reoffended and, under the Rehabilitation of  Offenders  Act,  would  in
    fact have been rehabilitated.

23. It was accepted that the appellant had a genuine parental  relationship
    with a British citizen under the age of 18.  It would not be reasonable
    to expect the children to leave the UK and unduly harsh to expect  them
    to remain here without their father.  It was  in  the  children's  best
    interests to be raised by both parents.  There was  evidence  from  the
    independent social worker of a strong attachment between the  appellant
    and the children.  Their mother was isolated from her  own  family  and
    had a history of domestic violence which had a  significant  effect  on
    her parenting ability.  The social worker had a particular  concern  in
    relation to how the appellant's daughter would react to the loss of the
    appellant and how she will cope with the understanding  of  the  issues
    surrounding her birth father.  He would not be going to  a  safe  place
    where the children could visit.  The family's constant concern for  his
    safety for an indeterminate  period  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children.

24. The appellant speaks English and although he has not got permission  to
    work is clearly capable of working.  He has not claimed public funds.

25. There has also been considerable delay on the part of  the  respondent.
    The appellant committed the offence in 2003.  The deportation order was
    made in 2005.  In 2008 it was accepted that the order was  invalid  and
    the decision withdrawn.  It was reviewed in 2009 and no  decision  made
    until February 2014.  During that  time  the  appellant's  private  and
    family life developed.

26. So far as the reasonableness of relocation was concerned, the judge had
    not mentioned  any  of  the  objective  evidence  referred  to  in  the
    appellant's bundle and had not considered his individual circumstances.
     The appellant had never been to Baghdad and left Iraq when he  was  15
    years old. The previous judge had accepted that he  had  no  family  in
    Iraq. He would have no knowledge of how to look  after  himself  there.
    It was the Home Office's own evidence that it was not safe to travel to
    the KRG and the appellant would not have the necessary documentation to
    access resources there.  His British family would not be able to  visit
    him because  Iraq  was  not  safe  for  British  citizens,  a  relevant
    consideration in deciding whether relocation would be reasonable.

27. Mr Diwnycz said that he stood by the deportation order.  He had  little
    to add to the Home Office bundle.  He accepted that family life existed
    in the UK but submitted that deportation was nevertheless proportionate
    in view of the fact that a serious crime had been committed.   He  said
    that he could not advance anything on the protection issue and accepted
    that the appellant could not  go  back  to  Kirkuk  although  he  could
    relocate.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

28. Under Section 72(4) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002:

         "A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a particular serious crime and to constitute  a  danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom if -

         (a)  he is convicted of  an  offence  specified  by  order  of  the
             Secretary of State, or

         (b)  he is convicted outside the UK of an offence and the Secretary
             of State certifies that in his opinion the offence is  similar
             to an offence specified by order under paragraph (a)."

29. It is not argued that  the  appellant's  offence  does  not  raise  the
    presumption under Section 72.  The  issue  is  whether  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the presumption had not been rebutted.

30. It is clear that the judge relied very heavily on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant continue to deny his possession of  a  knife  which,  as  the
    Court of Appeal identified in AM v SSHD is not an  adequate  basis  for
    concluding that rehabilitation is not possible without full  acceptance
    of guilt. The judge did not identify any other  reasons  for  upholding
    the certificate.

31. She said that there was no further material to assist in her assessment
    of risk, but that is not correct.  The fact is that the  appellant  has
    not re-offended since the index offence took place in  2004,  save  for
    possession of cannabis in 2008.

32. There was also the  evidence  from  the  prison.   Judge  Hall  in  his
    determination wrote:

         "The Appellant has produced a number  of  letters  written  in  his
         support from Portland Young Offenders Institution.   These  letters
         confirm that the Appellant  is  a  good  prisoner  who  has  proved
         himself to be reliable, undertaken  tasks  asked  of  him  and  has
         attended courses for the purposes  of  bettering  himself.   It  is
         stated by Race Relations Liaison Officer that the Appellant 'is  or
         very close to a model prisoner, he is on the enhanced level of  the
         prisoner's incentive and earned privileges system'.

33. A letter states that the appellant has never had any behaviour warnings
    or adjudications whilst in custody and

      i) "in my opinion I feel quite confident that he will not reoffend  in
         society.  He is a very mature and sensible person whose outlook  on
         life is way beyond his years."

34. Another which sets out that the appellant has taken responsibility  for
    his actions and deeply regrets his crime.  Serious doubts are expressed
    about his ability to cope on being sent back to Iraq.  The letter says:



      i) "I believe he deserves a second chance and as a  positive  peaceful
         Muslim voice in this country we may benefit more from  his  staying
         than from his deportation."

35. There was also evidence in the appellant's statement that his partner's
    mother and sister threw a brick through their window,  and  her  sister
    was arrested.  The evidence that he had not risen  to  provocation  was
    not referred to by the judge.

36. Finally, the appellant was a minor when the offence  took  place.   His
    relative immaturity at the time is also a  significant  factor  in  the
    assessment of whether he presently poses a danger to the public.

The Refugee Convention

37. I conclude that the judge did not have regard to relevant  matters,  in
    relation to the certificate, which is an error of law, and the decision
    must therefore be set aside. I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    rebutted the presumption that he constitutes a danger to the community.
    The  certificate  is  discharged  for  the  reasons  set   out   above.
    Accordingly he is not excluded  from  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.

38. It is the view of UNHCR that many persons fleeing Iraq  are  likely  to
    lead to the 1951 Convention criteria for refugee status. The appellant,
    as a Sunni Kurd, is not claiming a fear of the actions of ISIS. However
    the respondent accepts in the COI report that  Sunnis  should  also  be
    considered at risk of serious harm in the  contested  areas,  and  that
    Kurds where they are a local minority will be at increased risk. Kirkuk
    has a large Arab Kurdish and Turkmen population  and  is  volatile  and
    violent. The Tribunal in MK (documents - relocation) Iraq CG[2012] UKUT
    126 described the city  as  hazardous,  there  being  a  good  deal  of
    evidence of random and targeted violence in the city. Since  that  time
    the situation has deteriorated.

39. No argument was made by the respondent  that  there  is  no  Convention
    reason in this case. The risk to the appellant arises from his religion
    and ethnicity as a consequence of sectarian  reprisals  against  Sunnis
    and Kurds. The sole remaining issue is internal flight.

Subsidiary protection

40. There is no challenge in the grounds to the respondent's assertion that
    the appellant is excluded from humanitarian protection because  he  has
    committed  a  serious  crime  having  been  sentenced  to   42   months
    imprisonment after being  convicted  of  wounding  with  intent  to  do
    grievous bodily harm. He therefore falls within the exclusion  criteria
    set out in Rule 339D(i).

Article 8

41. So far as the Article 8 considerations  are  concerned,  the  challenge
    under the Rules is to the judge's assessment of  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the  person  who
    is to be deported.

42.  She  properly  applied  the  relevant  sections  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 brought in by the Immigration Act 2014.
     She was entitled to take into account that  the  relationship  was  of
    relatively short duration. She plainly had proper regard to the  social
    worker's report and the concerns as to the emotional wellbeing  of  the
    children, which may be compromised if  the  appellant  is  returned  to
    Iraq. The partner's circumstances were analysed in some detail and  the
    judge was entitled to  conclude  that  she  would  be  able  to  access
    necessary support  from  the  statutory  services  in  the  appellant's
    absence.  There was no requirement, as the  grounds  suggest,  for  the
    judge to go into the background which resulted in Mrs  Iqbal's  present
    vulnerability. The welfare of the children was clearly at the forefront
    of her mind.  She was satisfied that  their  mother  could  meet  their
    basic needs and had the capacity to  manage  their  distress  at  being
    separated from the appellant.

43. Nor am I satisfied that the judge erred in her  broader  considerations
    of Article 8.  The factors referred  to  in  the  grounds,  whilst  not
    referred to in the conclusions, namely the circumstances of the initial
    offence, the length of time that the appellant has spent in the UK, the
    lack of family in Iraq and  the  respondent's  delay  in  reaching  her
    decision were all matters which had been referred to at some  point  in
    the determination, and formed a part of  the  reasoning  process.   The
    judge's  conclusions  were  open  to  her  and  the  grounds  have  not
    established that the decision was unlawful.

Further Submissions

44. Mr Diwnycz did not wish to seek an adjournment to prepare  for  further
    submissions and said that he had little to add.  He  did  not  wish  to
    cross-examine the appellant.

45. Mr Siddique submitted that it was accepted that the appellant would  be
    at risk as a Sunni Kurd in Kirkuk.  It was accepted by Judge Hall  that
    he had no immediate family in Iraq save for  an  aunt  who  was  living
    there in August 2001.  According to the  information  on  the  SEF  his
    parents had died before he came to the UK in  2001  and  his  siblings'
    whereabouts were unknown as at that date,.

46. The appellant left Iraq when he was 15 and has now, at the age  of  28,
    spent nearly half of his life in the UK.  The dangers when he left were
    different from those which are present today.  He  does  not  have  the
    life skills to deal  with  protecting  himself  against  indiscriminate
    attacks by terrorists.

47. Mr Siddique submitted that the appellant would not be  able  to  travel
    safely to the KRG.  His family could not visit  him  in  his  place  of
    relocation which went to the issue of  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect him to go  there.   He  relied  on  the  recently  issued  UNHCR
    guidance.



Findings and Conclusions

48. It is accepted by the respondent that the Sunnis should  be  considered
    at risk of serious harm in the contested areas, which  include  Kirkuk.
    It is also accepted that  return  to  non-contested  areas  should  not
    involve travel through areas identified as  being  contested.  The  COI
    report at 1.3.19 acknowledges a real risk to civilians  who  choose  to
    travel by road through the contested areas.

49. It is the respondent's position  that  relocation  to  the  KRG  or  to
    Baghdad is reasonable. In the reasons for refusal  letter  she  asserts
    that the appellant could relocate to the KRG where  he  had  previously
    resided,  which  is  incorrect,  since  the  appellant's  only   former
    residence was Kirkuk, or to Baghdad. She relies on the  previous  UNCHR
    guidelines dated May 2012.

50. So far as Baghdad is concerned, the reasons for refusal letter  asserts
    that the picture is one of an improving security  situation  and  there
    has been a fall of over 80% in the number of casualties from  its  peak
    in 2006-7 to 2009-11, although it is  clearly  based  on  out  of  date
    information. The Secretary of State continued to rely on  the  findings
    in HM & ors (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 which  found  that
    the evidence did  not  establish  that  the  degree  of  indiscriminate
    violence characterising the conflict in Baghdad  was  at  such  a  high
    level to breach article  15(c)  and  that  there  were  no  reasons  to
    indicate  that  the  security  situation   in   Baghdad   has   changed
    significantly since HM(2) such as to make its  conclusions  unreliable.
    Somewhat paradoxically it also that the implications of the decision in
    HM(Iraq) [2011] EWCA Civ 1536 was found there was no up-to-date country
    guidance from the Tribunal on the situation in Iraq.

51. The COI guidance dated August 2014 does recognise that  these  civilian
    casualty levels have risen significantly and are at their highest level
    since 2007 demonstrating a worsening  security  situation.  It  accepts
    that there are very high levels of  new  population  displacement,  the
    ongoing security situation being the overwhelming factor driving it.

52. It is the UNHCR's most recent position, dated 27th October  2014,  that
    asylum claims should not be refused  on  the  basis  that  there  is  a
    relocation alternative. It states that since the 2012  guidelines  were
    published, Iraq has experienced  a  new  surge  in  violence  and  that
    casualties so far in 2014 represents the highest total since the height
    of the sectarian conflict in 2006-7. Baghdad  was  the  worst  affected
    governorate in 2014 in terms of casualty figures.

53. Whilst the UNHCR states that the security situation  in  the  Kurdistan
    region remains relative stable, it also states that there are  reported
    access restrictions particularly into the  Kurdistan  region  of  Iraq.
    UNHCR does not consider it appropriate for States to deny persons  from
    Iraq international protection on that basis.

54. At paragraph 9 the report states:

      i) "Reports indicate a resurgency of sectarian reprisal with bodies of
         Sunni men found blindfolded, handcuffed and apparently executed  in
         different parts of the country, primarily in  Baghdad  (21)   UNAMI
         reported that Sunnis  in  Basra  governance  had  been  exposed  to
         threats, abductions and killings (22)."

55. At paragraph 14:

         "The escalation in violence has further generated additional deaths
         from a lack of  access  to  food,  water  and  medical  care  (47),
         injuries  and  disabilities  (48),  destruction  of  property   and
         livelihoods (49) and serious impairment of access  to  basic  life-
         sustaining  services  (50).   The  current  conflict   is   largely
         concentrate in the central and northern governorates  of  Al-Anbar,
         Ninewa, Salah al-Din, Diyala, Kirkuk and  Babel.   Baghdad  remains
         the  centre  of  frequent  mass  casualty  attacks  often  but  not
         exclusively launched against predominantly  Shi'ite  neighbourhoods
         and has seen  an  upsurge  in  sectarian  violence.   The  security
         situation in the Kurdistan region remains  relatively  stable  with
         security forces remaining on  high  alert  and  imposing  tightened
         security to prevent IS and associated groups from staging  attacks.
         Armed clashes also  occur  between  Kurdish  forces  and  ISIS  and
         associated armed groups on the borders of the Kurdistan  region  as
         the latter had also advanced into areas  previously  controlled  by
         the Kurdish forces."

    The report concludes:

         "As the situation in Iraq remains highly  fluid  and  volatile  and
         since all parts of the country are reported to have been  affected,
         directly or indirectly, by the ongoing crisis, UNHCR  urges  states
         not to forcibly return persons originating from Iraq until tangible
         improvements in  the  security  and  human  rights  situation  have
         occurred.  In the current circumstances, many persons fleeing  Iraq
         are likely to meet the 1951 Convention criteria for refugee status.
          When in the context of the adjudication of an individual case of a
         person originating from Iraq, 1951 Convention  criteria  are  found
         not to apply, broader refugee criteria  as  contained  in  relevant
         regional instruments  or  complimentary  forms  of  protection  are
         likely to apply.  In the current circumstances,  with  massive  new
         internal  displacement  coupled  with  a  large-scale  humanitarian
         crisis,   mounting   sectarian   tensions   and   reported   access
         restrictions, particularly into the Kurdistan region of Iraq, UNHCR
         does in principle not consider it appropriate for  states  to  deny
         persons from Iraq international protection  on  the  basis  of  the
         applicability of an internal flight or relocation alternative."

56. The appellant is not required to demonstrate the degree of risk in  the
    proposed area of relocation as that which exists in his home area.

57. The Court of Appeal in AH (Sudan) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 297,  at  para
    33, set out  the  criteria  to  be  applied  when  considering  whether
    internal flight would be unduly harsh and held

      i) "the starting point must be the conditions prevailing in the  place
         of habitual residence.

     ii) those conditions must be compared with the conditions prevailing in
         the safe haven.

    iii) the latter conditions must be assessed according to the impact that
         they will have on the person with the characteristics of the asylum
         seeker.

     iv)  if  under  those  conditions  the  asylum  seeker  cannot  live  a
         relatively normal life according to the standards of his country it
         will be unduly harsh to expect him to go to the safe haven,

      v) dramatic changes of lifestyle for instance from city to a desert or
         into slum conditions should not be forced on the asylum seeker."

58. Taking the information from the "UNHCR position  on  returns  to  Iraq"
    dated 27 October 2014, it is clear that there has  been  a  significant
    resurgence of  sectarian  reprisals,  particularly  in  Baghdad,  which
    remains the centre of frequent attacks. The FCO advises against all but
    essential travel to Baghdad.

59. The appellant argues that he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  KRG
    because it would require him to pass through contested areas.  Moreover
    although the COI refers to returns to Baghdad  or  Erbil  International
    airport, the most recent Foreign Office travel advice  advises  against
    all travel to Erbil city and all areas west  of  the  city  within  the
    province.

60. UNHCR has particular concerns that hundreds of thousands  of  displaced
    Iraqis, in particular in the Kurdistan region face challenges to access
    safety as a result of ongoing fighting. It presently hosts over 850,000
    IDP's. The 200,000 Syrians who have sought refuge  are  mostly  in  the
    Kurdistan region. Moreover IDP's face growing challenges  in  obtaining
    the renewal of civil identification documentation there, which  usually
    require them to return to their place of origin which is generally  not
    feasible. They face challenges   accessing  services.  An  IDP  without
    valid documentation may be unable to register with local authorities in
    the region thereby preventing regularisation of stay and limiting their
    access to assistance and public services. Access restrictions appear to
    be linked to  certain  criteria  such  as  family  composition  or  the
    requirement to have a sponsor in the concerned governorate and in  some
    cases persons seeking to  relocate  are  barred  entry.  If  access  is
    granted, there may be additional requirements for IDPs to  be  able  to
    register with local authorities.

61. The primary shelter arrangement is to stay with the  host  communities.
    Otherwise displaced persons occupy unfinished or abandoned buildings or
    live in the open in substandard living  conditions,  exposing  them  to
    significant health risks. A number of camps are in use although not all
    meet minimum standards.  Significant  numbers  of  schools  accommodate
    IDP's but many are occupied by armed groups or  have  been  damaged  or
    destroyed as a result of the conflict.

62. More generally, casualty  figures  in  2014  have  spiked  compared  to
    previous years. Over 13,600 civilians died  between  January  and  late
    October 2014 in the country as a whole.  The escalation in violence has
    generated additional deaths there from a lack of  access  to  food  and
    water and medical care. Humanitarian needs have  escalated  rapidly  in
    the region with the influx of 200,000  Syrian  refugees.  More  than  5
    million people are currently in need of humanitarian assistance  across
    Iraq with only 1.5 million currently reached  by  humanitarian  actors.
    The UN has declared the highest level  emergency  designation,  and  in
    areas  of  displacement   local   authorities   and   communities   are
    overstretched, unable to provide IDPs with basic services.

63. Very considerable weight should be attached to the guidelines, although
    they are not determinative. There has been a lack of argument from  the
    respondent and no engagement at all with them. There is a dearth of up-
    to-date analysis of the present ever changing situation  in  Iraq,  the
    most recent country guidance case  being  some  three  years  old,  and
    predates the current crisis.  Inevitably  this  decision  is  based  on
    limited evidence.

64. Applying the guidance  set  out  in  AH,  the  starting  point  is  the
    situation in Kirkuk which the respondent accepts is  a  contested  area
    and where a real risk of harm is established.  It  is  clear  that  the
    situation in Kirkuk is more dangerous than Baghdad or the KRG,  but  at
    least so far as Baghdad is concerned, the difference is one  of  degree
    rather than of substance. Most of the large-scale  attacks  take  place
    there. So far as the KRG is concerned, on the basis of the  information
    from UNHCR an IDP there faces real problems accessing basic services.

65. Would the appellant be able to live a relatively normal life in  either
    place according to the standards of Iraq? The question  of  what  those
    standards should be is not an easy one to determine. In AH (Sudan)  the
    Court was concerned with economic survival and  the  reasonableness  of
    expecting subsistence farmers to relocate  to  camps  in  Khartoum  The
    Court observed  that  in  most  cases  where  internal  relocation  was
    considered, the relocation proposal  has  been  between  parts  of  the
    country which share broadly similar patterns. The  basic  structure  of
    the refugee's life would be the same in the safe haven as it was in the
    area of habitual residence. It was looking  at  a  situation  which  is
    relatively static.

66. It is difficult  to  translate  that  across  to  a  country  which  is
    presently  experiencing  an  upsurge  in   large-scale   targeted   and
    indiscriminate violence. And there is no obvious answer to the question
    of whether  the  comparison  should  be  made  between  the  conditions
    prevailing in Kirkuk and a safe haven in 2014,  or  over  the  last  10
    years or pre-conflict Iraq. It is clear from the figures in the refusal
    letter that there have been continuous mass casualties  since  the  war
    but aside from the peak in 2006-07, the present situation is far  worse
    than any in the last 10 years.

67. Leaving that aside, on the basis of the limited evidence before me,  it
    is difficult to see from the evidence of UNHCR, undisputed before me by
    the respondent, that the appellant could in any sense, whatever  period
    is chosen, live a normal life in the KRG because of the extreme strains
    imposed by the influx of refugees particularly from  Syria  and  others
    fleeing the contested areas.

68. So far as Baghdad is concerned, since most of the mass casualties  from
    suicide attacks and car bombs occurred there, and  it  is  the  primary
    resurgent of sectarian reprisals against Sunnis, the  risk  is  to  his
    safety. The appellant has particular  characteristics  which  make  him
    more vulnerable than the general population, namely he is a person  who
    has been out of Iraq for 14 years, left when he was a child of  15  and
    has not been there in the post-Saddam era. He has no  immediate  family
    who would be able to assist him. He lacks the skills and connections to
    help him avoid the risk of sectarian attack.

Decision

69. There is no error in law in relation to the  judge's  consideration  of
    the Article 8 claim, which shall stand. Her decision is set aside  with
    respect to the section  72  certificate.   The  following  decision  is
    substituted.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


