
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
DA/00738/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 June 2019                           |On 25 June 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                              aivars aleksandrs
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Farrell of Peter G Farrell Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant who is a citizen of Latvia, born in  1984,  appeals  with
    permission the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle.   For
    reasons given in  his  decision  dated  25  February  2019,  the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 28 November 2017 to make a deportation order.

 2. The offences leading to that decision were recorded by the Secretary of
    State as follows:

         "On 6 November 2017 at Glasgow City JP court you were convicted  of
         Possession of a controlled drug and admonished.

         On 15 February 2013 at Vilnius District Court you were convicted of
         Robbery and sentenced to 3 years imprisonment.

         On 21 December 2010 at Vilnius City 3rd Court you were convicted of
         Theft  and  Intentional  damage  or  destruction  of  property  and
         sentenced to 1 year and 6 months imprisonment.

         On 9 May 2005 at Kaunas City District Court you were  convicted  of
         Theft and sentenced to 1 year and 10 days suspended  for  2  years.
         On 27 April 2006 the suspended penalty measure was revoked.

         On 4 June 2004 you were  convicted  at  Kaunas  Regional  Court  of
         causing  grievous  bodily  harm   and   sentenced   to   3   months
         imprisonment."

 3. The judge set out relevant matters at [9] of his decision as follows:

         "9.  (a) The appellant is a Latvian national  on  08/10/1984.   The
                  appellant came to the UK in 2002 with his father and  made
                  an unsuccessful claim for  asylum.   In  spring  2003  the
                  appellant met Trebor Anderson, a British citizen who lives
                  in Glasgow.  Within a few  months  the  appellant  and  Mr
                  Anderson had  entered  into  a  relationship.   After  the
                  appellant's  application  for  asylum  was   refused,   he
                  returned to Latvia towards the end of 2003.

             (b)  Whilst in the UK  between  2002  &  2003,  the  appellant
                  attempted to end a drug habit he had developed.   For  the
                  first time  he  was  prescribed  methadone.   Through  the
                  winter of 2003 the appellant and Mr Anderson  remained  in
                  contact.  Mr Anderson visited the appellant in  Latvia  in
                  December 2003.  Contact between the two men petered out at
                  the start of 2004, when  the  appellant  left  Latvia  and
                  moved to Lithuania.

             (c)  In Lithuania the appellant has greater access  to  drugs.
                  The  appellant  became  addicted  to  heroin.   His   drug
                  addiction led him to a life of crime.  On 4 June 2004  the
                  appellant was convicted of causing grievous bodily harm at
                  Kaunas City District Court.  He received  a  three  months
                  custodial  sentence.   On  9  May  2005  at  Kanunas  City
                  District Court the appellant was convicted  of  theft  and
                  given a suspended sentence of one year & 10 days.  One  of
                  the conditions of the  suspended  sentence  was  that  the
                  appellant should not leave Latvia for more than a week  at
                  a time for a period of two years from conviction.

             (d)   The  appellant  breached  the  terms  of  the  suspended
                  sentence by returning to the UK in October 2005.  In April
                  2006 the  appellant  returned  to  Latvia.   Although  the
                  appellant's suspended sentence was imposed  in  Lithuania,
                  the appellant was taken into custody in Latvia and  served
                  the custodial sentence there.

             (e)  On release from prison in Latvia, the appellant  returned
                  to Lithuania where he resumed his drug habit.  He remained
                  in Lithuania between 2006 and the  end  of  2010.   On  21
                  December 2010 the appellant was  convicted  of  theft  and
                  intentional   damage   and   sentenced   to   18    months
                  imprisonment.  On  15  February  2013  the  appellant  was
                  convicted  of  robbery  at  Vilnius  District  Court   and
                  sentenced to 3 years imprisonment.

             (f)  Between 2004 and 2013 there was no  contact  between  the
                  appellant and Mr Anderson.  Whilst in prison between  2013
                  and 2016 the appellant started to  telephone  Mr  Anderson
                  once every second  month.   On  release  from  prison  the
                  appellant  moved  back  to  Latvia  and  lived  with   his
                  girlfriend until mid-2017.

             (g)  In August 2017 the appellant arrived, unannounced, at  Mr
                  Anderson door in Glasgow.  He has lived with  Mr  Anderson
                  since then.

             (h)  On  6  November  2017  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
                  possession of a class B drug at Glasgow city JP court.  He
                  was admonished.

             (i)  On 28 November 2017 the  respondent  made  a  deportation
                  order.   The  appellant   was   taken   into   immigration
                  detention.  The appellant was granted bail on  24  January
                  2018.  He has been at liberty since then and has continued
                  to live with Mr Anderson.

             (j)  On release from immigration detention the appellant, once
                  again, took heroin.  The appellant sought  help  with  his
                  addiction and at some point in early 2018, he was  put  on
                  the methadone programme.  He continues to take  90  ml  of
                  methadone per day.

             (k)  Mr Anderson suffers from a number of  disabling  physical
                  health conditions.  The appellant cooks and cleans for  Mr
                  Anderson.  The appellant keeps  Mr  Anderson's  house  and
                  garden, and carries  out  the  ordinary  household  chores
                  which require strength and energy  for  Mr  Anderson.   Mr
                  Anderson is now in his late 60s.  He suffers from  Crohn's
                  disease, COPD and heart disease.

             (l)  In November 2016 the appellant was offered  a  job  in  a
                  garage.  Since January  2019  he  has  worked  as  a  tyre
                  fitter.

             (m)  There is no need for an anonymity order."

 4. After directing himself as to the relevant Regulations (23  and  27(5))
    and the nature of the offending, the judge explained at [10](h):

         "10. (h) I have to determine whether or  not  the  appellant  is  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
                  fundamental interests of society.  On 23rd  November  2018
                  the Upper Tribunal  directed  that  the  appellant  should
                  provide details of progress on  the  methadone  programme.
                  The appellant has ignored that  direction.   There  is  no
                  satisfactory evidence  of  the  appellant's  progress,  or
                  abstinence  from  drugs,  before  me.   The  most   recent
                  information I have is a letter  from  the  appellant's  GP
                  dated 17 September 2018 which says that the  appellant  is
                  prescribed methadone and was last seen in September  2018.
                  As a matter-of-fact, the appellant is  still  addicted  to
                  drugs.  He  is  maintained  on  methadone.   There  is  no
                  reliable evidence of rehabilitation placed before me.  The
                  appellant might be trying to change his life, but the  sad
                  fact is that the drugs which caused  his  criminality  are
                  still a threat to the  appellant's  stability.   The  only
                  conclusion I can reach is that the appellant is  still  at
                  risk of reoffending.  The offences the appellant committed
                  are serious crimes which have a significant impact on  the
                  victim and include robbery.  If the appellant were  not  a
                  recidivist he would  not  have  committed  an  offence  in
                  November 2017.  The fact that he committed a non-analogous
                  offence indicates that the  appellant  has  not  separated
                  himself from a life tainted by crime."

 5. He continued at [10](i) and (j):

         "10. (i) The appellant's actions have placed members of the  public
                  at risk of serious harm.  The appellant says that  he  has
                  learned his lesson; he says that his  offending  behaviour
                  is not all his fault.  The  weight  of  reliable  evidence
                  indicates the appellant had not been  rehabilitated,  that
                  he had not integrated into society and that he is at  risk
                  of reoffending.

             (j)  The appellant has demonstrated that he is  a  resourceful
                  man.  The appellant's own evidence is that  he  has  never
                  committed a  crime  in  Latvia.   The  appellant's  mother
                  continues to  live  in  Latvia.   The  appellant's  former
                  girlfriends are in Latvia.  It was in Lithuania  that  the
                  appellant's drug habit  became  dominant.   The  appellant
                  says that he is at risk of relapsing into drug abuse if he
                  returns, but that claim is contradicted by the appellant's
                  oral  evidence.   The  appellant  insisted  in  his   oral
                  evidence that he has never taken drugs in Latvia  and  has
                  not committed a crime in Latvia.  The appellant said (many
                  times in his evidence) that the penalties  in  Latvia  for
                  illicit drug use are far more severe  than  in  Lithuania,
                  and the severity of those  penalties  dissuaded  him  from
                  abusing drugs in Latvia.  Return to Latvia  separates  the
                  appellant  from  the  bad  influence  of  his   Lithuanian
                  friends, removes the appellant from the drug abuse that he
                  descended into a Lithuania and places the appellant  in  a
                  country  where  he  has  already   had   supportive   drug
                  rehabilitation treatment."

 6. After reviewing the offences committed outside the United Kingdom,  the
    judge proceeded with a risk assessment at paragraph (f) as follows.

         "(f)  The  appellant  was  convicted  of  crimes  of  violence  and
             dishonesty.  There is no reliable evidence of  rehabilitation.
             The appellant's own evidence demonstrates a  lack  of  insight
             into  his  offending  behaviour.   The  appellant's  offending
             behaviour was driven by heroin use, but the appellant  is  not
             yet drug-free.  The appellant gives a candid account of  using
             heroin and cannabis in the UK.  He  says  that  he  has  taken
             nothing other than prescribed methadone for at  least  a  year
             now, but he is taking 90 ml of methadone a day.   Although  he
             is making progress, there is still a significant risk of  drug
             abuse.  The appellant's addiction  and  his  lack  of  insight
             indicates that the appellant is at risk of reoffending."

    before concluding at (k):

         "(k) The appellant's convictions are serious.  On the  facts  as  I
             find them to be there is a real risk of reoffending.   On  the
             facts as I find them to be the  appellant's    deportation  is
             justified under regulation 23 of the 2016 regulations."

 7. The judge then turned to Article 8  and  considered  the  case  in  the
    context of s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    and thereafter to paragraphs 398 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.  He
    directed himself that they did not apply but considered  they  provided
    useful guidance.  He concluded at [20]:

         "20. The appellant does not have children.  The appellant has  only
             been in the UK for a  maximum  of  18  months.   There  is  no
             reliable evidence of cultural integration, so  only  paragraph
             399A(c) could  have  any  relevance.   There  is  no  reliable
             evidence of very significant obstacles  to  integration.   The
             appellant is  a  Latvian  national.   His  first  language  is
             Latvian.   He  has  transferrable  skills   which   make   him
             employable.  I have found that the  appellant's  removal  will
             not breach any article 8 rights.  I have  already  found  that
             the respondent's decision is not disproportionate."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Neville
    in response to succinct grounds of challenge  arguing  that  there  was
    lack of clarity as to the level of risk found by  the  judge.   It  was
    incumbent upon the judge not just to ask whether  there  was  risk  but
    also the level of that risk.  The appellant was in receipt of methadone
    in the United Kingdom and had indicated that he was unlikely to receive
    such treatment in his own country.  There had been a  failure  to  have
    adequate regard to rehabilitation.

 9. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Neville
    considered that the challenge to the judge's  reasoning  was  arguable.
    He observed at [3]:

         "(3) Nonetheless, the challenge to the  Judge's  reasons  for  that
             decision is arguable.  The last violent offence was  in  early
             2013 in Lithuania.  Between entering the UK in August 2017 and
             the hearing on 18 February 2019 the appellant had received  an
             admonishment for possession of a class B drug in November 2017
             - described by the Judge as "non-analogous" and relapsed  into
             taking heroin on being subject to deportation and  immigration
             detention.   Yet  that  heroin  use  had  been  promptly   and
             successfully treated with methadone  and  there  had  been  no
             further offending.  The Judge finds at  para  10(f)  that  the
             appellant was "making progress."  That the reasoning  at  para
             10(h) is insufficient  to  justify  the  Judge's  finding  the
             appellant still posed  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
             serious risk of violent offending is sufficiently arguable  to
             merit consideration by the Upper Tribunal.  I grant permission
             on both grounds."

    before concluding at (4):

         "(4) Surprisingly, the grounds do not attempt any challenge on  the
             Judge seemingly having approached  proportionality  under  the
             Regulations by applying the criteria laid down  by  paras  398
             and 399 of the Immigration Rules and  ss.117A-D  of  the  2002
             Act.  Taking careful note of para 69-70 of AZ (error  of  law:
             jurisdiction; PTA practice) [2018] UKUT 245 (IAC) this is  not
             an appropriate case in which to grant permission  myself.   It
             is for the appellant as  to  whether  his  grounds  should  be
             amended and, of course, for  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  to  any
             decision on such an application."

 1. Ms Farrell confirmed at the outset of the hearing  that  there  was  no
    merit in a challenge to the judge's findings under  Article  8  despite
    the point about the correctness of the judge relying on the deportation
    provisions in the Immigration Rules as guidance since  the  appellant's
    case stood or fell under  the  2016  Regulations.   In  addition,  both
    parties accepted that the judge had been incorrect in relying  on  Part
    5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in his Article 8
    consideration.  A decision taken under the 2016 Regulations  is  not  a
    decision of a kind that is applied in section 117A of the 2002 Act.

 2. In essence Ms Farrell maintained the  point  made  in  the  grounds  of
    challenge which is an absence of a clear finding of the serious  threat
    contemplated by Regulation 27(5) of the 2016 Regulations in the judge's
    decision.  She referred to the various factors in Regulation  27(5)  in
    particular (c):

         "(c) The personal conduct of the person must represent  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
             fundamental interests of society, taking into the account past
             conduct of that person and that the threat does not need to be
             imminent."

    as well as (e):

         "(e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in  themselves
             justify the decision."

 3. With reference to Schedule 1 referred to in Regulation  27(8),  Part  7
    lists the fundamental interests of society as specifically:

         "(g) Tacking offences likely to cause  harm  to  society  where  an
             immediate or direct victim may be difficult  to  identify  but
             where there is a wider societal harm (such as offences related
             to the misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border  dimension
             as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the TFEU."

 4. Ms Farrell contrasted the heightened level identified  in  paragraph  7
    with the modesty of the appellant's sole UK conviction which had led to
    his admonishment.

 5. By way of response Mr Govan argued that the judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons.  He had noted that the appellant was  not  drug-free.   As  to
    whether being a drug addict of itself represented a  threat,  Mr  Govan
    candidly acknowledged it did not.  But he nevertheless contended it was
    a risk factor if drug related offending of the kind the  appellant  had
    carried out were taken into account.  He contended that  the  reasoning
    by the judge for his assessment of risk was made out in paragraph 10(f)
    to (i) of the decision.  Mr Govan was unable  to  help  me  as  to  the
    evidence surrounding the circumstances of the appellant's arrest in the
    United Kingdom and the evidence did not  disclose  how  much  synthetic
    cannabinoid the appellant had in his possession as the  issue  had  not
    been raised in cross-examination.

 6. By way of response, Ms Farrell reminded me that  the  onus  is  on  the
    Secretary of State and reiterated her  principal  submission  that  the
    judge had not identified the risk which had led  to  the  appeal  being
    dismissed.  It was at that point that Mr Govan as I have observed above
    acknowledged that being an addict of itself was not a risk.

 7. The judge correctly directed himself as to the provisions of Regulation
    27(5) and there was no need to  repeat  them  in  this  decision.   The
    evidence before the judge from the Secretary of State comprised  a  PNC
    which pre-dates his admonishment (although it refers to his arrest) and
    otherwise the factors and convictions set out in  the  refusal  letter.
    Mr Govan candidly acknowledged that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    produced the source of the material but rightly pointed  out  that  the
    appellant had accepted he  was  convicted  as  stated.   Otherwise  the
    evidence before the judge comprised statements by  the  appellant,  his
    partner Trebor Anderson, two letters from his doctor and a letter  from
    Sportrak in relation to his potential employment.

 8. The first of the two letters from Dr  Rennie  dated  13  December  2017
    addresses the circumstances of Mr Anderson's health.   The  appellant's
    health is addressed in the second letter dated 17 September 2018 in the
    following terms:

         "The above thirty three year old who is registered at the  Practice
         has requested that I write  a  letter  to  confirm  that  he  is  a
         recovering heroin addict and is seen at our  Drug  clinic.   I  can
         confirm this and that he is being  prescribed  Methadone  from  our
         Practice and was last seen on 12th September  2018.   He  has  also
         asked that I confirm that he is Hepatitis C and  he  currently  has
         follow up with the Liver clinic.  I confirm that he sees Dr  Dhatta
         with him last being seen in August 2018."

 9. It is undisputed that the appellant's offending was attributable to his
    drug addiction in the Baltic States of Latvia and Lithuania, the latter
    being the source of his exposure and  supply.   As  to  events  in  the
    United Kingdom since  his  further  arrival  here  after  release  from
    serving his sentence in Latvia in 2016 the appellant explained  at  [9]
    of his statement:

         "I think it  is  also  important  for  me  to  state  that  I  have
         completely turned my life around in the UK.  As already stated,  in
         Lithuania, I had become a drug addict.  When I came back to the  UK
         my Doctor put me on a methadone programme of 80ml a  day.   I  have
         reduced that and am now on 40ml a day.   I  am  drug  tested  on  a
         regular basis, at least once a month, and there has only  been  one
         slip-up about a year ago when I provided a positive drugs test.   I
         believe therefore that the risk of me re-offending  is  much  lower
         since my return to Scotland, and the danger for me is that I  could
         fall into bad company again if sent back to Latvia ..."

10. The evidence before the judge pointed to somebody  who  was  addressing
    addiction to a serious drug.  It was not clear on the evidence  whether
    the slip up referred to was that which led  to  the  use  of  synthetic
    cannabinoid.

11. Mr Anderson's statement explains at [3] and [4]:

         "3.  Aivas is still sticking to the methadone programme.  It is  of
             great assistance to him.  It keeps him stable.  It  keeps  him
             away having to associate with the kind of people who would  be
             involved in heroin.  He has even changed his pharmacy now.  He
             used  to  attend  one  in  Shawbridge   Street   in   Glasgow.
             Unfortunately there were ne'er  do  wells  who  were  offering
             heroin  or  cocaine  etc  outside  the  pharmacy.   They  were
             targeting vulnerable people.

         4.   His new pharmacy is in Shawlands Cross and does not have  this
             problem."

12. Although this evidence indicated that the appellant was taking steps to
    address his drug dependency, the judge has placed particular weight  on
    the appellant's failure to comply with the direction  which  post-dated
    the letter from Dr Rennie of  September  2018  to  provide  details  of
    progress on the  methadone  programme  which  had  been  ignored.   The
    appellant's evidence of the steps taken to address his addiction  post-
    date the offending that occurred in the  Baltic  States  and  the  only
    evidence of offending since then has been the conviction for possession
    of synthetic cannabinoid.  In my judgment the judge fell into error  by
    justifying the respondent's decision with reference to the  appellant's
    previous convictions which were undoubtedly serious and  he  failed  to
    give appropriate and proportionate weight to the efforts which  he  has
    taken to address his  dependency.   There  is  no  explanation  in  the
    decision why the appellant was unable to comply with the  direction  by
    the Upper Tribunal but care must  be  taken  when  drawing  an  adverse
    inference from that in the context of  otherwise  positive  conclusions
    reached as to the appellant's conduct, including his relationship  with
    Mr  Anderson.   The  evidence  surrounding  the  circumstances  of  the
    offending in the United Kingdom in November 2017 are not revealed and I
    am not entirely  clear  what  the  judge  meant  by  referring  to  the
    committal of a non-analogous offence indicating that the appellant  had
    not separated himself "from a life tainted by crime".  Risks  needs  to
    be assessed by reference to likely future conduct.  But for the  single
    offence in the United Kingdom which was not serious enough  to  warrant
    more than an admonishment, there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant has returned to  the  kind  of  offending  that  led  to  his
    convictions in the Baltic States and I am not persuaded that the  judge
    satisfactorily explained why he reached his decision otherwise.

13. I set aside the decision for error of law.  Neither party had  anything
    further to add in such an  eventuality.   The  evidence  before  me  is
    indicative of the positive steps taken by the appellant to address  his
    addiction and the evidence also points to other  factors  indicating  a
    deepening of the his efforts to integrate in this country.  Despite the
    appellant's conviction in the United Kingdom, I am not  persuaded  that
    the respondent has shown that there is a real  risk  of  the  appellant
    returning  to  offending  behaviour  of  a  kind  that   represents   a
    sufficiently serious and present threat to the fabric of society.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   I  re-make  the
    decision and allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   UTJ Dawson                          Date 21 June 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



