
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00317/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 October 2015                            |On 5 November 2015                |
|                                              |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               BRAIMA SONDE SO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Chirico instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and I do not make, any  order  restricting  publicity
    about this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, Judge Devittie, allowing the appeal by the  present
    respondent, hereinafter "the claimant",  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 15 November 2013 to make  him  the  subject  of  a
    deportation order.

 3. The claimant is an EEA national. It follows that he must not be deported
    just because he has committed a  serious  crime.  His  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom must  "represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society"
    and that cannot be established just by reason of his having committed  a
    criminal offence.

 4. He  is  a  citizen  of  Portugal  and  as  a  consequence  of  that  his
    circumstances  are  rightly  considered  under  the  Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  He has previously appealed, unsuccessfully, against a
    decision to make him the subject of a deportation order but he  was  not
    removed and the claimant  on  the  advice  of  his  solicitors  made  an
    application that he be not deported.  The Secretary of State refused  to
    entertain it but was ordered by the High  Court  that  it  ought  to  be
    considered.  I do not  entirely  understand  the  procedures  that  have
    brought this appeal before the First-tier Tribunal but there was clearly
    a hearing before the High  Court  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  as  a
    consequence of that hearing there was a further decision on 15  November
    2013 to deport the claimant. An appeal against that decision was allowed
    by the First-tier Tribunal and it is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    against that decision that is before me.

 5. I remind myself that it is not my task to decide if this  person  should
    be deported. Rather it is to  decide  if  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    exposed any material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    to allow the appeal and if I am so satisfied then to decide what  to  do
    as a consequence.

 6. The claimant has been in trouble with  the  authorities  in  the  United
    Kingdom I think on two occasions.  He was sentenced to community service
    for handling stolen goods that was eventually commuted to a sentence  of
    imprisonment of fourteen days and in July 2011 he was convicted  of  the
    offence of robbery and sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.

 7. The circumstances of the offence of robbery are set out  very  fully  in
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    The   Tribunal   quotes
    extensively from the sentencing remarks of the trial judge.  I hope I do
    not demean in any way the offence, which I  regard  as  very  nasty,  by
    summarising it as follows.  It was a case of a person being robbed of  a
    mobile phone.  The claimant who  was  then  an  adult  held  the  victim
    roughly whilst the  co-accused,  a  younger  person,  searched  him  and
    relieved him of his phone.  There can be no doubt  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  appreciated  the  seriousness  of  the  offence  because   the
    circumstances are so clearly set out in  the  Decision.  The  fact  that
    robberies can be considerably more serious than this does not in any way
    alter the fact that this was a serious and unpleasant crime about  which
    little can be said to the claimant's credit except that he seems to have
    admitted his guilt and to have accepted his punishment.

 8. When the  claimant  appealed  on  the  first  occasion  the  appeal  was
    determined by a panel. That division  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    persuaded that this was a case  where  an  EEA  national  had  conducted
    himself in such a way that  he  presented  a  genuine  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to justify his deportation.

 9. The Secretary  of  State  challenges  the  different  finding  of  Judge
    Devittie on three grounds. I will deal with the first one last.

10. Ground 2 complains that the Tribunal misdirected itself in that it  made
    proportionality findings  that  did  not  have  proper  regard  for  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Dumliauskas & Others [2015]  EWCA  Civ  145.   There  is  a
    quotation from the judgment relied on in the grounds in these terms:

         "Lastly, in agreement with what was said by the Upper  Tribunal  in
         Vasconcelos, I do not consider that in the case of an offender with
         no permanent right of residence substantial weight should be  given
         to rehabilitation."

11. With respect I do not think it is reasonably arguable  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in  the  way  it  alleged  on  this  occasion.   The
    criticism appears to me to be of a throwaway  remark  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 13 of the Decision that the process  of  rehabilitation  would
    not be advanced if the claimant's contact with his son was broken.   The
    judge clearly gave it some weight but it was not substantial part of his
    reasoning and the error warned against  in  SSHD  v  Dumliauskas  &  Ors
    [2015] EWCA Civ 145, is not an error committed here.  It was not a  case
    of giving it the prospects  of  rehabilitation  in  the  United  Kingdom
    excessive or undue weight. Rather it was just something that  the  judge
    noticed in his reasoning.

12. The third  ground  is  that  the  judge  muddled  himself  dealing  with
    proportionality b because he appears to  have  confused  proportionality
    under the Regulations and proportionality  on  Article  8  grounds.  The
    point  is  that  the  Regulations  require  that  the  removal  must  be
    proportionate and, additionally, a decision involving  removal  must  be
    proportionate to comply with Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  There is with respect  something  in  that  ground.   The
    judge does seem to  have  confused  himself  slightly.  Certainly  I  am
    confused about what particular tests he applied.   This  is  regrettable
    and if that had been all there was  to  the  case  it  might  have  been
    difficult for me to have upheld the decision. Even so there  is  clearly
    merit in the observation of Mr Chiricio that in fact the  judge's  error
    made it harder for the appellant to succeed and therefore it was  not  a
    material error.

13. I come now to the first ground  which  everyone  before  me  agreed  was
    decisive.  If  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  succeed  on  this  the
    Secretary of State cannot succeed.  The contention is  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in  law  by  failing  to  give  proper  reasons  for
    reaching  a  different  decision  about  the  prospects  of  the  future
    behaviour of the claimant when making its decision, bearing in mind that
    not so very long  before  a  differently  constituted  division  of  the
    Tribunal decided exactly the same point entirely the other way.  Because
    the circumstances are not identical it is  perfectly  obvious  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal knew what the earlier Tribunal had decided.  Again I
    say this with  the  same  confidence  that  I  say  about  the  Tribunal
    appreciating the seriousness of the offence.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    has quoted extensively from the earlier decision and it would be  absurd
    to think that the Tribunal had quoted it extensively and  forgotten  it.
    That clearly is not what happened and it is not what was suggested.  The
    suggestion in the grounds was more subtle than that. It was  that  there
    was just not sufficient evidence to  support  the  conclusion  that  the
    claimant no longer presented a risk.   I  have  thought  very  carefully
    about that mindful both of my responsibilities and the very serious view
    I take of the offence of robbery.

14. I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal conspicuously  gave  reasons  to
    justify its decision.

15. The first and main reason is that the claimant is now  that  much  older
    and has lived in the community for two years without attracting  further
    trouble.  To people who have no experience of criminals this might  seem
    unremarkable but to people experienced in  criminal  matters  I  do  not
    think it is at all controversial to say that it is not unusual for young
    people in their late teenage years and early 20s to indulge  in  serious
    crime and then to sort themselves out and  live  industriously  for  the
    rest of their lives.  A two year gap is not insignificant.

16. Whether I would have given it the same weight  that  this  Tribunal  has
    given it is not the point as I have been  properly  reminded  more  than
    once.

17. The Tribunal did not just rely on that the passage of time  but  on  the
    claimant having  established  a  relationship  with  his  son  and  this
    relationship is in its embryonic form.  He sees his son  for  (I  think)
    supervised contact for two hours a fortnight.  This is not very much but
    it would be wrong to assume this is the end of things.  This is an order
    of the court made in care proceedings brought  by  the  local  authority
    because of concerns about the way the child  was  looked  after  by  its
    mother and it made sure that the claimant had some link with his son now
    to start off a relationship.

18. It is plain that the First-tier Tribunal  gave  considerable  weight  to
    this developing relationship with the child and found it  indicative  of
    an emerging sense of responsibility and commitment that was not there on
    an earlier occasion.

19. So there are two significant things: there is a period of  time  out  of
    trouble and there is a new sense of responsibility expressed towards the
    child.

20. The First-tier  Tribunal  also  heard  from  the  claimant  and  it  was
    entitled to form a view of his attitude and did.  It noted evidence that
    he may be a promising footballer and has been offered  semi-professional
    terms. No one is making too much of that but  it  is  an  indication  of
    somebody who has got something to live for in a way that was  not  there
    before.

21. The claimant expressed his regret for what he had done and  expressed  a
    desire to behave himself in the future.  Again words like that are  very
    easy to utter but they are sometimes not uttered at all. When  they  are
    uttered the Tribunal was entitled to take a view on the  sincerity  with
    which they were uttered and it  did.   Cynicism  comes  very  easily  to
    lawyers but the fact is that custody is intended to be a punishment  and
    a jolt in a person's life. It is not unknown for it to cause a person to
    re-think what he or she is doing and to reorganise his life accordingly.
     That could be what has happened here. The Tribunal was entitled to give
    weight to the oral evidence that it heard.

22. I step back and look at the case as  a  whole.   I  repeat,  it  is  not
    necessarily the view of the evidence that everybody would have taken but
    I cannot say that this was perverse or unjustified  or  unexplained.  It
    was none of those things.  The First-tier Tribunal has taken a  view  of
    the evidence,  mindful  of  the  earlier  evidence  and  has  reached  a
    conclusion that the Secretary of State does not like, that  is  not  the
    same as erring in law.

     Notice of Decision

23. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 October 2015                |

