
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00426/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December 2018                          |On 28th January 2019          |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr A P
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr A Van Dellen of Counsel, Goldsmith Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Secretary of State appeals with permission the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Woolley promulgated on 20 September 2018.  Although the
Secretary of State is the appellant, for the purposes of this decision I
will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal with
AP as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

The appellant's appeal against deportation under the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the "2016 Regulations") was allowed by the
First-tier Tribunal on the basis that his deportation from the United
Kingdom would be disproportionate, despite the finding that he posed a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat in accordance with
Regulation 25 of the 2016 Regulations.  The decision of the First-tier
Tribunal proceeded on the basis, as was accepted by the respondent, that
the appellant had acquired permanent residence and therefore there had to
be serious grounds of public policy and public security pursuant to
Regulation 27(3) of the 2016 Regulations.

The First-tier Tribunal found, in paragraphs 22 to 28 of the decision, a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat by reference, inter alia,
to the seriousness of the appellant's offence for which he received a 42-
month sentence of imprisonment for causing death by dangerous driving.
Having set out the relevant legal provisions in paragraph 22 of the
decision, it is useful to set out the findings in full as follows:

         "23. The appellant was sentenced to a period of 42 months
         imprisonment for an offence of causing death by dangerous driving.
         This is a lengthy period of imprisonment and Paragraph 3 of
         Schedule 1 indicates the weight to be given to this.  The comments
         of the sentencing judge are recorded at Section B of the
         respondent's bundle.  The learned recorder referred to the Victim
         Impact Statements from the victim's family (and a similar statement
         was made available to me) and commented on the devastating effects
         of the offence.  The appellant made a poor and selfish decision to
         get into his car and drive at double the speed limit of 30 miles
         per hour with excess alcohol in his blood of nearly double the
         limit.  Further details of the offence are given in the OASYS
         document (it is not a full OASYS report but appears to be a
         preliminary assessment only).  At the point of the offence the
         appellant had accumulated 9 points for speeding on his licence.  He
         failed to give a satisfactory breath specimen and was seen to place
         his tongue over the mouthpiece thus to prevent any accurate reading
         from being made.  CCTV footage shows that one hour before the
         incident he was seen at a Service Station to purchase a bottle of
         whiskey.

         24.  The OASYS "assessment" does not give any assessment of risk of
         re-offending or any risk of harm.  There is a "screening" section
         at page 11 which shows no risk on a limited number of issues (such
         as self-harm or risk to other prisoners) but which does not give a
         generalised risk assessment.  In this context the authority of
         Vasconcelos (risk - rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378 (IAC) suggest
         that the tribunal should reach a conclusion on the evidence as a
         whole, and informed by those matters listed in Regulation 27 of the
         2016 Regulations.

         25.  I have therefore also looked at the behaviour of the appellant
         before and since the offence, and the other matters mandated by
         Schedule 1 of the Regulations.  The index offence was preceded by
         offences of speeding sufficient for him to accumulate 9 penalty
         points.  The index offence itself comprised speeding at double the
         speed limit which shows a continuation of this poor driving record.
          The appellant at the hearing said that a friend had been visiting
         him from Lithuania and that the friend has suggested a drink.  The
         OASYS version of events goes against this, as the appellant was
         seen by CCTV to purchase the bottle by himself an hour before the
         incident.  The fact that the drinking took place in the early
         morning militates against the suggestion that this was purely
         social drinking.  The appellant clearly consumed a large quantity
         of alcohol (he was nearly double the limit) and he cannot blame
         this on his friend's invitation to drink since he must have himself
         drunk willingly.  The OASYS report suggests a further aggravation
         in that he attempted to frustrate the breath reading by giving a
         flawed sample.

         26.  Taking a holistic assessment of all the factors I find his
         conduct can be described as representing a sufficiently serious
         threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  He
         has shown an escalating pattern of road traffic offending that
         culminated in the death of his victim.  The fact that he was
         prepared to drive a vehicle knowing he had been drinking heavily
         shows a fundamental lack of insight which constitutes a continuing
         threat.  He attempted to frustrate detection by providing a false
         sample.  I must under the Regulations take note of Schedule 1 of
         the Regulations and personal factors mentioned in paragraph 3 are
         relevant to this appellant - the fact that he received a custodial
         sentence and that this was a lengthy custodial sentence.

         27.  ... On all the evidence, taken in the round, I find that the
         appellant has been shown to have a propensity to re-offend and that
         he does represent an unacceptably high risk of re-offending.  He is
         a "present threat" to the fundamental interests of society.  The
         fundamental interests of society, as defined by Schedule 1, I find
         are engaged: include the removal of an EEA national with a
         conviction (7(f)), preventing social harm (7(c)), and protecting
         the public (7(j)).

         28.  The appellant has a right of permanent residence and therefore
         irrelevant decision must be taken on "serious" grounds of public
         policy.  The appellant's offence resulted in the death of his
         victim.  This death continues to have devastating consequences on
         the victim's family, as their Personal Statement revealed.  I find
         from this that serious grounds be made out in the appellant's case.
          On this basis I find that the Respondent was correct to decide
         that the Appellant's removal was justified on "serious" grounds of
         public policy, public security or public health because the
         Appellant's conduct represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
         serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of society."

There is no complaint by the respondent to this first part of the decision
dealing with the question of whether the appellant posed a genuine, present
and sufficiently serious threat.  Nor was there any application to cross-
appeal these findings by the appellant.

The respondent appeals in relation to the proportionality assessment
conducted by the First-tier Tribunal which follows the section above, in
particular with emphasis placed on the first ground of appeal that there
are factors adverse to the appellant which are far too limited in the
context of the facts and do not attach appropriate weight or give credence
to the factors adverse to the appellant on the whole.  The factors adverse
to the appellant in the assessment of proportionality are set out in
totality in paragraphs 31 and 32 of the decision as follows:

         "31. The appellant has appeared in the Crown Court for an offence
         of causing death by dangerous driving.  He had previously
         accumulated 9 points for speeding.  In his favour he pleaded guilty
         to the count in the Crown Court and thereby received a reduction
         from the starting point of 5 years imprisonment.  He does not
         appear to have any other previous court appearances.

         32.  The appellant has undergone a lengthy period of imprisonment
         (42 months) which has damaged his integration into the UK.  There
         has been an escalating pattern to his offending."

There is no express reference in those paragraphs back to the earlier
findings that the appellant poses an unacceptably high risk to the public
and that there are serious grounds of public policy and public security
showing that his conduct represents a genuine, present and sufficiently
serious threat to the fundamental interests of society.  The nature of the
offence has to be remembered at this point.  These factors are nowhere to
be seen within the proportionality factors set out as adverse to the
appellant by the First-tier Tribunal.

I am invited on behalf of the appellant to find that the decision should be
read as a whole and the earlier findings as to genuine, present and
sufficiently serious threat are carried through in to the proportionality
assessment.  However, I do not find that it can be read in that way, even
looking at the decision as a whole, when the First-tier Tribunal has
clearly adopted a balance sheet approach but these factors are not referred
to expressly or at all.  The first ground of appeal, therefore, that there
has not been sufficient recognition of the weight of the factors adverse to
the appellant is therefore allowed.  The proportionality exercise conducted
by the First-tier Tribunal begins without the scales correctly weighted on
both sides.

The second ground of appeal is in relation to the First-tier Tribunal's
assessment of rehabilitation as part of the proportionality assessment.
Paragraph 35 of the decision deals with reference to three decisions dating
back to 2012, those are Essa v Upper Tribunal [2012] EWCA Civ 1718; Essa
(EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] KUT 0016 (IAC) and MC (Essa
principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520.  Although there is some
complaint by the respondent as to why the earlier cases are included, there
is no obvious error of law following from their reference, it just appears
a little odd to unnecessarily do so when MC covers the points sufficiently.


The remainder of paragraph 5 sets out the reasons why the First-tier
Tribunal did not consider that rehabilitation was complete and the
Respondent challenges whether there has been any progress in rehabilitation
at all, for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.  The decision
refers to only one awareness course undertaken by the appellant and about
which Counsel was unable to identify any evidence explaining precisely what
that course was beyond the certificate in the bundle which is for an
"alcohol in-cell work pack" in November 2017.  Further, in his evidence the
appellant still appeared to show some level of blame by one of his friends
for the offence despite showing also remorse and pleading guilty to the
offence.  The respondent submitted that these factors also have to be
considered in the balance.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision provides a lack of reasons as to the
progress of rehabilitation and a lack of evidence and reasoning as to what
has happened after prison as well.  In particular, the last findings in
paragraph 35 that the appellant's prospects of rehabilitation would be less
in Lithuania because he has no family or other support network that he
could rely on to the same extent, if at all.  The reasoning for this is
that the appellant's mother is poor and is likely to want to support
herself and has no contact with his father.  This reasoning borders on the
perverse.  There is an attempt at a qualitative assessment of the relative
prospects of rehabilitation in the United Kingdom with family ties and
support here as against what would be available in Lithuania, however the
reasons given as to why the prospects would be less in Lithuania,
particularly with reference to the appellant's mother's situation bears no
obvious evidential basis or relevance to the rehabilitation assessment.
The First-tier Tribunal has also materially erred in law in its assessment
of rehabilitation, in the least because inadequate reasons are provided for
the findings made which, as I say, in the end of the paragraph, are
bordering on the perverse.  The assessment of rehabilitation is in any
event part of the assessment of proportionality and therefore forms part of
the wider first ground of appeal in which an error of law has already been
found.

The remaining grounds of appeal which were not pursued in any detail orally
before me on behalf of the respondent were in relation to the relative
links of the appellant in Lithuania and querying the best interests of the
children given the age of the children.  I find no specific errors of law
in the way that the First-tier Tribunal has dealt with the family
relationships and links in the United Kingdom or the best interests of the
children in paragraph 34 of the decision, and no obvious errors in
paragraph 36 as to the relative links to Lithuania compared to the United
Kingdom.  These two grounds disclose no further error of law, however,
given the errors in relation to the assessment of proportionality for
failing to take into account the full facts which are adverse to the
appellant and in relation to the approach to rehabilitation.  These are
errors of law which materially affect the outcome of the appeal and it is
therefore necessary to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
There was no challenge by either party to the findings in relation to
whether the appellant posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
threat in paragraphs 22 to 28 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, as set
out above, and those findings are therefore preserved for the purposes of
remaking the appeal.  Similarly, there was no challenge by either party to
the findings in paragraphs 33, 34 and 36 of the decision which are also
therefore preserved.

This decision was given orally at the hearing, and the parties went on to
make submissions for the remaking of the appeal as follows.

On behalf of the appellant, Counsel accepted the factors adverse to the
appellant in the proportionality exercise as contained in the error of law
part of the decision.  The First-tier Tribunal noted that there were no
aggravating factors to the offence and the appellant pleaded guilty to it,
which fortifies the remorse expressed by him.  The five-year starting point
for a custodial sentence was accordingly reduced.  This is not a drugs or
sexual offence, albeit Counsel did not diminish the loss of life caused by
it.

Counsel submitted that the description of the appellant showing an
escalating pattern of behaviour was slightly old, given that there was not
a natural progression from speeding to an offensive death by dangerous
driving and is not the typical pattern of escalation, for example, in drugs
offences from possession to dealing or offences involving a higher class of
drugs.

As to the factors in the appellant's favour, emphasis was placed on the
powerful factor of the appellant's children, three of whom are British
Citizens and all of whom he has a parental (even if not biological)
relationship with, as set out in paragraph 34 of the First-tier Tribunal's
decision.  In addition, reliance was placed on the findings in paragraph 36
of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, in particular, that the appellant
has spent the majority of his adult life in the United Kingdom, with a
continuous work history here and only weak links remaining to Lithuania.
For these reasons it was submitted that there was a weaker prospect of
rehabilitation in Lithuania than in the United Kingdom, but it was not
suggested that rehabilitation was complete and therefore this is a factor
which can be taken into account.  The further rehabilitation anticipated
was said to be the appellant not committing any further offences and his
ban from driving acted as a powerful deterrent in doing so.  Other
protective factors are contact with his family and children which
reinforces his integration into society.

Since his release from prison on 23 October 2018, the appellant was said to
have resumed employment, and as agreed at the oral hearing, evidence of the
payslips was submitted within seven days to show this.

In addition, the Applicant has submitted two letters from the National
Probation Service, both dated 17 December 2018.  No application has been
made to adduce this further evidence and no reasons given for its
submission at this stage.  However, I admit these documents which confirm
the Applicant's release from prison on 23 October 2018, following which he
has complied with his licence conditions.  The letters state that the
Applicant was unable to live with his family until they moved to a new home
outside of an exclusion zone and employment plans were submitted for prior
approval.  The Applicant has shown a willingness to engage in offence
focused work, including a provisional meeting with the Restorative Justice
team in the hopes of a future meeting with the victim's family.  The second
letter identifies the Applicant as posing a medium risk to the public due
to his driving conviction and a low risk to all other groups, and a
relatively low risk of reoffending due to the Applicant having learnt the
potentially tragic consequences of drink-driving and protective factors
including his family, accommodation and employment that have enabled him to
resettle successfully into the community.  It is said that the Applicant
has addressed and managed his risk factors including alcohol misuse and
consequential thinking.

It has not been suggested by the appellant that this evidence as to risk of
reoffending and risk of harm in any way affects the findings of the First-
tier Tribunal which were preserved in the oral part of this decision given
at the hearing.  There remains no full OASys assessment before the Tribunal
and I do not find that the assessment of risk set out in the recent letter
undermines or in any way affects the First-tier Tribunal's findings that
the appellant poses an unacceptably high risk of reoffending and that he
presents a genuine and sufficiently serious threat to public policy and
public security.

On behalf of the appellant it was accepted that his offence was not a minor
offence, it was serious, but given his very strong links to the United
Kingdom and his family relationships, in particular, with his children, are
such that his deportation would be a disproportionate decision.

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Avery relied on the original reasons for
deportation decision and the findings of the First-tier Tribunal as to the
appellant posing an unacceptably high risk of reoffending and being a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat if he remained in the
United Kingdom.  The nature of the offence committed was emphasised, in
which the actions of the appellant caused the death of an innocent
individual, which has a continuing impact on the victim's family as
evidenced in the Victim Impact Statements.

As to the appellant's family in the United Kingdom who would be affected by
his deportation, it was submitted that it would be a choice for them as to
whether to join him in Lithuania or stay in the United Kingdom.  It is an
inevitable consequence in the nature of a deportation decision that there
is an adverse impact on family members.

Overall, on behalf of the respondent it was submitted that there is nothing
in the positive factors in favour of the appellant, even taken
cumulatively, to outweigh the impact of his offence and the threat to the
public in the United Kingdom.  There is a lack of evidence of engagement in
rehabilitation and it was submitted that it is not encouraging that the
appellant has continued to attempt to shift the blame for his offence to
another.  The single course undertaken in prison provides only flimsy
evidence of rehabilitation and there is nothing ongoing.  It was suggested
that the impact of family support on the appellant is unclear in this case
and it can be assumed that there are options for rehabilitation also
available in Lithuania where the appellant has some links, including his
mother, where he still speaks the language and where he has a cultural
awareness.  In this case the appellant's deportation is not
disproportionate.

Findings

As already set out above, there is a preserved finding of fact in this case
that the appellant poses an unacceptably high risk of reoffending and that
he poses a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to public
policy and public security on serious grounds, in accordance with
Regulation 24 and 27(3) and (5)(c) of the 2016 Regulations.  The remaining
issue to determine is as to the whether the appellant's removal would be
disproportionate.  The relevant other provisions of Regulation 27 of the
2016 Regulations are as follows:

         "(5)     The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred
             by these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision is taken
             grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles -

               a) the decision must comply with the principle of
                  proportionality;

               b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

               c) the personal conduct of the person must represent a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society, taking into
                  account past conduct of the person and that the threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

               d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case which
                  relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                  justify the decision;

               e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                  themselves justify the decision;

               f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in
                  the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                  the grounds of specific to the person.

         (6)  before taking a relevant decision of the grounds of public
             policy or public security in relation to a person ("P") who is
             resident in the United Kingdom, the decision-maker must take
             account of considerations such as the age, state of health,
             family and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in
             the United Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into
             the United Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's
             country of origin.

         ...

         (8)  a court or tribunal considering whether the requirements of
             this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of
             public policy, public security and the fundamental interests
             of society etc)."

There is no dispute in this case that at least one of the fundamental
interests of society is engaged, as found by the First-tier Tribunal and
not challenged by either party before me.  The remaining provisions of
Schedule 1 so far as relevant to the present appeal are as follows:

         "2.      An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national
             having extensive familial and societal links with persons of
             the same nationality or language does not amount integration
             in the United Kingdom; the significant degree of wider
             cultural and social integration must be present before a
             person may be regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national
             has received a custodial sentence, was a persistent offender,
             the longer the sentence, all the more numerous the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represent a genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
             fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of an EEA
             national on family member of an EEA national with in the
             United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at
             around the same time as -

               g) the commission of a criminal offence;

               h) an act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of
                  society;

               i) the EEA national or family member of an EEA national was
                  in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the
             family member of an EEA national who is able to provide
             substantive evidence of not demonstrating a threat (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA national or the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully performed or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate."

In applying these factors I turn to consider the appellant's circumstances
for the purposes of the proportionality exercise, starting with the
additional preserved findings of fact in paragraphs 33, 34 and 36 of the
First-tier Tribunal, as follows:

          "33.    I accept that the appellant arrived legally in the UK in
         2010 and that he was continuously in work from August 2011.  His
         behaviour in the UK was blameless until January 2017 apart from the
         accumulation of 9 penalty points for speeding.

         34.  The appellant has a long-term partner in the UK.  She is from
         Lithuania and I note the restrictions of paragraph 2 of Schedule 1
         that the link with a person of the same nationality does not amount
         to integration in the UK.  The appellant has however shown more
         than this.  He is a step-father to two children, one of whom is a
         British citizen.  The father of this step-child is not in contact
         and I accept that the appellant has taken over the role of parent.
         He has two twin children of his own.  Although they are still young
         both are British citizens.  It is said that the relationship can be
         carried on from Lithuania but I find that with very young children
         the physical presence of the appellant as father cannot be
         substituted for a remote telephonic link.  The best interests of
         the children under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
         Immigration Act 2009 are for the appellant to remain in the UK -
         and as three of the children British citizens they are entitled to
         enjoy the advantages of that citizenship rather than being expected
         to move to Lithuania.  The appellant has acquired a right of
         permanent residence which has not been taken away by his
         incarceration and this in itself is an indication of his
         integration.  He has a continuous work history which again shows
         social and cultural integration.

         ...

         36.  The appellant has now been in the UK for a considerable period
         of time (since August 2010) and has spent the majority of his adult
         life in this country.  I accept that he has some links to Lithuania
         through his mother, but he has now lost contact with his father.  I
         find that his own personal links to Lithuania are now weak."

To these matters I would add the following additional findings.  In
relation to family life, the appellant's relationship with his partner and
parental relationship have been accepted and the appellant's evidence is
that they are now living together as a family unit.  However, that has only
been very recently, they were not cohabiting prior to the appellant's
imprisonment, nor immediately upon his release because the family lived in
an area in which the applicant was excluded from by virtue of his licence
conditions.  The appellant's partner has been living in the United Kingdom
2007.

In terms of the appellant's integration in the United Kingdom, as above he
has lived here since August 2010 (albeit he has been in prison for a not
insignificant period of time up until October 2018) and has been in
employment for the majority of the time he has been the United Kingdom and
at liberty.  The appellant's partner is Lithuanian and he has other
Lithuanian family members here, including his sister whom he has resided
with for the majority of his time here, which, as found by the First-tier
Tribunal in accordance with 2016 regulations, does not as such demonstrate
integration into the United Kingdom.  However, as also has accepted by the
First-tier Tribunal there are other factors, including employment, which
does lend support to the finding that the appellant has integrated here.

The appellant has lived the majority of his adult life in the United
Kingdom, but retains links to Lithuania, through family (his mother is
there and he has Lithuanian family members in the United Kingdom through
whom he is likely to retain cultural links, although he has lost contact
with his father), he speaks Lithuanian and spent his entire childhood and
formative years living there.  In these circumstances, although the links
are not as strong as his current ones to the United Kingdom, there is still
evidence of social, cultural, family and linguistic ties to Lithuania.

The parties are agreed on the applicability of the guidance in MC (Essa
principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC) as to the relevance of
rehabilitation to decisions taken on public policy and public security
grounds under the 2016 Regulations.  So far as relevant, the Upper Tribunal
confirmed that rehabilitation is not an issue to be addressed in every EEA
deportation or removal decision and will not be relevant, for example, if
rehabilitation has already been completed.  The reference to prospects of
rehabilitation concerns reasonable prospects of a person ceasing to commit
crime, not the mere possibility of rehabilitation or capability of
rehabilitation.  To gauge the prospects of rehabilitation, an assessment of
the relative prospects of rehabilitation the host Member State as compared
with those in the Member State of origin must be gauged, but, in the
absence of evidence, it is not to be assumed that prospects are materially
different in that other Member State.  Matters that are relevant when
examining the prospects of rehabilitation of offenders include family ties
and responsibilities, accommodation, education, training, employment,
active membership of a community and the like.

The evidence as to rehabilitation is somewhat mixed in this case, as is the
position of the parties.  Up until the post hearing evidence from the
National Probation Service, the evidence of rehabilitation by the appellant
was very limited and extended only to a certificate showing completion of
alcohol in-cell work, which was entirely unexplained and there was nothing
to suggest any ongoing or planned further work to address the offending
behaviour.  The respondent's submission was therefore that there was in
reality no significant rehabilitation in progress.  The letter from the
National Probation Service however refers to a wider range of work to
address offending behaviour and I have no reason to doubt that is the
position, although it is surprising that none of these wider matters were
relied upon by the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal or at the oral
hearing before me, although the letter does not indicate when such work was
undertaken and it may have post-dated at least the First-tier Tribunal
decision.

At the oral hearing, it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the
process of rehabilitation had begun, but not yet been completed with
reference to further rehabilitation largely being reintegration into
society with no further offences being committed.  There has been no
amendment to this submission in light of the evidence from the National
Probation Service and no suggestion that rehabilitation has been completed.
 I find it remains a relevant factor to be taken into account in the
proportionality exercise.

In the United Kingdom, the appellant has family ties and responsibilities,
including parental responsibilities to his children, including
stepchildren.  He is now cohabiting with his family and has resumed
employment.  Whilst in prison he has undertaken further education and
training, improving his skills and experience for employment as well.
There is lack of any specific evidence of active membership of his local
community.  On the whole, these are positive factors for the prospects of
rehabilitation of the appellant, although it is noted that these were all
factors which existed prior to the offence and it has not been identified
that the lack of such factors (or any other possible risk factors)
contributed to the offence.  For example, this was not a theft offence to
which lack of employment or resources may be a factor, nor is any change of
circumstances identified relevant to the nature of the offence.  These
positive factors for the prospects of rehabilitation have not been shown to
be of any specific relevance to the specific nature of the offence
committed.

On behalf of the appellant, it was submitted that the relative prospects of
rehabilitation were weaker in Lithuania than in the United Kingdom, due to
the absence of the positive factors identified immediately above.  There is
however no specific evidence in relation to the same submitted by the
appellant, there are remaining ties to Lithuania and nothing to suggest
that he would not be able to establish himself there with accommodation and
employment, with the support of family both there and in the United
Kingdom.  Although on balance I find that the prospects of rehabilitation
are better in the United Kingdom than in Lithuania, the difference is not
highly significant, and there remain reasonable prospects of rehabilitation
in Lithuania as well.

Finally, as to the balancing exercise required for the proportionality
assessment, I take into account the following factors which are adverse to
the appellant and in favour of deportation.  These include the matters set
out in detail above by the First-tier Tribunal, including, first, that the
appellant poses an unacceptably high risk to the public.  Secondly, that he
presents a genuine and sufficiently serious threat to public policy or
public security.  Thirdly, the seriousness and circumstances of the offence
for which he was convicted, at a time when he had already accumulated 9
points on his licence for speeding, shows an escalation of driving offences
and more importantly where the result was that an innocent person lost
their life, which has a significant and continuing impact on the victim's
family.  The seriousness of the offence is reflected in the length of
sentence imposed and although there were no aggravating features reflected
in the sentence itself (and in fact a reduction for the guilty plea), there
are features, including that the appellant attempted to frustrate giving a
breath sample at the time of the offence, which are also adverse.
Fourthly, the length of sentence has also damaged the appellant's
integration into the United Kingdom.  These are all factors which carry
significant weight.

There are a number of relatively neutral factors which do not weigh heavily
on either side of the balancing exercise, including the appellant's age,
that he is in a good state of health and he is in a relatively stable
economic situation with a good employment history, current employment,
education and vocational qualifications.  These matters are essentially the
same whether the appellant is in the United Kingdom or in Lithuania where
he has not show any differential employment prospects.

The following factors are positive ones in favour of the appellant in the
balancing exercise against deportation.  First, his family life with
partner and children, with whom he lives (albeit from only very recently).
Three of the four children are British citizens and as the First-tier
Tribunal found in paragraph 34, it is in their best interests to remain in
the United Kingdom (to benefit from the advantages of their citizenship
here) with the appellant (particularly given the young age of some of the
children).  This is the weightiest factor in favour of the appellant.
Secondly, the appellant has a degree of integration in the United Kingdom
through employment and his length of residence here since 2010, and family
life established here, albeit the strength of that integration is reduced
by his imprisonment and because his immediate relationships are with
Lithuanian nationals or those with Lithuanian heritage (three of the
children being British citizens born to at least one if not both Lithuanian
parents).  Thirdly, the relatively strong links to the United Kingdom
compared to those that remain with Lithuania.  Fourthly, the marginally
better prospects of rehabilitation in the United Kingdom than in Lithuania,
although this is not a weighty factor for the reasons already set out
above.

Taking all of these factors into account, I find that the appellant's
deportation to Lithuania would not be disproportionate, with the strength
of the factors adverse to him not being outweighed even by the strength of
his family life in the United Kingdom, the best interests of his children
or all the factors positive to him taken cumulatively.  The appellant
received a lengthy sentence for a very serious offence which has had
devastating consequences for others, he poses an unacceptably high risk of
reoffending and presents a genuine and sufficiently serious threat to
public policy and public security on serious grounds and his deportation is
proportionate.  For all these reasons the appeal is dismissed under the
2016 Regulations.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  it  as
follows:

The appeal is dismissed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     22nd January 2019

 Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


