
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00621/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 9th May 2013                               |On 18th June 2013            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                           Mr KEVON ANTHONY GORDON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Mair instructed by Paragon Law.
For the Respondent: Mrs Heath Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel') composed  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge TRP Hollingworth and Mrs  L  Schmitt  JP,
        who dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  order  for  his
        deportation made pursuant to section 32(5) UK Borders Act 2007.


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, was born on the  9th  December
        1990. His immigration history is set out  in  paragraph  3  of  the
        Panel's determination. He entered the UK on 25th November 2008  and
        has remained here since. He was arrested  on  2nd  March  2010  for
        possession of two types of Class A drugs with intent to supply.  He
        was sentenced to two years imprisonment at Nottingham Crown  Court.
        There was no appeal against conviction or sentence.


     3. The appellant relied upon one of the exceptions  contained  in  the
        Borders Act, namely that his removal from the UK  will  breach  his
        rights under Article 8 ECHR.


     4. The key findings of the Panel can be summarised as follows:


     i.   The adjournment request made at  the  hearing  was  refused.  Both
   sides had           had ample time to prepare  and  it  was  not  in  the
   interests of justice to                   adjourn. [10 - 13]


     ii.  The appellant was not found to be credible or reliable. [19]


      iii.  The  appellant's  evidence  regarding  two  apparently  parallel
   relationships           with Tanya Brown and Alicia Woodhouse was evasive
   and unconvincing.            [20]


     iii. The determination of IJ Shanahan was  the  staring  point  in  the
   appeal. The              appellant  and  those  around  him  deliberately
   withheld  information  from              that  judge  that  he  had  been
   arrested for a serious drug related offence  only             eight  days
   before  the  hearing.  His  counsel  conceded  this  was  correct.   [21]
   Had the judge known  it  may  have  had  some  bearing  on  the  decision
     reached. [23]


     iv.      The appellant has established a family life in the UK.  He  is
   in a                    relationship with the witness who gave  evidence.
   They have a child                together born on 16th July 2011. [25]


      v.    The  respondent's  decision   will   have   sufficiently   grave
   consequences so as           to engage Article 8. [26] The decision is in
   accordance  with  the   law   and   the             issue   is   one   of
   proportionality. [27] and [28].


     vi.  There is nothing  which  assists  the  appellant  in  the  current
   version of the               Immigration Rules. He has been in the UK for
   just over four years. His             sentence was of  more  than  twelve
   months  but  less  than  four  years,   there   is                nothing
   exceptional about his position. There  is  a  primary  carer  in  the  UK
   who can assume parental responsibility in the event of his removal. [29 -
              30]


     vii. Had the original judge in March 2010 been aware of his arrest only
   days           before the hearing, the decision reached on that  occasion
   may have been           different. The appellant would have been aware of
   the importance of that           hearing but that  did  not  prevent  him
   becoming involved in matters which            led to a substantial prison
   sentence. [33]


     viii.    The appellant has been untruthful or willing  to  deceive  his
   witness and             the mother of his child, Miss Woodhouse. [35]


     ix.  The impression created by the appellant that he  is  in  a  loving
              relationship with Miss Woodhouse is flawed. [36 - 46]


     x.   The submission that whatever may have happened in the past that is
                  'water under the bridge' as the couple have a  child,  the
   appellant  has  been            granted  bail,  and  released  into   the
   community, was rejected. [49]


     xi.  The appellant's propensity to be  untruthful  when  it  suits  him
   assumes             considerable weight in the Article 8 exercise. [50]


     xii. There is a  strong  argument  the  appellant  was  deceiving  Miss
   Woodhouse            and  seeing   a   second   girlfriend   during   his
   incarceration. [51]


     xiii.    The appellant's evidence regarding the  circumstances  of  his
   guilty plea is               unreliable [52] and another example  of  his
   propensity to manipulate and              distort the evidence. [54]


     xiv. In assessing the appellant's relationship and the quality of  that
                  relationship with the chid, the parties have  never  lived
   together. [55]


     xv.  The appellant looks after their daughter A two  to  three  days  a
   week                whilst Miss Woodhouse, the mother, works.  A has also
   stayed over                  some nights at the house he shares with  his
   mother in Nottingham as a             result of his bail conditions. [56]
   Miss Woodhouse lives in Derby.


     xvi. There  is  no  clear  picture  of  what  the  living  or  domestic
   arrangements are.            [57] Neither is there any indication of  the
   couple's intention  to  live                 together  permanently.  [58]
   Neither witness statement mentions marriage.           [59] Although  one
   letter from Miss  Woodhouse  refers  to  marriage  there              was
   little to support such  a  commitment  either  through  co-habitation  or
   consistent support. [60]


     xvii.    The Panel accept the child A is the appellant's. [62] For  the
   first six               months of the child's life he was in prison. [63]
   He shares  responsibility  for               A  when  she  stays  at  his
   mother's house. The claim the appellant  has                  greater  de
   facto  control  over  the  child  as  Miss   Woodhouse   works   is   not
   accepted. It is likely that Miss Woodhouse has day to day control of  the
          child who is fifteen months old at the date of the hearing. [65]


     xviii.   The extent of the relationship between the appellant and child
   is nine             months in total. [66]


     ixx. It cannot be  said  the  appellant  is  the  primary  carer.  Miss
   Woodhouse also               relies  upon  help  from  her  own  extended
   family. [67] It  was  found                  unfortunate  there  were  no
   witness statements from her extended family            and nor  did  they
   attend the hearing. [68]


     xx.  At all material times the  child  will  remain  with  its  natural
   mother,                 supported as necessary by other  family  members.
   There is attachment to           both sets of grandparents  which  should
   be encouraged. [71] Removal of            the appellant will not  require
   the child to leave the UK. [72]


     xxi  The child's best interests will be perfectly adequately covered by
   the                 present arrangements which amount to her  being  with
   her natural mother           and her mother's extended family. [73]


     xxii.    The deportation will not necessarily result  in  cessation  of
   the relationship             as Miss Woodhouse's mother has  a  boyfriend
   of her own who normally               resides in Jamaica. They maintain a
   relationship indirectly although it is             recognised this is not
   the same situation with a very young child. [74]


     xxiii.   The appellant has now been  charged  with  a  new  offence  of
   shoplifting.            [76] He was found in a compromising position with
   another female                   partner, not Miss Woodhouse and  elected
   trial by Jury. [77]


     xxiv.    Considering his private life - the appellant has been  in  the
   UK for a short               period of time, having arrived in  2008.  He
   spent his formative years in              Jamaica. It is not suggested he
   will have major difficulties if  returned.  He            may  aspire  to
   employment   but   otherwise   the   appellant's    private    life    is
   unremarkable. [78]


     xxv. The appellant allowed himself  to  become  involved  in  extremely
   serious             offences on 2nd March 2010. His  motivation  appeared
   to be financially            driven. He pleaded  guilty  to  two  charges
   involving heroin and cocaine              having pleaded not guilty until
   the day of the trial. [80]


     xxvi.    The appellant had only been in the UK for little over  a  year
   when he                 committed these offences involving the supply  of
   drugs [81]. He  has  no             previous  convictions  [82].   It  is
   accepted he has undertaken courses in              prison [83].


     xxvii.   The appellant has been assessed as a low rate of  re-offending
   although            there is no full copy of the OASys report.  The  risk
   of re-offending is not           determinative. [85]


          xxviii. The appellant may be prevented from re-entering the UK for
   as much as              ten years. [86]


     xxiv.    Having  balanced  the  competing  interests  the  decision  is
   proportionate and            in favour of deportation. [87]


     5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 21st November  2012.  The  appeal  is  opposed  by  the
        Secretary of State in her Rule 24 Reply dated 6th December 2012.



Discussion



     6. The more recent offence referred to by the Panel  in  paragraph  77
        has now been resolved in the appellant's favour without trial.


     7. The first challenge is to the refusal of the Panel to adjourn. Miss
        Mair submitted that a request had originally been made  in  writing
        to allow the appellant to  obtain  a  report  from  an  Independent
        Social Worker. This was refused. The application was renewed at the
        hearing accompanied by a letter from Christine Brown, the  intended
        expert.


     8. When asked by me why it was necessary  for  such  a  report  to  be
        commissioned Miss Mair stated it was because a  social  worker  was
        needed to provide all the details. There  would  not  have  been  a
        disproportionate delay and the Panel noted  in  paragraph  57  that
        they did not have  a  particularly  clear  picture  of  the  living
        arrangements. It was  submitted  that  such  a  report  would  have
        provided these details.


     9. When asked why the family did not attend to provide  such  evidence
        Miss Mair stated they had mixed feelings about the relationship and
        had been asked to attend the hearing but did not do so. The  expert
        could also deal with the long terms prospects for the child.


    10. The Tribunal's  record  of  proceedings  confirms  that  a  written
        request was made for an adjournment to obtain  the  report  on  2nd
        October 2012, the day before the  pre-hearing  review.  The  letter
        sought an adjournment until the third week in November  2012  when,
        it was stated, the report would be due. The request was  considered
        at the hearing by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Coates and refused as he was not satisfied that  the  appeal  could
        not be justly determined without a report from a social worker and,
        in any event, as the hearing was not until 23rd October, there  was
        further time for it to be prepared.


    11. The application was  not  renewed  until  the  hearing  when  Judge
        Hollingworth  has  noted  Miss  Mair  referred  to  a  letter  from
        Christine Brown and renewed the  application.  It  was  stated  the
        report had not been prepared in time. The report is to  assess  the
        strength of family life.  It was accepted the appellant  was  aware
        of the relevant dates. The application was opposed and refused,  as
        stated in the grounds, as it was found both parties had  had  ample
        time to prepare and that it was not in  the  interests  of  justice
        given this is a very young child and there are  witness  statements
        from interested parties.


    12. I accept that the key question to be asked when an  application  of
        this nature is made is whether it is fair in all the  circumstances
        to refuse it.  In WT [2004] UKIAT 00176 (Ouseley) the Tribunal said
        that it was not an error of law to refuse an adjournment  requested
        on the basis of fresh evidence, which had yet to be obtained,  when
        it was not clear how such evidence would make a material difference
        to the evidence already before an Adjudicator.  In that case, while
        the fresh evidence,  in  the  form  of  a  report  by  the  Medical
        Foundation, could not have been obtained with reasonable  diligence
        before the Adjudicator's hearing, the substance  of  that  evidence
        could have been obtained from a GP and could have  been  raised  by
        the appellant himself in time for the hearing.  The  Tribunal  said
        that, although the Medical Foundation had a  particular  expertise,
        it was not unique.  A report by them would consist of a description
        of physical symptoms, which could be provided  by  others,  and  an
        assessment of the consistency of those signs or symptoms with  what
        the appellant described.  However, consistency was not the same  as
        proof.


    13. Before any court or tribunal expert evidence should  be  restricted
        to that which is reasonably required to  resolve  the  proceedings,
        i.e. what is necessary. Although there is  no  provision  requiring
        permission to be given by the Tribunal to adduce  expert  evidence,
        at this point in time, in other jurisdictions such  as  the  family
        courts considering public law children  cases  there  is.  In  this
        appeal it was not an application  for  permission  the  Panel  were
        considering but an application for the proceedings to be delayed to
        allow additional evidence to be obtained.


    14. In the  absence  of  a  specific  definition  for  a  term  in  any
        regulations or statutory provisions, words must be  interpreted  by
        reference to their ordinary  meaning.  The  online  Oxford  English
        dictionary defines necessary as something essential, that needs  to
        be done. In family law, in the case  of  Re  P  (Placement  Orders:
        Parental Consent) [2008] EWCA Civ 535, the  Court  of  Appeal  said
        necessary has a meaning lying somewhere between 'indispensable'  on
        the one hand and 'useful', 'reasonable' or 'desirable' on the other
        hand", having "the connotation of the imperative, what is  demanded
        rather than what is merely optional or reasonable or desirable."


    15. Designated Judge Coates did not consider a  report  from  a  social
        worker was  necessary  to  allow  the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
        relevant issue which was whether the appellant is able to rely upon
        the Article 8 exception to be found in the UK Borders Act to  avoid
        deportation. On the information before Judge Coates  this  decision
        was correct as nothing in the papers establishes that such a report
        is  necessary.  The  Panel's  Record  of  Proceedings   shows   the
        following:






          Preliminary Matters


          Adjournment Application
          Counsel


          We have received a letter from an independent social worker. It is
   to assess the       strength of family life. She has  not  been  able  to
   complete the report in time. We        would  like  an  adjournment.  The
   parents have done their best. Accept they wd       have been aware of the
   relevant date. But seek an adjournment on that basis.


          Mr Bates


          The  resp  objects  to  the  application.  Tribunal  have  already
   considered the point         on 2.10.12. The report can only provide  you
   with general matters & the            separation  of  a  child  from  its
   parents. You have  ample  experience  to  deal  with         the  aspects
   raised.


          Ruling


          We refuse the application. Both sides have had ample time to  deal
   with the       preparation. This issue was raised and refused at the  CMR
   on 3/10. No attempt          to  re  argue  it  beforehand.  Not  in  the
   interests of justice to adjourn given this is a        very young  child.
   And there are w/s from interested parties.


    16. The refusal was made by the Panel  exercising  their  discretionary
        case management powers. The overriding objective is to be found  in
        rule 4 of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005, and the provisions relating to adjournments in rule 21.  Rule
        21 (b) imposes an obligation upon an applicant to show good reasons
        why an adjournment is necessary which it was  found  the  appellant
        had not satisfied in this appeal.  Rule  21  (3)  states  that  the
        Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing in order to allow a party  more
        time to produce evidence unless satisfied (a) the evidence  relates
        to a matter of dispute in the appeal and (b) it would be unjust  to
        determine  the  appeal  without  permitting  the  party  a  further
        opportunity to produce the evidence and (c) where the party  failed
        to comply with directions for the production of  the  evidence,  he
        has provided a satisfactory explanation for that failure.


    17. I find these provisions were considered  by  the  Panel.  There  is
        reference to the issue of fairness and  also  the  availability  of
        evidence from other sources relevant to the issue. There  are  also
        reported determinations by the President of the Upper Tribunal  and
        others regarding the best interests of a child which it is accepted
        are, in the absence of countervailing factors, to be brought up  in
        a stable home with a loving and caring mother and father.


    18. Facts specific to this case should have been included in statements
        and oral evidence if the appellant wanted  the  Panel  to  consider
        them.  The Panel was tasked to primarily act on the evidence in the
        case, which they did. The claim that the findings made  demonstrate
        the decision to refuse the adjournment was incorrect, as the  Panel
        found in paragraph 57 that they did not have a  particularly  clear
        picture of the living arrangements, is a submission made  with  the
        benefit of hindsight and does not show the decision  made  when  it
        was, is wrong. The reason the Panel did not have  a  clear  picture
        was the evidence from the appellant and others was simply not  good
        enough to prove what was being alleged.


    19. I  find  no  error  proved  in  relation  to  the  refusal  of  the
        adjournment request on the facts of this appeal.


    20. The second ground of challenge  alleges  the  Panel's  findings  on
        family life are flawed, alleging undue weight was placed  upon  the
        fact the appellant and Miss Woodhouse have not lived  together  and
        substantially underestimated the amount of time  the  family  spend
        together and their future intentions.


    21. The Panel found that the appellant and Miss Woodhouse have not  co-
        habited which is factually correct. The  pregnancy  was  accidental
        and the Panel noted the appellant's lack of honesty and involvement
        with other women as summarised above.


    22. In Berrehab v The Netherlands [1989] 11 EHRR 322 the European Court
        said that "the concept of family life embraces, even where there is
        no co-habitation, the tie between a parent and  his  or  her  child
        regardless of whether or not the latter is legitimate".  There  is,
        therefore, clearly family life recognised by Article 8 between  the
        appellant and A.


    23. In relation to the appellant and Miss Woodhouse, the  existence  or
        non existence of family life for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  is
        essentially a question of fact depending upon the real existence in
        practice of close personal ties. In Kroon v Netherlands [1994] ECHR
        35 the Court accepted that family life could include  relationships
        between unmarried adults who  had  made  a  sufficient  commitment.
        More recently, in R (on the application of Kussin)  v  SSHD  [2009]
        EWHC 358, a JR case in  which  there  was  a  lack  of  substantive
        evidence to show that an engaged  couple  had  lived  together  for
        eight yeas as claimed, Blake J pointed out (for the purposes of the
        unmarried partner's policy) that the nature of  their  relationship
        was not on the same basis as husband  and  wife  which  would  have
        required the relationship to have matured to the  point  of  mutual
        commitment  to  a  permanent  relationship.   Mere  starting  of  a
        relationship, mere periods of cohabitation and a mere  relationship
        with an individual did not equate to  the  status  of  husband  and
        wife.  In such circumstances, Blake J thought that  there  were  no
        reasonable prospects that an  Immigration  Judge  would  allow  the
        appeal on  Article  8  grounds,  given  that  the  parties  had  no
        dependent children and they  had  developed  and  maintained  their
        relationship at a time when the applicant's immigration status  was
        unstable and insecure.


    24. In Balogun  v  United  Kingdom  (Application  no.  60286/09)  ECtHR
        (Fourth Section), reported in May 2012,  the ECtHR upheld the  view
        of the Tribunal that the relationship with  a  girlfriend  was  not
        sufficiently settled, serious or long-term to amount to family life
        (para 47).


    25. It is submitted that the reason the parties do not co-habit is  due
        to the appellant's bail conditions which require  him  to  live  in
        Nottingham whereas Miss Woodhouse lives in Derby.  If  there  is  a
        settled intention to live as man and wife with clear evidence of  a
        sufficiently settled, serious, and long term relationship, and this
        is only prevented by extraneous factors, it could  be  said  family
        life recognised by Article 8 has come into existence.  Whatever the
        intention of Miss Woodhouse, however, the  Panel  clearly  did  not
        believe the appellant had such an intention. There is reference  to
        other women he was seeing and being found in the company of, and in
        paragraph 58 and 59 the Panel note the lack of  evidence  regarding
        this issue. I accept Miss Woodhouse may have given evidence to this
        effect but unless the desire is mutual  one  parties  view  is  not
        decisive. The old adage 'it takes two to make a marriage but one to
        break it' may be relevant here.


    26. In any event, even if there is no family life recognised by Article
        8 the friendships/relationship they do have will  be  an  important
        element of their private lives recognised by Article 8.  As  stated
        in AA v United Kingdom  (Application  no.  8000/08)  ECtHR  (Fourth
        Section)  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  tended  to  suggest  that  the
        Applicant, a young adult who resided with his mother  and  had  not
        yet founded a family of  his  own,  could  be  regarded  as  having
        "family life" for the purposes of Article 8(1). However, it was not
        necessary to decide this.  As Article  8  protected  the  right  to
        establish and develop relationships with  other  human  beings  and
        could embrace aspects of an individual's social identity, it had to
        be accepted that  the  totality  of  social  ties  between  settled
        migrants and the community in which they  were  living  constituted
        part of the concept of private life within the meaning  of  Article
        8.   In  practice  the  factors  to  be  examined  when   assessing
        proportionality of the deportation measure were the same regardless
        of whether family or private life was engaged (paras 46 - 49).


    27. In relation to the weight to be given to  the  appellant's  private
        life it is noted he entered the UK in 2008 and that Miss  Woodhouse
        knew of his  status.  European  Jurisprudence  states  that  little
        weight need be given to a relationship developed when one party  is
        aware of the adverse immigration status of the other.  In  Nunez  v
        Norway (Application No. 55597/09) ECtHR (Fourth Section) the  ECtHR
        said that an important consideration was whether  family  life  was
        created at a time when the persons involved  were  aware  that  the
        immigration status of one of them was such that the persistence  of
        that family life within the host State would  from  the  outset  be
        precarious. Where this was the case, the removal of a  non-national
        family  member  would  be  incompatible  with  Article  8  only  in
        exceptional circumstances.  In Y v Russia (Application No  20113/7)
        ECtHR (First Section) the ECtHR appeared  to  suggest  that,  where
        family life was created at a time when the  persons  involved  were
        aware that the immigration status of one of  them  was  precarious,
        then removal of the  non  national  family  member  would  only  be
        incompatible with Article 8 in exceptional circumstances.


    28. A finding the relationship between the appellant and Miss Woodhouse
        did not make the decision disproportionate is within the  range  of
        findings the Panel were entitled to make on the evidence.


    29. The third ground of challenge is to the Panel's assessment  of  the
        best interest of the child.  The findings Miss  Woodhouse's  family
        will be able to assist, in paragraph 71, is said to  be  flawed  as
        there was no evidence of this and the  evidence  was  that  at  all
        times either the appellant or Miss Woodhouse cares for A.  I accept
        the factual matrix is that the appellant lives with his  mother  at
        her house in Nottingham as part of his bail conditions and that  he
        cares for his daughter while Miss Woodhouse is at work.   There  is
        no evidence the appellant's mother has no role in  caring  for  the
        child in such circumstances or that she or Miss Woodhouse's family,
        who came to the Upper Tribunal hearing and to  support  her,  would
        effectively abandon the child if the appellant was removed. In  any
        event this is not material as it has not been proved Miss Woodhouse
        is unable to adequately care for the child and meet  her  needs  if
        the appellant was removed, even if this meant  she  was  unable  to
        work.


    30. I accept the appellant is known to his daughter  but  there  is  no
        error proved in the finding Miss Woodhouse is  the  primary  parent
        with care on the facts. I  find  she  is  the  primary  carer  with
        assistance from the appellant, even if  such  care  is  in  reality
        shared in terms of the time A spends with each parent. I accept, as
        per the case law and established thinking, that A's best  interests
        are to be brought up in a settled family.  There is no  finding  by
        the  Panel  to  the  contrary.   The   proportionality   assessment
        considered the child's position and it was  found  that  her  needs
        will continue to be met as she will remain with her  mother.  There
        was no evidence Miss Woodhouse is unable to meet the primary  needs
        of heat, shelter, food, love, physical and emotional  security,  or
        that separation from the appellant  will  result  in  emotional  or
        other harm to the child sufficient to render the decision wrong  in
        law. A is very young and very young children are focussed on  their
        parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.


    31. The appellant was convicted of supplying Class A drugs.  The  Panel
        considered the factors relevant to assessing the public interest as
        per   Masih   (deportation    -    public    interest    -    basic
        principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046(IAC).  I find it was clear
        to the Panel  that  the  needs  of  the  child  were  an  issue  of
        substantial  importance.  I  find  the  offence  committed  by  the
        appellant, supply of Class A drugs and the prevention of crime  and
        disorder and the protection of the public, as well as the deterrent
        element, means there must be a  strong  Article  8  claim  for  the
        appellant to succeed. This is also an  automatic  deportation  case
        relating to an order made under  the  statutory  provisions  to  be
        found in UK Borders Act 2007. The child and her mother shall remain
        in the UK. The child shall continue to be cared for by her  primary
        carer. The child is still only very young.  I do not find it proved
        that in dismissing the appeal the Panel made a decision outside the
        range of findings they were entitled to make on the  evidence.  The
        consequences of separation were noted and factored in regarding the
        effect of the decision on the child's development. Even if care was
        shared no material  error  is  proved  in  the  way  in  which  the
        proportionality balancing exercise was conducted.


Decision

    32. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    33. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.







Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17th June 2013












