
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00610/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th September 2014                          |On 16th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                awazi mwinyi

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Mair of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Deardon and Dr Deputy Judge Barros made following a hearing at Bradford
    on 8th July, 2014.



Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  born  on
    15th May 1989.  On 26th October 2011 he was convicted  of  offences  of
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm and possession of  an  offensive
    weapon.   He  was  sentenced  to  two  terms  of  imprisonment  to  run
    concurrently for a total of 21 months.

Procedural history

 3. This matter first came before the Tribunal on 17th December, 2012.  The
    Presenting Officer that day requested an adjournment on the basis  that
    he had been ambushed by the late service of  an  expert  report  by  Dr
    Aguilar on the claimant's ethnicity.  The judge indicated that she  was
    prepared to give the Presenting Officer adequate time to  consider  the
    report but said that thereafter she intended to proceed.  At that stage
    the Home Office withdrew the decision.

 4. A fresh decision was made in November 2013.

 5. In February 2014 that decision was withdrawn in the light of  the  case
    of R (on the application of P) (DRC) v SSHD and R (on  the  application
    of R) (DRC) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879.

 6. A third decision, and the one before the panel was made on 26th  March,
    2014.

 7. On 23rd June, 2014 the POU asked for the case to be  adjourned  pending
    the reporting of a country guidance case.  The request was  made  by  a
    Senior Presenting Officer who said that he had been assigned to present
    the appeal.  He said that it was expected  that  the  country  guidance
    case would be heard and promulgated before the end of the year.

 8. On 25th June 2014 the adjournment request was refused by  the  resident
    judge.

 9. On the morning of the hearing the judge received a letter from the  POU
    in Leeds which he set out in full.  It states:

         "I write to inform you that due to  sudden  illness  no  Presenting
         Officer will be available to present the list in Court 7 today, 8th
         July 2014.  On behalf  of  the  Home  Office  I  wish  to  seek  an
         adjournment on the  case  of  Awazi  Mwinyi  (DA/00610/2014).   The
         absence  of  a  Presenting  Officer  should  not  be  taken  as  an
         indication that any aspect  of  this  appeal  is  conceded  by  the
         Secretary of State.  The panel is invited to take into account  the
         contents of the Home  Office  bundle  and  to  dismiss  the  appeal
         accordingly.   Please  accept  my   sincere   apologies   for   the
         inconvenience caused by the absence of  a  Presenting  Officer  for
         this list."

10. The judge heard submissions from counsel for the  claimant.   She  told
    him that Dr Aguilar, the expert, was on the train from St. Andrew's  in
    Scotland and was expected to arrive  at  the  hearing  centre  to  give
    evidence later in the morning.  She said that the Home  Office  were  a
    large organisation and it would not  have  been  unreasonable  to  have
    expected  them  to  have  fielded  either  counsel  or  an  alternative
    Presenting Officer at short notice.  She also confirmed that there  was
    no country guidance case pending on the DRC  on  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    case management system.

11. The judge wrote as follows:

         "We considered the application to adjourn which had  been  made  by
         the Secretary of State in light of the further representations made
         by  Ms  Mair  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   We  considered  the
         application of Rules  4  and  21  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  noted   that   a   written
         application to adjourn the proceedings had already  been  made  and
         refused  by  the  regional  senior   Immigration   Judge.    Having
         considered all the factors cumulatively  we  decided  that  it  was
         appropriate for the proceedings to continue.  We therefore  refused
         the application to adjourn."

12.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  claimant  and  considered  the
    submissions. He relied on the judgment in P & R  and,  on  that  basis,
    found that the claimant was a member  of  a  particular  social  group,
    being a criminal deportee who had been sentenced  to  a  period  of  at
    least twelve months' imprisonment, and would be journeying back to  the
    DRC.  As such, and on the  basis  of  the  conclusions  of  Mr  Justice
    Phillips in P & R, he concluded that he would be  at  risk  on  return.
    The claimant would be interrogated on arrival by professional,  skilled
    and experienced immigration officials.  He would not be  able  to  hide
    the fact of his  conviction  and  that  would  result  in  a  real  and
    substantial risk that, in common  with  other  criminal  deportees,  he
    would be subjected to imprisonment and ill-treatment.

The Grounds of Application

13. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in deciding to proceed with the appeal without  any
    representation from the Secretary of State.  The  Presenting  Officer's
    attendance was entirely out of control of the Secretary  of  State  and
    cover was not available at such short notice.

14. Second, the judge erred in relying on the case of  P  &  R.   The  Home
    Office has now published a Country Policy Bulletin  which  updates  the
    policy on return to the DRC in the light  of  that  judgment.   The  UK
    Government is confident that the new information confirmed  their  view
    that foreign national offenders or failed asylum seekers do not on  the
    basis of their conviction in the UK face any real risk on return.   The
    Tribunal, moreover, had failed to provide any assessment as to why  the
    authorities in the DRC would ever know about his conviction.

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Appleyard  on  5th
    August 2014.

Submissions

16. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds.  He said that the file  was  enormous
    and needed two days' preparation because of its  potential  complexity.
    There was no way that the POU could field a substitute.  The  case  had
    been assigned to him personally because it had been decided that it was
    complex enough to need a Senior Presenting  Officer;  the  panel  would
    have been aware of that fact because of the letter on the file.

17. Ms Mair submitted that it was open to the  judge  to  decide  that  the
    proper course was to proceed.  She reminded me of the history  of  this
    appeal and the past conduct of the Secretary of  State  in  withdrawing
    two previous decisions and then attempting to have the appeal postponed
    on the basis of a claimed pending country guidance case which had still
    not been listed. Arguably the conduct of  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    December 2012, in seeking to have an appeal adjourned  and,  when  that
    attempt failed, withdrawing the decision, amounted to abuse of process.
    The judge's decision to proceed must be considered in  the  context  of
    the fact that this was the third attempt by the Secretary of  State  to
    have the matter adjourned after a third decision.

18. The claim of risk on the grounds of particular social group was  raised
    two and a half months earlier at the CMR and  whilst  it  was  accepted
    that the report was not available until  very  late  in  the  day,  the
    parties knew what the report would say.

19. It was not clear to the panel on the day that the case had been  deemed
    too complex to be given to colleagues, nor that a particular individual
    was tied to the case. Moreover there was real prejudice to the claimant
    who was in detention.

20. So far as Ground 2 was concerned she said that the judge had been right
    to consider this appeal in the light of the decision in  P  &  K.   The
    judge had considered how the convictions would come to light.   All  of
    the evidence before the judge was in the reports which were  before  Mr
    Justice Phillips.

Findings and Conclusions

21. The rules which govern the judge's decision are Rule 4 and  21  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

22. Rule 4 states:

         "The  overriding  objective  of  these  Rules  is  to  secure  that
         proceedings before the Tribunal are handled as fairly, quickly  and
         efficiently as possible and, where appropriate, that members of the
         Tribunal have responsibility for ensuring this, in the interests of
         the parties to the proceedings and the wider public interest."

23. Rule 21 states:

         "The Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing on the  application  of  a
         party unless  satisfied  that  the  appeal  or  application  cannot
         otherwise be justly determined."

24. It is clear that the judge had the relevant rules  in  mind,  since  he
    cited  both  and  said  that  he  had  considered   all   the   factors
    cumulatively. On the evidence before the judge it  cannot  properly  be
    said that he was not entitled to reach the conclusion that  the  proper
    application of them favoured proceeding with the appeal.

25. The procedural history of this  matter  is  quite  extraordinary.   The
    Secretary of State has made three decisions, having withdrawn two,  the
    first after a failed application to adjourn and the second in the light
    of P & R although it was re-made on broadly the same terms as before.

26. The judge was entitled to take into account the procedural  history  in
    deciding whether the overriding objective of the Rules  would  properly
    be met by acceding to another adjournment request.

27. Most importantly, the evidence upon which the  Presenting  Officer  now
    relies was not before him.  The adjournment request from the Presenting
    Officers' Unit did not state that this was a case which was so  complex
    that it needed two days' preparation.  It did not state that  a  Senior
    Presenting Officer had been assigned personally to prepare  it  because
    of the importance of the matter to the Secretary of State.  The request
    was made in standard terms without any reference to matters now  relied
    upon.

28. Whilst it may have been difficult for the Secretary of State to field a
    suitable Presenting Officer to present the appeal at short  notice,  it
    could not have been difficult for her to instruct one  of  the  six  or
    seven Presenting Officers who were in the building at the time to  come
    into court and to explain the position to the  judge.   The  importance
    which she now ascribes to the case is belied by her actions on the day.



29. So far as Ground 2 is concerned Mr Diwnycz made no submissions.  It  is
    without merit.  It was for the judge to decide how much weight  to  put
    on the case of  P  &  R.  Moreover  Mr  Justice  Phillips  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  against
    his decision but it seems  that  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to
    withdraw her appeal and elected to re-make the decision in P's case.

30. The judge dealt with the issue of disclosure to the DRC authorities  at
    paragraph 20 of the determination.

Decision

31. The original judge did not err  in  law.   His  decision  stands.   The
    claimant's appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

