
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00428/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 February 2016                  |On 24 February 2016                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 FARID CHAOU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Parkinson - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Grimmett promulgated on the 11 December  2015  in  which  the
         Judge dismissed the appellants appeal against  the  order  for  his
         deportation from the United Kingdom.

      2. Through no fault of Judge Grimmett  it  has  been  found  that  the
         determination must be  set  aside  as  a  result  of  a  procedural
         irregularity sufficient to amount to an error of  law  material  to
         the decision.

      3. On 19 October  2015  notice  of  the  hearing  was  posted  to  the
         appellant at HM Detention Centre at Campsfield House in Oxfordshire
         informing him of the hearing listed for  8  December  2015  at  the
         Victoria Law Courts in Birmingham. A request for the  appellant  to
         be produced was made. On the day the appellant was not produced and
         so failed to attend.  Judge Grimmett records in the determination:

         "12. The Appellant was in detention at the time of the hearing  and
             arrangements were made for him to be brought  to  the  Hearing
             Centre in Birmingham. However, those who  were  providing  the
             travel arrangements for him faxed the court on the day of  the
             hearing to say that he had  refused  to  be  transferred  from
             Harmondsworth Immigration Removal Centre  where  he  currently
             resides to Campsfield Immigration Removal Centre  on  the  day
             prior to the hearing. Apparently the transfer was so  that  he
             could be produced at court in good time for his court hearing.
              I was satisfied that he was aware of the hearing, having been
             notified of it by the tribunal and by the attendance of  those
             seeking to remove him to Campsfield  on  7th  December  and  I
             heard the appeal.

         13.  At about 1.30pm, after the hearing was completed, there was  a
             telephone message from the Appellant to say that the  men  who
             were to move him told him that there was no need  for  him  to
             travel to Campsfield.  On the day after the hearing a fax  was
             received from the  Appellant  which  said  that  the  security
             officer had told him there had been a mistake and that he  did
             not need to travel.  I  do  not  consider  it  appropriate  to
             adjourn the appeal as those attempting to move  the  Appellant
             had notified the Tribunal prior to the hearing that he did not
             wish to attend and the  Appellant  took  no  steps  until  the
             afternoon of the day of the hearing  to  notify  the  Tribunal
             that he was not attending."

      4. The fax referred  to  by  Judge  Grimmett  advised  the  First-tier
         Tribunal that the appellant was not being produced as ordered as he
         had refused to be transferred from Harmondsworth IRC to  Campsfield
         on 7 December 2015 so that he could be produced in  court  in  good
         time for his appeal hearing on 8 December 2015.

      5. A letter from Lawrence Lupin Solicitors to the First-tier Tribunal,
         faxed on 8 December 2015 at 13:08  hours,  has  attached  a  letter
         signed by the appellant in the following terms:

             "Unfortunately I was not able to attend my Deportation hearing
             today. I am now at Harmondsworth  IRC.  Yesterday  a  security
             officer came and said that I was  being  transferred  back  to
             Campsfield IRC but then said that it was a mistake and  I  was
             staying here.

             I request for my deportation hearing for today being adjourned
             so that I could attend. I am also in a process of  instructing
             solicitor who would represent me at my deportation hearing.

             Yours faithfully"

      6. The appellant has been consistent in relation to a  key  aspect  of
         his claim which is that after being notified of  the  intention  to
         transfer he was told by an officer of  the  Detention  Centre  that
         this had been in error and that he was to remain at  Harmondsworth.
         As the appellant is in immigration detention he  could  not  attend
         the hearing unless transferred and produced under escort.

      7. There is clearly a dispute of fact between the appellant's  account
         of why he did not attend the  hearing  and  that  recorded  in  the
         determination. The appellant again advanced at today's hearing  his
         claim that he was happy with a transfer  as  Campsfield  is  nearer
         Manchester where his partner lives.

      8. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  sought  resolution  of
         the dispute by the appellant giving oral  evidence  that  could  be
         tested by  cross-examination,  consideration  of  Judge  Grimmett's
         record of  proceedings,  consideration  of  the  fax  sent  to  the
         Tribunal on the day of  the  hearing  stating  that  the  appellant
         refused to be moved, and evidence from the writer of  the  fax  and
         officer who attended the appellants room  on  8  December  2015  at
         7.00AM.

      9. It was possible to hear from the appellant who repeated  his  claim
         and wish to have attended the hearing to 'speak to the judge'.  The
         documentary evidence has all been considered but there  is  nothing
         further from the author of the fax informing the Tribunal that  the
         appellant was not going to be produced or from the officer  who  it
         is said informed the appellant there had been a mistake and that he
         was to remain at Harmondsworth.

     10. Mr Parkinson was asked whether he  had  anything  to  disprove  the
         appellants claim but he did not. Mr Parkinson also noted  that  the
         appellant has referred to a partner and two children and that there
         may be Article 8 issues that need to be considered.

     11. As a result of the failure, for whatever reason, of  the  appellant
         to be produced at the hearing he has been denied the opportunity to
         participate in the appeal process and to put his case to  a  judge.
         The determination of Judge Grimmett shall be  set  aside.  Although
         the analysis of the position in EU law is well reasoned and may  in
         other circumstances be sustainable, there  shall  be  no  preserved
         findings.

     12. The following directions shall apply to the future conduct of  this
         appeal:

          i. The determination of Judge Grimmett shall be set aside with no
             preserved findings.

         ii. The appeal shall be heard by a Designated or Salaried Judge of
             the First-tier Tribunal nominated by the Resident Judge  in  a
             secure court in  Manchester  at  10.00am  25  May  2016,  time
             estimate 4 hours.

        iii. The appellant must send to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
             respondent copies of all the written evidence  he  intends  to
             rely upon. He must also provide a  written  statement  setting
             out in clear terms why he believes he should not be  deported.
             In relation to his human rights claim  he  must  set  out  the
             nature of the private and/or family life being relied upon and
             his case in relation to the effect on his family/private  life
             if he is removed to France. The same must be provided  by  any
             person coming to the Tribunal to support his case such as  his
             partner. This information to be provided no later than  4.00pm
             11 May 2016 or earlier date if so advised  by  the  First-tier
             tribunal in the event if a change to the hearing date.

         iv. No interpreter is required.

          v. Any further case management directions shall  be  provided  by
             the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester.

Decision

     13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
         the decision of the original Judge. The case shall be  remitted  to
         the First-tier tribunal sitting at Manchester for further hearing.

    Anonymity.

     14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.

         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 February 2016
