
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00091/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 August 2016                              |On 20 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State):  Mr S Whitwell, Home Office
                  Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr B):  Mr R Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Selva &
                  Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Thanki who in a decision which was  dated  30  July
    2015 and promulgated shortly thereafter allowed Mr B's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision to deport him.  For ease of reference
    throughout this decision, I will refer to the Secretary of  State,  who
    was the original respondent, as "the Secretary of State" and to  Mr  B,
    who was the original appellant as "the claimant".

 2. This appeal came before me on 4 February 2016 when I found  that  Judge
    Thanki's decision had contained a material error of law  such  that  it
    had to be set aside and re-made.  I gave my decision  orally  following
    that hearing and I shall incorporate the  substance  of  that  decision
    into this decision.

 3. The claimant, who was born in 1991, is a national of Dominica who moved
    with his family first to Montserrat, when he was 5 or 6 years  old  and
    then subsequently to the UK, when he  was  about  12,  in  2003,  after
    Montserrat had become difficult to inhabit owing to the eruption of the
    volcano there.  He was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country in July of that year.  As I noted in my previous decision as to
    error of law, regrettably, the claimant did not  behave  well  in  this
    country and by 2013 he had acquired eight convictions for 22  offences,
    which included a conviction for supplying class A drugs in May 2011 for
    which he was  sentenced  to  eighteen  months  in  a  youth  offenders'
    institution.  He was also sentenced in  July  2013  to  sixteen  weeks'
    imprisonment suspended for two  years  in  respect  of  an  offence  of
    battery of a former partner (and the mother of one of his children,  to
    whom reference will be made below).

 4. In August 2011 the claimant was served with a Notice  of  Liability  to
    Deportation and it is not now challenged on his behalf that as at  that
    time, if not earlier,  his  immigration  status  in  this  country  was
    precarious.  The Notice was served because by virtue of  Section  32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007,  the  claimant  was  subject  to  automatic
    deportation, and having considered the representations which were  made
    in response to this Notice, a deportation order was made against  which
    the claimant did not appeal.  This order was dated 17 March 2014.

 5. Subsequently, the claimant made  further  representations  in  February
    2015,  based  on  his  family  life  in   this   country,   but   these
    representations were refused by the Secretary of State,  who  certified
    his Article 8 claim under Section 94B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, the effect of which was that  the  claimant  could
    only appeal against that decision from outside the UK.  However, on  26
    March 2015 the claimant was granted an extension of time  in  which  to
    appeal against the 17 March 2014 decision and it was in respect of that
    decision that his appeal came before Judge Thanki.

 6. The claimant's appeal was on the basis that his deportation would be in
    breach of his Article 8 rights because of his family life with his then
    current partner, Ms Mo.. and their young daughter, P...  P..  had  been
    born on 8 November 2013, some fifteen months or so after  the  claimant
    and Ms Mo.. had become partners.  At the time  of  the  hearing  before
    Judge Thanki, Ms Mo.. was pregnant with the couple's  second  daughter,
    L, who was born on 18 March 2016.  Ms Mo.. is a  British  national  and
    accordingly so are her two children.  The claimant also has  a  son  by
    his previous relationship with a Ms Mi.., who was  the  victim  of  the
    assault in respect of which the claimant was convicted in 2013.

 7. Although pursuant to Section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  the
    Secretary of State is obliged to make a deportation order in respect of
    a foreign criminal  (which  by  virtue  of  his  2011  conviction  this
    claimant was), this requirement is subject to the provisions of Section
    33 which include (under Section 33(2)) "Exception 1" which is where the
    removal of the foreign criminal would breach that  person's  Convention
    rights.  Accordingly, if the removal of the claimant could properly  be
    said to be in breach of his Article 8 rights, then his removal would be
    unlawful.

 8. Whether or not a removal would be in breach of Article 8 in cases  such
    as this is governed by what is set out within the Immigration Rules  at
    paragraph 398, 399 and 399A in particular which themselves embody  what
    is set out within the new part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (inserted by Section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
    from 28 July 2014) and in  particular  Section  117C.   These  will  be
    discussed below.  It has always been common ground before me  that  the
    key issue in this case, although not necessarily the  only  issue,  was
    and remains whether or not the effect of deportation would  be  "unduly
    harsh" on the claimant's partner and her children.

 9. Judge Thanki considered, but in my judgment without adequate reasoning,
    that the effect of deporting the claimant would be unduly harsh on P...
     As already noted, I set that decision aside and in the  course  of  so
    doing I discussed the conflicting decisions given by this  Tribunal  in
    MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 and KMO (section 117
    - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 543.  I expressed the  view  in  my
    earlier Decision that the approach adopted in KMO was to be  preferred,
    which was to the effect that consideration of what was  "unduly"  harsh
    had to take account of the  level  of  public  interest  there  was  in
    deportation, such that the more serious the offending  of  the  foreign
    criminal, the less likely would it be that  his  deportation  would  be
    "unduly harsh".

10. The view I expressed in my earlier Decision has been  endorsed  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) & Another v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, in
    which the need for a proportionality assessment in cases such  as  this
    was made clear, the court concluding at paragraph 24 as follows:

         "Accordingly the more pressing the public interest in  ...  removal
         [of the foreign criminal], the harder it will be to show  that  the
         effect on his child or partner will be unduly harsh".

11. With the agreement of both parties, after I had found an error of  law,
    this appeal was relisted before me so that a fresh  decision  could  be
    made, and I gave directions for the service of further evidence so that
    the  claimant's  circumstances  and  that  of  his  family,  could   be
    considered as at the date of the hearing.



The Hearing

12. I heard evidence from the claimant and Ms Mo.. (whom the  claimant  had
    married as recently as 19 May this year, the day before the  claimant's
    25th birthday).  I also heard evidence from the claimant's  mother  and
    grandmother.  All of these witnesses had previously made statements (in
    the grandmother's case she had written a  letter  which  stood  as  her
    statement) which statements stood  as  their  evidence-in-chief.   They
    were cross-examined  on  their  statements.   Although  the  claimant's
    stepfather had prepared a statement in anticipation of giving evidence,
    in the event he did not do so.

13. The file (which had been prepared in  accordance  with  the  directions
    which  I  had  given  earlier)  also  contained  a  statement  from   a
    psychiatrist and social worker.   I  also  heard  submissions  from  Mr
    Whitwell on behalf of the Secretary of State and Mr Spurling on  behalf
    of the claimant, Mr Spurling relying  also  on  the  skeleton  argument
    which he had helpfully prepared.

14. I do not intend to set out within this Decision  everything  which  was
    sent to me during the course of the hearing, but  shall  only  set  out
    below what is necessary.   However,  I  have  had  regard  to  all  the
    evidence which was given and the submissions which were made,  as  well
    as to all the material contained within the file, whether  or  not  the
    same is specifically referred to below.

The Claimant's Criminal History

15. A list of the claimant's convictions has helpfully been set out  within
    paragraph 5 of the skeleton argument prepared on his  behalf,  and  for
    someone so young, is extensive.  His first conviction was in  September
    2004, when he was just 13 years old, and in  possession  of  a  Stanley
    knife, for which he received a referral order.  In May 2006, when  aged
    15, he pleaded guilty  to  burglary  of  a  commercial  premises.   The
    following month, he was convicted of taking and driving away  a  moped,
    as well as  bail  offences,  for  which  he  received  a  twelve  month
    supervision order.  Then  in  January  2007,  still  aged  15,  he  was
    convicted of possession of an imitation firearm (a  cigarette  lighter)
    for which he again received a supervision order  plus  a  twelve  month
    community order.

16. In June 2007, after  the  claimant  turned  16,  he  was  convicted  of
    possession of crack cocaine, as well as a bail offence  and  breach  of
    community order, for which he again received a twelve  month  community
    order.  Then, the following month, he was again convicted of possession
    of crack cocaine, as well as heroin (again apparently for personal use)
    for which on this occasion he was sentenced to four months'  detention.



17. Still aged 16, just before his 17th birthday in May 2008, he received a
    further six months' detention sentence for aggravated  vehicle  taking,
    where he had stolen a car and driven it dangerously without a  licence.
    That conviction was ten days before his 17th birthday.

18. The claimant did not stop offending when he became an adult, because on
    3 March 2011, when he was 19, he was convicted of possession of class A
    drugs, cocaine and heroin, with intent to  supply,  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to eighteen months in a young  offenders'  institution.   The
    judge's sentencing remarks in respect of this offence are  instructive,
    because it is clear that the judge did not accept the excuses which the
    claimant had put forward to explain his actions.  In the first place it
    is clear that the claimant had said that he "did not  really  know  how
    serious it was" to be dealing in drugs but this  was  rejected  by  the
    judge who noted that the claimant had taken "the trouble to hide  these
    drugs about your person, quite a bit of trouble  to  hide  them"  which
    explained why the judge was "not convinced that [he did not know  that]
    what you were doing was very wrong indeed".  The judge also  considered
    that the claimant would have known from his previous times in detention
    centre just how serious dealing in drugs was.

19. The judge  also  said  this  about  another  plank  of  the  claimant's
    mitigation:

         "I have to say I am not too impressed with the mitigation that  you
         committed these offences in order to support your family."

20. At this time, the claimant was in a relationship with Ms Mi.., who  was
    the mother of his son K.

21. After his release from this sentence, the  claimant  met  Ms  Mo..  and
    started his relationship with her,  but  it  seems  that  she  did  not
    appreciate just how precarious the claimant's immigration position was.
     Although he had been notified of  his  liability  to  deportation,  it
    appears that he only told her that there were matters  to  be  resolved
    with regard to this.  Be that as  it  may,  it  is  accepted  that  the
    claimant's relationship with Ms Mo.. developed at a time  when  on  any
    view his immigration status in this country was precarious.

22. In the meantime, relations with his previous  partner,  Ms  Mi..,  were
    clearly not good and this led to the  most  recent  of  the  claimant's
    convictions, which occurred as a result  of  his  assaulting  Ms  Mi...
    Although the claimant pleaded guilty to this offence (for which he  was
    sentenced in the Magistrates'  Court  to  a  sixteen  weeks'  suspended
    sentence with a supervision requirement on 13 January 2013)  (this  was
    when the claimant was 21 years old), it is clear from all the  evidence
    which I have considered in this  appeal  that  the  claimant  does  not
    really accept his responsibility for this offence.  It was  clear  from
    what his mother said in evidence that his position was that he did  not
    actually assault her, because when asked why she had  referred  to  the
    offence as "the alleged" offence, the claimant's mother said that  this
    was because she knew the lady involved and did not believe  her.   When
    asked whether this is also what she had been told by the claimant,  she
    indicated that it was.

23. In addition to the offences of which the claimant has  been  convicted,
    he also admitted other offences for which he was cautioned  or  warned,
    being  one  of  criminal  damage  when  he  was  aged  13,  another  of
    shoplifting when he was also aged 13 and two occasions on which he  was
    warned for possession of cannabis for personal use when he was aged 18.
     He also was given a warning for harassment in June 2006  when  he  was
    aged 15 but he apparently now denies this.

24. The Nexus Report also lists a substantial  number  of  further  alleged
    offences (some eleven in total) of which it is said on his behalf  that
    with regard to three of them "the evidence clearly exonerated" him  and
    in regard to the  other  eight  (which  includes  offences  of  assault
    occasioning ABH and harassment of a girlfriend plus  possession  of  an
    air pistol and theft) "the police took no further [action] for lack  of
    evidence capable of supporting a prosecution".

25. It is accordingly clear  that  certainly  up  until  the  time  he  was
    released from his sentence of imprisonment, and beyond, until the  time
    he was convicted of the assault on his former girlfriend, the  claimant
    has got a terrible record, and that even now he does not  accept  fully
    his responsibility for the offences of which  he  has  been  convicted,
    even though in respect of the most recent offence he pleaded guilty.

The Claimant's Family Life

26. Although at paragraphs 35 and 36 of his most recent witness  statement,
    the claimant appears to suggest that he has  recommenced  contact  with
    his son from his relationship with Ms Mi.., his evidence regarding this
    changed during cross-examination, and it was apparent  (and  ultimately
    accepted on his behalf) that currently he does  not  have  any  contact
    with him.   It  is  not  argued  on  his  behalf  that  the  effect  of
    deportation on his son could be said to be unduly harsh.

27. However, he clearly does currently enjoy a close relationship  with  Ms
    Mo.., and all the evidence I  heard  was  to  the  effect  that  he  is
    currently the primary carer for his two daughters while  Ms  Mo..  goes
    out to work.  Ms Mo.. is a  midwife  and  needs  on  occasion  to  work
    unsocial hours, but whenever she is at work the  claimant  looks  after
    their children.

28. Ms Mo.. does not have a large  family  in  this  country.   She  has  a
    brother, but he does not have children and I was told is likely soon to
    move out of London to be with his new partner.  Although Ms Mo.. has  a
    good relationship with her sister, she has children of her own  and  is
    not able  to  supply  much  support.   However,  the  claimant  has  an
    extremely large family in this country, of which  very  many  are  very
    supportive.  The claimant's mother has regularly had P.. to  stay,  and
    tries to see her grandchildren every weekend.  She will do anything she
    can to help.  She apparently has a baby herself now, and  the  claimant
    is surrounded  by  cousins.   I  heard  evidence  from  the  claimant's
    grandmother, who told me she had had her first grandchild aged 26, that
    she  has  five  children,  fourteen  grandchildren  and  eight   great-
    grandchildren, who all provide  mutual  support  to  each  other.   The
    claimant himself is one of five children, so there is a  large  support
    network available currently to assist.   However,  I  accept  that  the
    claimant is currently a supportive father who is involved  in the  care
    of his children with Ms Mo.. and that this care is one of  the  factors
    which enable Ms Mo.. to carry out the responsible job which she does.

29. Regarding Ms Mo.., she is about ten years older than the  claimant  and
    is, I find, a capable and  impressive  lady.   She  clearly  takes  her
    responsibilities as a midwife seriously, and she told me that  she  was
    very dependent upon the support which she currently receives  from  the
    claimant.  However, as I have  already  noted,  the  claimant  did  not
    apparently inform her from the outset just how serious his  immigration
    position was, and their youngest child was  born  in  2016,  which  was
    sometime  after  Ms  Mo..  herself  must  have  appreciated  that   the
    claimant's position was precarious, because he  had  been  detained  in
    2014, pending possible deportation.   Ms  Mo..  told  me  that  it  was
    difficult while the claimant was detained, but with the help of various
    members of the claimant's family, she had just about been able to cope.



30. Although she was reticent,  Ms  Mo..  did  tell  the  Tribunal  of  her
    depression following a dreadful car "accident" in about 2003, when  she
    and a female friend had apparently been chased by a gang who the police
    later told her were known or suspected  of  carrying  out  gang  rapes.
    This had a terrible effect on her,  especially  because  she  had  been
    unable to talk about it  for  some  years.   She  has  also  apparently
    suffered  from  postnatal  depression  after  the  birth  of  both  her
    children.  The claimant's case was advanced on the basis  that  if  the
    claimant was deported, Ms Mo.. might find it so difficult to cope  that
    the effect  would  in  these  circumstances  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
    children.

31. It was submitted on behalf of the claimant that  some  confirmation  of
    this risk could  be  gleaned  from  the  psychiatric  report  of  Susan
    Pagella, who is a psychotherapist.  Reliance was  also  placed  on  the
    report from Ms McKenzie, a social worker.

Ms Pagella's Report

32. Regrettably, I am not able to place any real  weight  on  this  report,
    which, in Ms Pagella's own words  is  heavily  dependent  on  her  "own
    extensive professional working experience" as there  appears  to  be  a
    "dearth of scientific research in related fields" (see at page 4 of her
    report at page 48 of the Bundle).  The report is heavily  dependent  on
    what Ms Pagella has been told by the claimant and  Ms  Mo..,  which  is
    quoted at length.  So for example, at page 6 of the report Ms  Mo..  is
    quoted as follows, referring to the claimant:

         "I trust him.  All his crimes happened in  the  past  when  he  was
         immature.  He's emotionally mature now and very gentle; intuitively
         picking up the children's needs and what  needs  doing  around  the
         house."

33. As his most recent conviction, for assaulting his former  partner,  was
    in respect of an offence committed when he was 21,  it  is  simply  not
    correct that all his offences were committed "in the past when  he  was
    immature".  I also note that at page 13 (page  57  of  the  Bundle)  Ms
    Pagella when listing the "current post sentencing indicators" refers to
    his having "not re-offended" since his release from prison.   This  is,
    of  course,  simply  incorrect,  and  appears  to   airbrush   out   of
    consideration what I certainly regard as a  serious  offence,  that  of
    assaulting his former partner, and mother of his son  (especially  when
    considered in the  context  of  his  previous  history  which  involves
    harassment   and    allegations    of    assault    against    previous
    girlfriends/partners).   I  also  cannot  accept  what  is  said  under
    "Conclusion" at page 15 (page 59 of the Bundle) that the claimant  "can
    be considered to be himself a  victim  of  his  own  past,  growing  up
    without a father present and other disruptive elements during his young
    life", which apparently leads Ms  Pagella  to  conclude  "as  a  mental
    health professional" that the claimant's  "level  of  re-offending  and
    consequently his risk to the public [is] extremely low  if  he  remains
    within the  UK".   In  light  of  his  extensive  history  of  criminal
    offending, the fact that he has remained out of trouble  for  the  past
    three years (at a time when he must have appreciated that he  needs  to
    be on his best behaviour to have any chance  of  avoiding  deportation)
    cannot properly be a sufficient basis for concluding that his  risk  of
    re-offending is "extremely [my emphasis] low", especially as, as I have
    already noted above, the claimant still did not appear  to  accept  the
    seriousness of his most recent conviction, or even  that  in  any  real
    sense he was guilty as charged, despite his plea at the time.

34. I also note what Ms Pagella regards as the "pertinent criteria",  being
    "maturity,  motivation,  remorse"  and  "moving  on  and   growing   up
    psychologically", but again from his answers given in cross-examination
    and his evidence generally, I did not find the claimant to  be  someone
    who had genuinely moved on  from  previous  offending  towards  a  more
    mature approach.  I noted in particular that his evidence would  change
    when under challenge.  So, for  example,  although  he  had  originally
    stated that he had been seeing his son  after  originally  winning  his
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, and that that position had  only
    changed after his birthday this year, when it was pointed  out  to  him
    that in Ms McKenzie's report, which was  written  a  month  before  his
    birthday, she had referred to his telling her that he was not  able  to
    have contact and that this was because he lacked the finances to appeal
    to the courts (see at paragraph 2 of her report) (at  page  66  of  the
    Bundle), after various attempts to explain the discrepancy between what
    was said there and what his evidence was now, his  account  changed  to
    being that "truthfully" he had only seen his son once and that  contact
    had effectively consisted of his leaving presents for his son.

35.  Neither  the  claimant's  mother  nor  his  grandmother  appeared   to
    appreciate just how serious was the claimant's criminal history either,
    his grandmother even going so far as to say in her  letter  of  support
    that after the death  of  his  grandfather  "he  started  getting  into
    trouble just like any normal teenager which I know".  By no stretch  of
    the imagination can this claimant's criminal history be explained  away
    as "just like any normal teenager".

36. Ms Pagella also relies on "research" which, in her  words,  "has  shown
    the importance of fathers' presence in their childrens' lives as a role
    model and a balance to the feminine input of mothers".  She goes on  to
    suggest that "one cannot make up  for  the  deprivation  of  the  other
    without a  long-term  damaging  effect  to  the  child's  psychological
    development... [which] psychological damage may be  overt  or  covert".
    She then quotes from other research.

37. I would accept that in general, as a generic proposition, it  would  be
    preferable for a child to be brought up by both parents, but the weight
    to be given to this factor must be assessed on a case by case basis.

38. Earlier in her report, Ms  Pagella  had  given  her  opinion  that  the
    relationship between the claimant and his  wife  and  daughters  was  a
    genuine caring one, and although there may  have  been  an  element  of
    calculation in the timing of their marriage  in  the  context  of  this
    appeal, I accept that it is more likely than not that this is a genuine
    relationship.

The Immigration Rules and  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014).

39. As already indicated above, at paragraph 8 of this decision, whether or
    not the removal of this claimant would be in breach of  his  Article  8
    rights  is  governed  essentially  by  what  is  set  out  within   the
    Immigration Rules at paragraphs 398, 399 and  399A  in  particular  and
    these Rules are intended to embody what is set out within the new  Part
    5A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  and  in
    particular Section 117C.  I set  out  first  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules, as follows:


         " Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

         (a) a foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
         deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

         (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
         him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or

         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

               (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

               (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
               the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the   date   of   the
               immigration decision; and in either case

               (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live  in  the
               country to which the person is to be deported; and

               (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the
               UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

               (i) the relationship was formed at a time  when  the  person
               (deportee) was in the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration
               status was not precarious; and

               (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  live  in
               the country to which the person is to be  deported,  because
               of compelling circumstances over and above  those  described
               in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

               (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in
               the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and

         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported...."

40. I also set out the provisions now  contained  within  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as inserted by Section 19
    of the Immigration Act 2014, as follows:

         ""PART 5A Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

         117AApplication of this Part

         (1)This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

         (a)breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
         under Article 8, and

         (b)as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998.

         (2)In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

         (a)in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and

         (b)in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
         considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117BArticle 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)Little weight should be given to-

         (a)a private life, or

         (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.

         (6)In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b)it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

         117CArticle 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
         criminals

         (1)The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (2)The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)In the case of  a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)Exception 1 applies where-

         (a)C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of
         C's life,

         (b)C is socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom,
         and

         (c)there would be very significant  obstacles  to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

         (5)Exception 2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

         117DInterpretation of this Part

         (1)In this Part-

             "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
         Rights;

             "qualifying child" means a person who is under the  age  of  18
         and who-

             (a)    is a British citizen, or

             (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period
         of seven years or more;

             "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

             (a)    is a British citizen, or

             (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning
         of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).




         (2)In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a)who is not a British citizen,

         (b)who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

         (c)who-

         (i)has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  12
         months,

         (ii)has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious  harm,
         or

         (iii)is a persistent offender. ..."

41. As I have also indicated above, following the decision of the Court  of
    appeal in MM (Uganda), it is necessary for this Tribunal to carry out a
    proportionality assessment in order to reach a decision as  to  whether
    the effect on the claimant's children or wife could properly be said to
    be "unduly harsh", bearing in mind the  clear  guidance  given  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda)  that  "the  more  pressing  the  public
    interest in... removal [of a foreign criminal] the harder it will be to
    show that the effect in his childhood partner will be unduly harsh".

42. When assessing the effect on the claimant's children, I  also  have  in
    mind the Secretary of State's  obligations  under  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to  have  regard  to  the
    need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are  in  the
    United Kingdom, and that these interests are a  primary  consideration,
    although not necessarily a determinative one.

43. Although, as I have already stated, I do not consider that the claimant
    has a genuine parental relationship with his oldest child, I do  accept
    that he  does  have  a  genuine  parental  relationship  with  his  two
    daughters with Ms Mo.., and that on balance they would  be  better  off
    remaining in this country, where they are currently settled, with  both
    their parents.  I also accept that  Ms  Mo..  is  established  in  this
    country, and that the entire family derive  considerable  benefit  from
    the support which is given by the  claimant's  extended  family,  which
    they would not have were they to leave the UK.  I also accept  that  if
    the deportation decision is affirmed by this Tribunal and the  claimant
    leaves without Ms Mo.. and his daughters, this will have a  detrimental
    effect on them, although as Lord Justice Sedley remarked in  his  well-
    known dictum in AD Lee, "that is what deportation does".  So far as  Ms
    Mo.. is concerned, the claimant's relationship with her was formed at a
    time when his position in this country was precarious and so the  issue
    I have to decide is whether or not  the  detrimental  effect  on  their
    children of their father's removal can properly, in  the  circumstances
    of this case be said to be "unduly harsh", and in order to  reach  that
    assessment I have to consider all the  factors,  including  the  public
    interest in removing foreign criminals.

44. Having considered all the factors in this case,  I  consider  that  the
    factors in favour of upholding the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    deport this  claimant  are  sufficiently  strong  as  to  outweigh  the
    detrimental effect on his daughters of his removal, (and I  would  have
    also found, had I needed to, that these  factors  also  outweighed  the
    detrimental effect on his wife, if this had to be added to  the  effect
    on their children), such that the effect on  them  cannot  properly  be
    said to be "unduly" harsh.

45. I first of all do not accept that this claimant can properly be said to
    be a "reformed" character.  As  I  have  noted  in  the  body  of  this
    Decision, it was clear that he does not truly accept his responsibility
    for his most recent offence, that of assaulting his former partner, and
    it is also clear that he still does not accept his responsibility for a
    number of the other offences of which he had been convicted.   He  also
    initially attempted to suggest to the Tribunal that he had  recommenced
    contact with his older son from his relationship with Ms Mi..,  and  it
    was only during cross-examination  that  his  evidence  regarding  this
    matter changed.  Given his serious and extensive record of offending, I
    cannot accept that he represents a low risk of offending, and  this  is
    not only a factor which must be considered when assessing the  risk  to
    the public, but it is also relevant when consideration is given to  the
    effect on his wife and children if he is to be removed.   Having  heard
    the claimant give evidence, my  reluctant  conclusion  (based  on  this
    claimant's failure either to accept his guilt in respect of matters  of
    which he had been convicted or even to acknowledge the  seriousness  in
    particular of his  most  recent  offence,  coupled  with  his  lack  of
    candour) is that he remains a dishonest man who is likely to  reoffend.
    The likelihood therefore is that although his children  at  the  moment
    benefit from the support that he currently gives them, that support  is
    likely to be intermittent and his influence is not  a  wholly  positive
    one.  The children are at a very young age and although  as  a  general
    rule it is in the best interest of children to be brought  up  by  both
    parents, these children are young enough to adapt, they have  a  loving
    mother and they will have the support of their large extended family on
    their father's side. Also, as is clear from my findings above, not only
    would he not in all respects be likely to be a  positive  influence  on
    his children but  his  continued  presence  would  carry  with  it  the
    likelihood of future disappointment and disruption in their lives  were
    he to continue offending, which on the balance of probabilities I  find
    he would.

46. Although Ms Mo.. herself does not have a large family on whom  she  can
    call in this country, even if the claimant is removed, she would still,
    if she remained here with her  children,  be  able  to  rely  upon  the
    support of the claimant's large family, who I find would continue to be
    supportive.

47. The public interest in removing this claimant is in my judgment a  high
    one, and I have in mind in particular,  as  I  must,  that  by  Section
    117C(2) of the 2002 Act "the more serious the offence  committed  by  a
    foreign criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation  of
    the criminal".  Dealing in class A drugs (cocaine and heroin) is a very
    serious matter indeed, and it is also clear from the judge's sentencing
    remarks that much of the claimant's mitigation was not  accepted.   The
    claimant's extensive criminal history is  a  further  weighty  negative
    factor, as is the assault on his  former  partner.  What  is  contained
    within the Nexus Report is also unhelpful to his case.

48. Obviously, I have to assess the risk to the public, and I do so on  the
    basis of all  the  evidence  which  I  have  considered,  including  my
    assessment of the claimant, which as I have already stated, was that he
    does not exhibit true remorse and was not an  honest  witness.   In  my
    judgement, as I have already indicated, this risk is significant and  I
    consider that it is more likely than not that he will reoffend.

49. I also have to take account of both the revulsion which is rightly felt
    by the public towards people who offend as seriously and  as  often  as
    this claimant has and also the deterrent effect which removing  foreign
    criminal such as him will have on others.

50. Accordingly, I am satisfied that although the effect on the  claimant's
    daughters (and his wife) would, at  least  initially,  be  detrimental,
    this  could  not  properly  be  said  to  be  "unduly  harsh"  in   the
    circumstances of this case.  The  public  interest  in  deporting  this
    claimant is sufficiently large as to outweigh the effect on Ms Mo.. and
    her children by a large margin, such  that  the  decision  is  entirely
    proportionate for Article 8 purposes.

51. It follows that the claimant's appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
against the respondent's decision to deport him is set aside  as  containing
a material error of law.  The following decision is substituted:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 15 December 2016
