
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 11 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [M T]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Ms A Pickup instructed by Wilsons LLP, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on  24  October  2014,  in
    which she allowed the claimant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 5  November  2013  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order made against him.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo  ("DRC")
    born on [ ] 1989. He entered the United Kingdom on 26  September  2000,
    aged 11 and although refused asylum, was granted Exceptional  Leave  to
    Remain and then later Indefinite Leave to Remain on 19 October 2005. On
    7 June 2010 he was convicted of ABH, possession of a prohibited weapon,
    threatening  to  kill  for  which  he  was  sentenced   to   4   years'
    imprisonment. The victim was his partner, a Congolese national, who had
    been granted asylum in the United Kingdom and who is the mother of  his
    two children.

 3. Following the conviction, on 6 March 2012, the Secretary of State  made
    a deportation order against claimant; the appeal against that  decision
    was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 2 May 2012. An  application
    for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  unsuccessful.
    Despite representations  from  the  claimant's  representatives,  on  5
    November 2013 the Secretary of  State  refused  to  revoke  deportation
    order, that decision giving  rise  to  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was advanced on three grounds: -

      i) the claimant was at risk of treatment contrary to article 3 of  the
         Human Rights Convention as  a  returnee  with  a  criminal  record;
         and/or

     ii) the claimant was at risk of treatment contrary to article 3 of  the
         Human Rights  Convention  on  account  of  his  mental  ill-health;
         and/or,

    iii) the claimant's deportation would be in breach of article 8  of  the
         Human Rights Convention.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found that: -

      i) as a returnee with a criminal record, the claimant was at  risk  on
         return to DRC of being detained and subjected to conduct  amounting
         to a breach of article 3 [32]-[33];

     ii) even were he not detained on  return,  the  claimant's  deportation
         would  amount  to  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment   given   his
         continuing vulnerability as  identified  by  the  doctors  who  had
         examined him, the stigma attached to the mentally ill, the  absence
         of any experience of living there at an adult or working there, and
         the absence of family there [39];

    iii) there are compelling factors over  and  above  those  described  in
         section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
         such that his deportation would be disproportionate in  respect  of
         article 8 of the Human Rights Convention [49].

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred:-

      i) in its approach to the evidence adduced by the respondent  in  that
         inadequate reasons had been given for rejecting  the  Secretary  of
         State's evidence that the risks identified in R  (P  &  R  (DRC)  &
         Others) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879 were not real, the reference to the
         expert's  report  being  insufficient  (renewed  grounds   [2]-[4];
         initial grounds [1]-[2]);

     ii) in its approach to the claimant's mental health problems in failing
         to engage with  the  relevant  jurisprudence,  and  in  failing  to
         resolve an evidential conflict  in  the  medical  reports  (renewed
         grounds [5]-[7]; and, (initial grounds at  [3]),  failing  to  have
         regard  to  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014   in
         considering the claimant's ties to DRC, the findings in his  favour
         being insufficiently reasoned;

    iii) in its approach to  article  8,  the  above  errors  infecting  the
         findings on that issue (renewed grounds [9]); and, in  misdirecting
         itself in law as to what  was  required  to  show  very  compelling
         circumstances  such  that  deportation  would  be  disproportionate
         (initial grounds [4]-[10])

 7. On 7 March 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission on all
    grounds.

    Submissions

 8. Mr Norton  submitted  that,  in  reality,  at  paragraph  [32]  of  the
    decision, the First-tier Tribunal had, in effect,  failed  properly  to
    resolve  an  evidential  conflict  between  the  Secretary  of  State's
    evidence and that adduce by the claimant. He submitted  that  this  did
    fall within the ambit  of  the  grounds;  and,  that  this  error  was,
    effectively, the same error identified by the Upper Tribunal in Lokombe
    (DRC: FNOs - Airport monitoring) [2015] UKUT 627(IAC) at [17]-[18].

 9. Mr Norton accepted that if he did not succeed on the challenge  to  the
    appeal being allowed on the  basis  the  claimant  was  at  risk  as  a
    returnee.

10. Mr Norton submitted further, that the claimant's  ill  health  -  there
    being no evidence that he is currently in receipt of medication -  came
    nowhere near the threshold to engage article 3. He submitted also  that
    the  claimant's  circumstances  simply  came  nowhere  near  the   high
    threshold necessary to demonstrate that, despite having been  sentenced
    to  a  term  of  four  years'   imprisonment,   his   deportation   was
    disproportionate.

11. Ms Pickup submitted that the points now being raised  in  challenge  to
    the approach to the evidence adduced by the claimant were  not  covered
    by the grounds, these being simply a reasons challenge.  She  submitted
    that in any event, the expert's report discloses that he  had  been  to
    DRC after the respondent's evidence had been gathered, and had set  out
    proper and persuasive reasons why it was less reliable. The  First-tier
    Tribunal had been entitled to rely on that, and the reasons  for  doing
    so were adequate.

12. Ms Pickup submitted also that in reality there was no conflict  in  the
    medical  evidence,  the  apparent  differences  being  attributable  to
    changes in the claimant's condition over time, the First-tier  Tribunal
    having properly addressed that issue.  She submitted further,  that  in
    this case, unlike Bensaid, the trauma the claimant  had  suffered  (and
    the subsequent mental ill-health) flowed from what he had witnessed  in
    DRC; that was attributable to failures of  the  state.   She  submitted
    further that the  assessment  of  the  risk  in  this  regard  was  not
    predicated on detention on return.

13. Relying on her skeleton argument, Ms Pickup submitted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had engaged with the relevant case law  and  legislation,
    and had given adequate reasons  for  concluding  that  deportation  was
    disproportionate.

14. In reply, Mr Norton submitted that  the  evidence  of  the  expert  was
    simply  not  capable  of  displacing  the  evidence  adduced   by   the
    respondent, that being the observations  of  states  who  had  returned
    people to the DRC.

    Discussion

21. The main thrust of the Secretary of  State's  case  as  now  put  is  a
    failure by the First-tier Tribunal to resolve an  evidential  conflict.
    Contrary to what was submitted  by  Ms  Pickup,  I  consider  that  the
    challenge to the findings at [32]-[33] as elaborated by Mr  Norton,  do
    fall within the scope of the grounds as, on any view, the  respondent's
    evidence as to the risk on return as  set  out  in  the  February  2014
    bulletin was not accepted by the judge.

22. At paragraph [32] of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal states:

         "There are clearly some contradictory points  in  this  information
         before  me  and  any  assessment  of  these   is   very   difficult
         particularly  on  paper  without  oral  expert  evidence.  I   have
         therefore decided not to attempt to do so but instead to  make  the
         following points:"

23. It is then, in that context said:

           . That, in the absence of a decided appeal or CG  case,  I  have
             taken the view that the findings in P & R  can  reasonably  be
             relied upon in this appeal. As Phillips J said,  unless  there
             is a clear basis for believing that  the  risk  indicators  no
             longer arise, a deportee returning with a criminal  record  is
             at risk of being detained and consequently being subjected  to
             conduct amounting  to  a  breach  of  article  3  due  to  the
             conditions in detention in the DRC.

24. It evident from this that the First-Tier Tribunal did not  accept  that
    the respondent's evidence as set out in length at [29]. While there  is
    reference to the evidence of the expert, Dr Kodi, and that his evidence
    was based on the research mission to DRC as recently as June-July 2014,
    there is no analysis of why his evidence  is  preferred.  While  it  is
    correct that his  evidence  postdates  the  evidence  supplied  to  the
    Secretary of State by those states returning  people  to  DRC,  and  he
    records why he does not consider that evidence to be reliable, there is
    no indication in the decision that this  formed  part  of  the  judge's
    reasoning.

25. I accept that this case is different from Lokombe  in  that  there  was
    additional evidence in the form of expert evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, but why it was accepted and why that of  the  respondent
    was rejected, is unclear.

26. Viewing paragraph 32 as a whole, I consider that  there  is  no  proper
    explanation given why the respondent's evidence was  rejected.  In  the
    context of the observation that there are evidential difficulties, this
    error is all the more serious. That there is no Country  Guidance  case
    is not a reason for not making finding on the evidence.

27. Turning to the second challenge to the findings with respect to article
    3, I am not satisfied that  there  was  any  real  evidential  conflict
    between the medical reports. As is noted at [34]-[37], the reports were
    prepared over a period of time, the most recent report from  Dr  Katona
    indicating that there had been a relapse [35]. It cannot be  said  that
    it was "speculative" to consider whether there would be  a  relapse  on
    return; that was  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr  Katona.  Further,  the
    difficulties which the claimant would face on return were he to  become
    ill and the difficulties faced on return after an absence of nearly  10
    years were set out in the expert evidence of Dr  Kodi.  It  is  evident
    from the decision at [34] that the conclusion that  there  would  be  a
    breach of article 3 on return was not predicated on the claimant  being
    detained. It is

28. I do not consider that Bensaid [2001] ECHR 82 can be  distinguished  in
    this case in the manner submitted by Ms Pickup, given that  it  is  not
    clear why the First-tier Tribunal did not  engage  with  the  decision;
    there is no sufficient analysis of whether the  harm  to  the  claimant
    would flow from actions or inaction on the part of the DRC authorities,
    even assuming his mental ill-health arises  from  what  occurred  there
    when he was a child.  While I note what is said at [34] in  Bensaid,  I
    note also what was said at [40] -

         "The Court accepts  the  seriousness  of  the  applicant's  medical
         condition. Having regard, however, to the  high  threshold  set  by
         Article 3, particularly where the case does not concern the direct
         responsibility of the Contracting State for the infliction of harm,
         the Court does not find that there is a sufficiently real risk that
         the applicant's removal in these circumstances would be contrary to
         the standards of Article 3.,"

29. Further in N v SSHD  [2008] ECHR 453 at [43] the Court stated:

         "The  Court  does  not  exclude  that  there  may  be  other   very
         exceptional cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally
         compelling. However, it considers that it should maintain the  high
         threshold set in D v the  United  Kingdom and  applied  in  its
         subsequent   case-law,   which   it   regards   as    correct    in
         principle, given that in such cases the alleged future harm  would
         emanate not from  the  intentional  acts  or  omissions  of  public
         authorities or non-State  bodies,  but  instead  from  a  naturally
         occurring illness and the lack of sufficient resources to deal with
         it in the receiving country."

30. There is, I consider, no sufficient analysis at [38] of the decision or
    elsewhere of why the high threshold established by article 3  in  cases
    such as these is reached. It is not thus possible to  discern  why  the
    respondent's arguments were dismissed. Given the case law applicable to
    article 3, and as summarised recently in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.
    It is entirely possible that,  had  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed
    itself properly, that it would have come to a different  conclusion  on
    this issue.

31. In respect of the findings made in relation to article 8, while at [43]
    the First-tier Tribunal directed itself properly with  respect  to  the
    law, at [48] there is no proper or adequate  reference  to  the  public
    interest in deporting the claimant. On that basis alone,  the  decision
    involves the making of an error of law. Further, it is not sufficiently
    clear why the factors identified are over and above what is  identified
    in section 117C of the 2002 Act. In any event, those  factors  must  be
    weighed against the public interest; there is no sufficient  indication
    that has been done.

32. Accordingly, I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve  the  making  of  an  error  of  law,  capable  of
    affecting the outcome, and I set it aside.

33. Given that there has now been over a year since this matter was  heard,
    and given that both parties submitted that it would be the  appropriate
    course of action, I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision on all issues.

Summary of conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  on
    all material issues.


Signed                                  Date:  2 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

