
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00987/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 24 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KL
                         (Anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni  (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Wilkins     (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    In a  determination  promulgated  on  23  March  2015  the  First-tier
Tribunal allowed the  appeal  of  KL  (hereinafter  "the  claimant"),  to  a
limited extent, against a decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department (hereinafter "the Secretary of State") of 16 May 2014  to  refuse
to revoke a deportation order which had been  made  in  respect  of  him  by
virtue of section 5(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The appeal was  allowed
under the Immigration Rules to the extent that the decision  was  found  not
to be in accordance with the law.  It was said that the claimant  awaited  a
lawful decision.

2.    The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal.  The claimant cross-appealed.  Permission was granted and after  a
hearing of 21 October 2015, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal but I did preserve a large number of findings which had  been  made
by that body and which had been favourable  to  the  claimant.   There  then
followed a hearing of 7 July 2016 which was concerned with the  remaking  of
the decision in the Upper Tribunal.

3.    I have set out below the relevant factual history, what  needs  to  be
set out about the legislation and the competing  arguments  of  the  parties
and the reasoning I have deployed in remaking the decision.

The Relevant history

4.    The appellant entered the UK unlawfully on a date  in  2004.   It  was
not in issue before me that that was when he had arrived.   He  claims  that
his parents were from Morocco but that they had fled that country  with  the
consequence that he had been brought up in a refugee camp  for  people  from
the Western Sahara, that camp being  located  in  Tindouf  in  Algeria.   He
claims to be stateless because as the child of  refugees  from  the  Western
Sahara (his parents) he was not entitled to Algerian nationality.   He  left
Algeria, as a minor, initially to go to  Libya  and  he  then  travelled  to
Italy and Belgium before entering the United Kingdom.  It  does  not  appear
that he did anything to seek to regularise his status immediately  upon  his
arrival. He has, however, remained in the UK since arrival.

5.    The claimant has committed criminal offences.  Mrs Aboni told me,  and
I accept, that he has  committed  a  total  of  15  offences  in  all.   The
relevant convictions were imposed  between  2009  and  2013.   There  is  no
evidence that he has any convictions either before 2009 or after 2013.   The
offences were not for trivial matters but neither  were  they  at  the  most
serious end of the offending spectrum.  He has, though, served a  number  of
short prison sentences though he  has  never  received  a  single  custodial
sentence of 12 months or more.  He has had some mental health  difficulties.


6.    In due course the claimant made an asylum claim.  I am not certain  as
to precisely when that claim was made but it was refused  by  the  Secretary
of State on 10 June 2010.  Prior to that refusal, in fact on  14  May  2010,
the Secretary of State decided to make a deportation  order  in  respect  of
him in light of his offending.  It does not appear that he  claimant  sought
to appeal against either of those decisions.  However, he was  not  actually
deported and he subsequently made an application, on 7  February  2014,  for
leave to remain on the basis that he is a stateless person.  Given that  the
deportation order had already been made,  the  Secretary  of  State  treated
that application as one to revoke the deportation order.   She  decided  not
to do so and issued a decision to that effect on 16 May 2014.  The  claimant
decided to appeal against that decision.

The legal framework

7.    It may be helpful, at this stage,  to  set  out  the  content  of  the
Immigration Rules which the First-tier Tribunal was required to  apply  when
considering the question  of  revocation  of  the  deportation  order.   The
relevant parts read as follows:

    Revocation of deportation order

         390.     An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
         be considered in the light of all the circumstances  including  the
         following:

                (i)    the grounds on which the order was made;

                (ii)   any representations made in support of revocation;

                (iii)   the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                maintenance of an effective immigration control;

                (iv)    the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                compassionate circumstances.

         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of  State  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.

         391.     In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
         conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the   continuation   of   a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:

                (a)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                than four years, unless ten years  have  elapsed  since  the
                making of the deportation order when, if an application  for
                revocation is received, consideration will  be  given  on  a
                case by case basis to whether the deportation  order  should
                be maintained, or

                (b)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
                least four years, at any time,

         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to  the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol relating  to
         the  status  of  refugees,   or   there   are   other   exceptional
         circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation   is   outweighed   by
         compelling factors.

         391A.    In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
         be authorised unless the situation  has  been  materially  altered,
         either by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by
         fresh  information  coming  to  light  which  was  not  before  the
         Appellate Authorities or the Secretary of State.   The  passage  of
         time since the person was deported may also  in  itself  amount  to
         such a change of circumstances as  to  warrant  revocation  of  the
         order.

         392.     Revocation of a deportation order  does  not  entitle  the
         person concerned to re-enter the United Kingdom;  it  renders  him
         eligible to  apply  for  admission  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
         Application for revocation of the order may be made  to  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer or direct to the Home Office.

    Rights of appeal in relation to a decision not to revoke a  deportation
    order

         396.     Where a person is liable to  deportation  the  presumption
         shall be that the public interest requires deportation.  It  is  in
         the public interest to deport where the  Secretary  of  State  must
         make a deportation order in accordance with Section 32 of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007.

         397.     A deportation order will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
         removal pursuant to  the  order  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
         obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
         Convention.  Where deportation  would  not  be  contrary  to  these
         obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the
         public interest in deportation is outweighed.

    Deportation and Article 8

         A398.    These rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                his deportation would be contrary to  the  United Kingdom's
                obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                made against him to be revoked.

         398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article 8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public  interest
                because they have been convicted of  an  offence  for  which
                they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
                least four years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public  interest
                because they have been convicted of  an  offence  for  which
                they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public  interest
                because, in the  view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
                offending has caused serious harm or they were a  persistent
                offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,

         The Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

8.    Additionally, the claimant sought  to  rely  upon  Article 3  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) which affords protection  against
torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and Article 8 which
affords a limited protection to the right to respect for family and  private
life.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

9.    I have indicated, above, the decision which  the  First-tier Tribunal
reached.  In considering the appeal it was conscious of the  fact  that  the
Secretary of State, in refusing to revoke the deportation  order  under  the
Immigration Rules, had taken the view that the appellant was a  "persistent
offender",  within   the   meaning   of   paragraph 398(c)   as   of   the
Immigration Rules as set out above, and that, therefore, a  view  had  been
taken that the claimant's deportation  would  be  conducive  to  the  public
good.  It was also conscious of the arguments regarding  statelessness.   In
dealing with all of that it said this:

    "25.   Paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules is my starting point  by
    reference to paragraph 398 and 399 or 399A further to the case  of  MF
    (Nigeria).

    26.    The Respondent puts the Appellant as  a  'persistent  offender'.
    The IDIs, chapter 13:  Criminality guidance in Article 8 ECHR  cases,
    v5, 28.7.2014, says that, 'Persistent offender' means a repeat offender
    who shows a pattern of offending over a period of time.  This can  mean
    a series of offences committed in a fairly short time frame,  or  which
    escalate  in  seriousness  over  time,  or  a  long  history  of  minor
    offences.'

    27.    Mr Bradshaw submitted that the Respondent argues the  Appellant
    has been  sentenced  to  twelve-months  for  one  offence  however  the
    evidence is that the Appellant has not been sentenced to  twelve-months
    for one offence and he was  therefore  not  a  persistent  offender  as
    alleged.  Mr Bradshaw explained the Appellant had not  offended  since
    his last offence in 2013 and prior to that in 2011.  I have  considered
    whether he is a persistent offender and find that the evidence does not
    satisfy that he is for the following reasons.

    28.    In this case the Appellant arrived in the UK as in 2004 and  his
    pattern of offending did not begin until some years later in 2009.

    29.    The Respondent provided no Probation Service risk assessments or
    pre-sentence report.  I therefore have only the evidence of  the  types
    of offence and sentence imposed upon which to form a conclusion  as  to
    the seriousness with which the Appellant's behaviour was viewed by  the
    Respondent.

    30.    The Respondent  has  listed  the  Appellant's  offences  in  the
    refusal.  I have considered the  details  provided  by  the  Respondent
    regarding the Appellant's offences.  I note that  he  was  involved  in
    three - offences in 2009, offences in 2011 and in 2013.   The  offences
    whilst not trivial did not result in lengthy prison sentences.  He  did
    not offend from 2009 to 2011 or 2011 to 2013.   Whilst  the  Respondent
    alleges the Appellant is a persistent offender, I take a different view
    and find that the Appellant cannot be found to be a persistent offender
    under this limb because he has not been convicted  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve-months.

    31.    The Appellant's case is that he  is  determined  not  to  offend
    again and is trying to control himself.  He states  that  he  does  not
    want to steal.  He has paid for what he has done and does not  want  to
    ever go back to that place.  He has managed to stay away from  problems
    with the police since his release on bail.  I  find  on  the  available
    evidence that the Appellant is not a persistent offender  or  one  that
    will continue to offend.

    32.    For all these reasons I find that paragraph 398C does not apply
    in the Appellant's case and the decision is therefore not in accordance
    with the law.

    33.    Even if I am wrong and I believe I am not, that  paragraph 399C
    does  not  apply,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  is  stateless,   that
    exceptional circumstances exist because of his statelessness to  revoke
    the deportation order, for the reasons I shall consider below.

    34.    The Appellant asserts that the Algerian  authorities  would  not
    accept him back, however the Respondent  argues  they  would.   I  have
    considered the Appellant's documents and note these do not suggest that
    he is of Moroccan nationality.   The  evidence  is  that  the  Algerian
    authorities have not issued the Appellant an identity  document  or  an
    emergency travel document, which lends weight to the Appellant's  claim
    to be stateless.

    35.    I have had regard to the two expert reports of  Dr Maloney  and
    Dr Seddon.  Dr Maloney's report is in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    psychiatric condition and Dr Seddon to the situation  of  refugees  in
    Algeria.  Both experts have highlighted their expertise to provide  the
    reports and have summarised their credentials.  The Respondent has  not
    challenged Dr Maloney's report and there was no cross-examination about
    the Appellant's mental state.

    36.    Dr Seddon gives his opinion with references to sources, credible
    background reports and articles.  Turning  to  Dr Seddon's  report  he
    provides a detailed account that the Appellant is a  Sahrawi  from  the
    Tindouf refugee camp.  He explains that  the  Appellant  had  given  an
    account of his  life  in  the  camps  in  his  interviews  and  witness
    statement.

    37.     I  have  considered  the  Appellant's  interviews  and  witness
    statements and accept the expert's account that the Appellant has given
    the details of his background, as claimed.  In his  interview  in  2010
    and 2012 the Appellant consistently maintained that he was from Tindouf
    camp in Algeria.  The expert found  that  the  Appellant's  account  of
    having lived in the camps was plausible  and  although  the  Respondent
    alleges the Appellant had failed to name one specific camp the  refusal
    letter acknowledges that the Appellant had stated that he was  born  in
    Layoun.  I note in  his  witness  statement  he  mentions  three  other
    refugee camps close to Layoun.  Dr Seddon sets out in his report  that
    he has personally visited the camps and accepts  that  the  Appellant's
    account of the other camps (sic).

    38.    Dr Seddon says that those under 18-years of age are normally not
    issued an individual ID card in the refugee camps.  I find this accords
    with the Appellant's evidence that he did not have an identity card  in
    the camp or when he left.

    39.    The Respondent does not dispute that Western Sahara  remains  a
    non self-governing territory under dispute and is  not  regarded  as  a
    state  by  the  United Nations.   The  Respondent  did  not  challenge
    Dr Seddon's report.

    40.    I find Dr Seddon's report provides strong  supporting  evidence
    that the Appellant is from the Tindouf refugee camps.  I  find  on  the
    basis of this evidence  that  the  Appellant  is  stateless,  he  is  a
    Sahrawi's from Algeria as supported by his evidence and the  report  of
    Dr Seddon.

    41.    The position is that the Respondent has been seeking  to  remove
    the Appellant since 2010, however the evidence  is  that  the  Algerian
    authorities have refused to issue the Appellant with an identity/travel
    document.

    42.    I find as a stateless person he would be in a state of limbo  in
    Algeria upon return and even if he were able to return there  he  would
    have to get to the refugee camp.  This lends weight to the  Appellant's
    claim that he would experience difficulties on return to Algeria, as  a
    Sahrawi's who would have to move to the refugee camps  as  a  stateless
    person.

    43.    For all these reasons I find the Secretary of  State's  decision
    under Immigration Rules on the Appellant's claim to be stateless is not
    in accordance with the law."

10.   It will be seen that that passage involved the making of a  number  of
factual findings.

My setting aside of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

11.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal. As indicated, I did set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.
 My precise reasons for doing so are set out in a written decision I  issued
after the hearing of 21 October 2015.  I did, though, again as  indicated,
preserve certain of the findings.  Specifically,  I  preserved  all  of  the
factual findings contained within paragraphs 28, 30 and from 34-40  of  the
First-tier Tribunal's decision.  All of that is  set  out  above.   So,  my
starting point, when remaking  the  decision,  was  that  the  claimant  had
entered in 2004, that his convictions were from  the  years  2009  to  2013,
that he is a Sahrawi who has lived in the refugee camps in Algeria and  that
(see paragraph 40) he is, indeed, stateless.

The hearing of 7 July 2016

12.   Mrs Aboni, for the Secretary of State, submitted  that  the  claimant
did fall foul of paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules because he  had
been convicted, in total, of 15 offences and because although  he  had  not
been sentenced to a period of 12 months imprisonment or more in relation to
a single offence, he had received a  number  of  different  sentences  which
would, when taken together, amount to 12 months or  more.   He  was  to  be
characterised as "a persistent offender" following the  reasoning  in  Chege
("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT 00187 (IAC).  In this context, he
was to be regarded as someone who "keeps on breaking the law".  There was  a
continuing risk that he would  reoffend.   As  to  what  he  might  face  if
returned to Algeria (assuming of course that as a stateless person he  could
be returned) there was no evidence he would be persecuted.  If he  were  not
permitted to enter that, of itself,  would  not  constitute  persecution  or
serious harm.  If admitted then there would be no clear risk  of  harm  even
on the basis of Dr Seddon's evidence  as  contained  in  his  supplementary
expert report of 5 January 2016.  Further, such risk as Dr Seddon  thought
there might be rests upon speculation.  Though stateless, return  would  not
lead to any breach Article 3 or Article 8 of the ECHR.  Further, as to any
mental health concerns the  claimant  has,  treatment  would  be  available,
should  it  be  required,  in  Algeria.   The  strong  public  interest   in
deportation was not outweighed in this case.

13.   Ms Wilkins, for the claimant,  suggested  that  Dr. Seddon's  report
indicated that, whilst there would be no immediate risk of persecution  upon
return to Algeria, the claimant would  face  destitution  either  inside  or
outside the Sahrawi refugee camps.  As to whether  the  claimant  is  to  be
regarded as a "persistent offender" he has not offended for some  time.   He
has been free of offending for long periods in the past.  If  he  is  not  a
persistent offender then that takes away the  grounds  for  maintaining  the
deportation order.  It has been accepted that he is stateless.  Further  and
in any event, he would be at risk of treatment which would offend Article 3
of the ECHR upon return.  His plight as a stateless person and  his  history
of mental health difficulties must be considered together.



My consideration of the issues

14.   I remind myself of the preserved findings.  It seems to  me  that  the
starting point, given that the claimant's application has  been  treated  as
one  to  revoke   a   deportation   order,   is   paragraph 390   of   the
Immigration Rules.  The content of that rule may be found  above.  It  lays
down four broad factors, though it is not a non-exhaustive list, which  must
be considered by decision makers in deciding whether or  not  to  revoke  a
deportation order.  Paragraph 390A brings into play paragraphs 398, 399 and
399A.  Those Paragraphs are concerned with the situation where a  person  is
claiming that deportation would be contrary to the  UK's  obligations  under
Article 8 of the ECHR.  In this case the claimant has sought to  rely  upon
Article 8, though he also relies on  the  Immigration  Rules,  but  in  the
context of an argument that not revoking the deportation order,  as  opposed
to deportation itself, would be contrary to the UK's obligations under  that
Article.

15.   In turning to  paragraph 398,  then,  as  noted,  the  applicant  has
asserted that a refusal to revoke a deportation order  will  bring  about  a
breach of Article 8.  In this context  he  relies  upon  private  life  not
family life. So, it has to be asked whether he falls  within  either  398(a)
or (b) or (c) and, if he does a refusal to revoke will be conducive  to  the
public good and unless he can bring himself within paragraph 399  or  399A,
the public interest in  maintaining  the  deportation  order  will  only  be
outweighed by other factors where there are exceptional  circumstances  (see
Paragraph 390A).

16.   Although the principle focus had been upon 398(c), Mrs Aboni did,  as
I understand her, seek to argue that 398(b) applied  because  the  applicant
had received sentences of imprisonment which, when totalled up, amounted  to
12 months or more.  Further, again as I understand her, she made the  point
that in  September 2009  he  had  received  two  sentences  of  six  months
imprisonment each to run consecutively and  that  that  had  amounted  to  a
total of 12 months.  However, the Secretary of State, in refusing to revoke
the deportation order, did not assert that  the  claimant  fell  within  the
scope of paragraph 398(b).  It was only ever  asserted,  in  this  context,
that he fell within the scope of 398(c).  Such is clear  from  a  letter  of
16 May 2014  explaining  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasoning  (see  in
particular from paragraphs 91 to 94 of that letter).  That represented the
case that the claimant was required to meet.  In any event, the use  of  the
term "an offence" within paragraph 398(b) suggests  that  there  must  have
been one single offence which led  to  a  sentence  of  12 months  so  that
different offences which lead to consecutive  sentences  which,  when  taken
together, amount to 12 months, do not fall within 398(b). I turn, then,  to
398(c).

17.   The decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Chege,  cited  above,  and  to
which I am referred by Mrs Aboni, is clearly highly relevant.  In that case
the Upper Tribunal decided that a  "persistent  offender"  is  someone  who
keeps on breaking the law.  The status is not a permanent  one  and  can  be
lost  or  relinquished  after  it  is  acquired.   On  the  other  hand,  an
individual can still be a "persistent offender"  for  the  purposes  of  the
Rules even though he may not have offended  for  some  time.   Further,  the
Upper Tribunal decided that the phrase "persistent  offender"  as  used  in
paragraph 398(c) must mean the same as it does in section 117D(2)(c) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

18.   In my judgment the claimant does not fall  within  the  definition  of
"persistent offender".  I accept Mrs Aboni's submissions to the effect that
his offending should not be regarded as trivial.  However,  I  am  primarily
concerned with the pattern of the offending.  He has been in  the  UK  since
2004.  He did commit offences for a period, as highlighted above, but  there
has then been no offending and no conviction since 2013.  So,  there  was  a
lengthy period when there was no offencing, punctuated by a  lengthy  period
when there was offending and, thereafter, a period of  time  from  when  the
offending had ceased until the decision not to revoke the deportation  order
and then, indeed, until this hearing.  It seems to me that I  am  assessing,
for the purposes of the remaking of this decision, the situation as  at  the
date of hearing (see paragraph 36 of Chege) though, in any event,  my  view
would have  been  the  same,  although  perhaps  not  with  quite  the  same
certainty, had I been assessing matters as at the date  of  the  refusal  to
revoke.  But it would have been the same. I conclude that  the  claimant  is
not a "persistent offender" given the specific pattern of  offending  within
a fixed period flanked by  two  periods  of  non-offending  as  referred  to
above.

19.   So, whilst it is clear that the claimant cannot bring  himself  within
paragraph 399 or  399A  (he  has  never  suggested  he  can)  there  is  no
requirement for him to demonstrate the "exceptional circumstances"  test  in
390A. That is because 398 does not apply in consequence of his  not  falling
within 398 (a), (b) or (c).

20.   In considering article 8 and, indeed, paragraph 390, I remind  myself
that the claimant entered the UK illegally, that  he  has  not  subsequently
successfully applied to regularise his status and that he  has  committed  a
series of criminal offences which whilst not amounting to the  most  serious
types of offending are not to be characterised as  trivial.   Against  that,
he has been in the UK since 2004 and  can  be  taken  to  have  developed  a
private life even though he has not  developed  a  family  life  within  the
meaning of Article 8.  Indeed in a  letter  written  on  14  May  2010  the
purpose of which was to explain why a deportation order was being made,  the
Secretary of State  did  accept  that  private  life  had  been  established
commenting "Whilst it is accepted you have established private life  in  the
United Kingdom...".  He is from Algeria in the sense that he lived there  in
a refugee camp but is a stateless person so it cannot be said that,  in  any
true sense, he has a  home  country  to  return  to  even  if  he  would  be
readmitted into Algeria.  In all the circumstances I conclude  that  he  has
demonstrated that, in looking at the rules, revocation  of  the  deportation
order is appropriate on the particular facts of  his  case.   I  would  also
make it clear that I conclude he has demonstrated  that  Article 8  of  the
ECHR prevents his removal.  In that context it  was  not  argued  before  me
that Article 8 was not engaged and it seems to me, given the length of time
he has resided in the UK, it clearly is.  Of course, any  interference  with
Article 8 rights would be lawful and would be in pursuance of a  legitimate
aim so matters would come down to a consideration  of  proportionality.   In
that context, it seems to me, that it is right to weigh in the  balance  the
difficulties he may face in Algeria.  Assuming he were  to  be  admitted  to
that country at all, the report of Dr Seddon, suggests that the authorities
may well take him to the Sahrawi refugee camps he would be left there as  a
stateless person (see paragraph 5.7 of the report of 31 January 2015) and
would not have available to him any  state  support  or  prospect  of  state
employment or assistance (see paragraph 7.3).  Indeed, it is said that were
he to try to live outside the refugee camps he would be doing  so  illegally
and would be liable to arrest.  I do not accept, and I will say  more  about
that below, Dr Seddon's view that the claimant will actually be at risk  in
the camps from the Polisario and Sadr authorities who control the camps but
I do accept  he  will,  in  effect,  have  to  stay  there  and  that  those
authorities have a "restrictive  attitude"  towards  those  from  the  camps
wishing to leave.

21.    In  light  of  the  above  I  do  consider  that  it  would  not   be
proportionate, on the facts of this case, to require the claimant  to  leave
the UK and to face the consequences  of  statelessness.   I  have  borne  in
mind, in reaching this view, the importance of the maintenance of  effective
immigration control, that such  is  in  the  public  interest,  that  little
weight is to be attached to private life formed when  a  person  is  in  the
United Kingdom unlawfully and that the deportation of foreign criminals  is
in the public interest.   I  would  also  add  that  the  circumstances  the
claimant would face if he had to leave the UK would, in my view,  result  in
there   being   "exceptional   circumstances"   within   the   meaning    of
paragraph 390A though, of course, on my  reasoning,  the  claimant  is  not
required to show any of that.

22.   So, the appeal does succeed.  The claimant has shown that his  removal
would breach the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  with  respect  to
Article 8.  Further,  the  requirements  for  revocation  as  contained  at
paragraph 390 are met.

23.   I was also urged to consider allowing the appeal under  Article 3  of
the ECHR.  However, it does not seem to me that Dr Seddon's report provides
a proper basis for my doing  so.   Dr Seddon  addressed  various  hardships
which the claimant would endure if he sought to live outside of the  refugee
camps  in  Algeria.   He  would,  in  effect,  be  breaking  the   law   and
consequently liable to arrest and he would  not  have  access  to  forms  of
Government  social  support.   However,  Dr Seddon  does  accept  that,  if
admitted to the country, he will be taken to the refugee camps.  It  is  not
suggested that the conditions in the refugee camps,  of  themselves,  breach
Article 3, but what is said is that the Polisario and Sadr authorities  may
hand out what Dr Seddon described as "punishment for  leaving  unofficially
or illegally, and seeking asylum abroad".  In  his  report  he  quotes  from
other sources which do show that the Polisario are capable  of  meeting  out
very harsh treatment to those in the camps for,  for  example,  "spying  for
Morocco".  However, I do  find  his  suggestion  that  this  claimant  might
receive punishment for leaving  the  camps  illegally  as  a  child,  to  be
somewhat speculative.  To that  extent  I  find  myself  in  agreement  with
Mrs Aboni.  It does not seem to me that the evidence  goes  far  enough  to
demonstrate that he will be treated by the persons from the camp  in  a  way
which will bring about a breach of Article 3.  There is also an  Article 3
claim based on what is said to be a  risk  that  the  claimant  will  commit
suicide.   There  is   certainly   documentary   evidence   of   psychiatric
difficulties.  However, the most recent report of Dr Maloney, a  consultant
psychiatrist, which was prepared on 15 January 2016, notes an  improvement
in his condition with respect to depression.   Specifically  as  to  suicide
risk, it is noted that he does not  report  any  suicidal  ideation  and  no
further incidences of self-harm although it  does  appear  that  there  have
been some such incidences in the past.  It is said that his  immediate  risk
of suicide is "less than before" and "in the absence of any  suicidal  ideas
it remains categorisable as law".  Dr Maloney does stress that  his  mental
health remains fragile and that a worsening of his  mental  condition  would
be possible if "his current stability were disrupted".   However,  it  seems
to me that that falls short of demonstrating that there would actually be  a
real risk of suicide if he were required to leave  the  United Kingdom  and
return to live in the Sahrawi refugee camps in Algeria.

24.   In conclusion, then, and in remaking the  decision,  I  conclude  that
the claimant succeeds in showing that the  deportation  order  ought  to  be
revoked under Article 8 of the ECHR and under the  Immigration Rules.   He
does not, though, although it makes no difference to  the  outcome,  succeed
under Article 3.

Decision

In remaking the decision I allow the appeal  of  the  claimant  against  the
Secretary of State's  decision  of  16 May 2014  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
deportation order.

Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and the Secretary of State.  Failure to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:     Date: 24th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE APPELLANT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed:     Date: 24th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
