
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00335/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 February 2016                  |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    [D B]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. On the facts  of
this case, it is not necessary for an anonymity direction to be made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Page  promulgated  on  8  October  2015   ("the   Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
         decision dated 29 July 2015 making a deportation order against  him
         under  section  5(1)  Immigration  Act  1971  and  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA  regulations").
          The decision to deport is based on the Appellant's convictions for
         fourteen criminal offences between 10 April 2003 and 1 June 2015

      2. The Appellant is a national of France.  He claims to  have  entered
         the UK in 1995.  He has a daughter who is aged six  years  old  who
         suffers from autism.  He is estranged from his  daughter's  mother.
         He seeks to remain in the UK in order to  continue  access  to  his
         daughter.  He also points out that he has been in the UK for twenty
         years.

      3. There was  some  evidence  before  the  Judge  of  the  Appellant's
         economic activity in the UK between 2002 and  2009.   However,  the
         Judge did not accept that the Appellant had established that he  is
         entitled to permanent residence under the EEA  regulations  due  to
         lack of  evidence  at  various  periods  of  time.   The  Appellant
         accepted before me that he produced little evidence  to  the  Judge
         about what he has been doing in the UK.  He says that he  has  been
         working on and off throughout the period since 1995.   He  accepted
         before me that  he  produced  no  documentary  evidence  about  his
         employment  history  such  as  tax  records,  payslips  etc.    The
         Appellant said that he was unable to work for periods  due  to  his
         mental health.  Again,  the  Appellant  accepts  that  he  has  not
         produced any documentary support for this assertion such as medical
         records.  There are letters in the bundle from his GP which testify
         as to the Appellant's mental health problems.   However,  those  do
         not say how long he has been registered with the GP  and  for  what
         period and between what dates he has been unable to work due to his
         mental health issues.  There is no written statement in the  bundle
         from the Appellant giving particulars of his employment or  periods
         of ill health and  no  attempt  to  particularise  his  periods  of
         employment and sickness.

      4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on
         9 December 2015 on the basis that  the  Judge  may  have  erred  in
         failing to take into account when determining whether the Appellant
         was entitled to permanent residence the  Appellant's  own  evidence
         that he has been working throughout his time in the UK save when he
         has been in prison.  As I note at [3] above, that was not  in  fact
         the evidence before me as the  Appellant  says  that  he  has  been
         working other than when he has been in prison or has been unable to
         work due to his mental health.  I accept however that a  "qualified
         person" under regulation 6 of the EEA regulations includes a person
         who is temporarily unable to work  as  the  result  of  an  illness
         (regulation 6(2)).  There is no express restriction on  the  period
         to  which  this   applies   (unlike   the   case   of   involuntary
         unemployment).

      5. This appeal comes before me  therefore  to  determine  whether  the
         Judge made an error of law in the Decision when  finding  that  the
         Appellant was not entitled to permanent residence.   This  in  turn
         would impact on the level which applies to determining whether  the
         Appellant's deportation is justified on grounds  of  public  policy
         and public security.  If  I  find  that  the  Decision  contains  a
         material error of law, the parties agreed that I should  remit  the
         appeal for hearing before a different Judge.

    Submissions

      6. The Appellant appeared in person.  As such, I permitted him to  say
         what he wished to in support of his case.  He explained that he has
         been working in the UK but is prone to  bouts  of  depression.   He
         attempted suicide in 2013.  He has on occasion  been  hospitalised.
         He said that he could get medical records  to  verify  the  periods
         when he was ill and tax records or payslips to verify  his  periods
         of employment but he accepted that those were not produced  to  the
         Judge at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  He said that he has been
         in the UK for most of his life.  He says that  he  came  here  when
         aged nineteen and has done a variety of jobs.  He  did  not  though
         tell me when he was working where.  I noted the chronology  in  his
         case indicated that there were two periods when he might have  been
         eligible to claim permanent residence.  The  first  was  from  1995
         until 2003 when he was first sentenced to a term  of  imprisonment.
         The second was from the end of that period  of  imprisonment  until
         December 2008 when he was again imprisoned.  However, there  was  a
         long period from  April  2004  to  March  2007  when  there  is  no
         documentary  evidence  (or  indeed  evidence  from  the   Appellant
         himself) to show what he was doing.  The Appellant  indicated  that
         he was sick at  that  time.  He  provided  no  further  particulars
         although said he could given time.

      7. Mr Norton on behalf of the Respondent submitted  that  this  appeal
         turned on the (lack of) evidence.  Based on the paucity of evidence
         produced by the  Appellant,  even  taking  into  account  his  oral
         evidence, this is a case where the Judge could  only  have  reached
         the one conclusion that he did.  Mr Norton  pointed  out  that  the
         Respondent's decision took issue with whether the  Appellant  could
         show that he was exercising Treaty rights for a  five  year  period
         and the Appellant was therefore aware that he needed to demonstrate
         that he had.

    Discussion and conclusions

      8. The Judge set out the evidence on which the Appellant relied at [5]
         to [8] and [15] to [21] of the Decision.  As I have  noted  at  [4]
         above, the Appellant's oral evidence as to what he had  been  doing
         in the UK since his arrival was that he had "always  been  working"
         when he was not in prison [21].  The Appellant did not  say  as  he
         did before me that there were long periods when he was not in  fact
         working but had been unable to work due to ill health  (other  than
         in relation to the period at the date of the hearing as set out  at
         [19]).  In light of that evidence, it  was  not  incumbent  on  the
         Judge to go behind  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  was  working.
         However, the Judge was entitled to consider what evidence there was
         that he had in fact been working throughout the period when he  was
         not in prison.  In  addition  to  the  documents  produced  by  the
         Appellant himself which as the Judge notes did not assist his  case
         on this issue [18], the Judge was taken to evidence produced by the
         Respondent which related to the Appellant's  ex-wife's  application
         for permanent residence.  This is set out at [23] of the  Decision.
         This showed that the Appellant was working  intermittently  between
         2002 and 2009 but was sentenced to a term of imprisonment in  April
         2003 and again in December 2008.

      9. There was no documentary evidence in relation to the  period  prior
         to 2002 and the only documentary evidence that  the  Appellant  was
         even physically present in  the  UK  at  that  time  was  that  the
         Appellant was cautioned in relation to theft in 1999.   As  I  have
         noted at [6] above, even in relation to the period from mid 2003 to
         December 2008 which is the only other  period  that  the  Appellant
         could rely upon  to  support  a  finding  that  he  is  permanently
         resident, there is a long period from  April  2004  to  March  2007
         about which there is no documentary evidence.  The evidence set out
         at [23] was produced to the Respondent by the Appellant's  wife  to
         support an application for a permanent residence card  in  relation
         to her.   I can therefore  only  assume  that  if  there  had  been
         documentary evidence showing that the  Appellant  was  economically
         active (or indeed sick as he now says is the case) for that period,
         this would have been produced.

     10. As I have noted above at [8], the Appellant's oral evidence  before
         the Judge was that when he was not in prison, he was working.   His
         oral evidence to me is that he was sometimes working but there were
         periods when he was unable to work and was off sick.   Even  before
         me, that evidence was very vague as to the periods  concerned.   It
         is apparent from what is said at [21]  of  the  Decision  that  the
         Appellant's oral evidence was similarly  vague  before  the  Judge.
         There is no witness statement from the Appellant and  therefore  no
         detail of the employment which he claims to  have  had  during  the
         relevant periods nor for what periods he was unable to  work.   The
         Judge cannot be expected to simply accept such  vague  evidence  as
         establishing to the  requisite  standard  that  the  Appellant  was
         physically present and economically  active  in  the  UK.   He  was
         entitled to have regard to the documentary evidence which  did  not
         support a finding that the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  permanent
         residence for the reasons which the Judge  gives  at  [25]  of  the
         Decision.

     11. I am satisfied that the Judge properly understood and took  account
         of the evidence before him.  He could not be expected to  do  more.
         As the Judge notes at [9] of the Decision, the  burden  is  on  the
         Appellant to establish the facts on which he relies on a balance of
         probabilities.  The Appellant failed to do this.   I  am  therefore
         satisfied that the Decision does not contain any error of law.   As
         I pointed out to the Appellant at the hearing before me, if he  has
         evidence which would support an entitlement to permanent  residence
         (that is a five year period during which he has not been in  prison
         and when he has been either working or  unable  to  do  so  due  to
         illness), it is open to him to produce that to the Respondent  with
         submissions that the deportation order should be revoked.

    DECISION

    For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied  that  the  Decision  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal does not contain an error of law.  The Decision  of
    First-Tier Tribunal Judge Page promulgated on 8 October 2015 is  hereby
    confirmed.

Signed      [pic]      Date 23 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
