
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
DA/00056/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31 August 2018                        |On 01 October 2018                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                mariusz trela
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mariusz Trela, was born on 8 August 1979 and is  a  male
    citizen of Poland.  By a decision promulgated on 1 July 2018,  I  found
    that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such  that  the  decision
    fell to be set aside.  My reasons for reaching that  decision  were  as
    follows:-

         1.   The appellant claims to have entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
         January 2005 and began working here immediately.  He was  convicted
         of a series of driving offences beginning in 2011.  On  21  October
         2017, he was  convicted  of  driving  whilst  disqualified  without
         insurance, failing to surrender to custody and was later  convicted
         of driving with a controlled drug above  the  specified  limit  and
         sentenced to a total of  twelve  weeks'  imprisonment  and  further
         disqualified for 36 months.  On 27 October 2017, the appellant  was
         served with notice of intention  to  deport  him.   A  decision  to
         deport the appellant was taken on 10 January 2018.   The  Secretary
         of State accepted that,  having  produced  evidence  of  continuous
         exercise of Treaty Rights for  a  period  of  five  years,  he  was
         entitled to permanent residence.  It was not accepted that  he  had
         been  resident  for  a  continuous  period  of   ten   years.    In
         consequence, the respondent applied the "serious grounds of  public
         policy and public security" provided for by Regulation 27(3) of the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

         2.   The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Oxlade) which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  19  February  2018,
         allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         3.   I find that the judge erred in law.  At [37] he wrote:

         Considering the totality of  the  evidence,  both  documentary  and
         oral, I do find the appellant has  lived  in  the  UK  continuously
         since January 2005 exercised Treaty Rights for six years and so  is
         both a permanent resident and when it  comes  to  deportation,  the
         threshold test is imperative grounds of  public  security  for  the
         appellant to be deported.

         4.   Regulation 27(4) provides:

         (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

         (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in  the
         best interests of the person concerned,  as  provided  for  in  the
         Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the  General
         Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989

         5.   The calculation of the "continuous  period  of  at  least  ten
         years prior to the relevant decision" has now been settled  by  the
         Court of Justice of the European Communities in the case of B EUECJ
         C-316/16 which was delivered on  17  April  2018.   Paragraph  [95]
         provides:

         In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the fourth question in
         Case C-316 is that Article 28(3)(a) of the Directive  2004/38  must
         be interpreted as  meaning  that  the  question  whether  a  person
         satisfies the condition of having "resided in the host Member State
         for the previous ten years" within the meaning  of  that  provision
         must be assessed  at  the  date  on  which  the  initial  expulsion
         decision is adopted.

         6.   This decision coincides with jurisprudence in  the  courts  of
         England and Wales including  Warsame  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  16.  Judge
         Oxlade, instead of calculating  backwards  from  the  date  of  the
         deportation decision,  has  calculated  the  period  of  ten  years
         forward from the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom in 2005.
          By doing so, he erred in law.

         7.   Ms Khan, who appeared  for  the  appellant  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal, argued first that the  judge  had  made  a  comprehensive
         decision  which  considered  both  "serious"  grounds  as  well  as
         "imperative" grounds.  At [2], the judge wrote:

         For the following reasons, I find the  appellant  has  continuously
         lived in the UK since January 2005; in accordance  with  Regulation
         27(4) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016
         ... he can only be removed on imperative grounds of public security
         and I am not satisfied that this threshold has been made out on the
         facts.  Further, I am not satisfied the  personal  conduct  of  the
         appellant is a genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
         affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society  or  that
         deportation would comply with the principle of proportionality.

         8.   Ms Khan submitted that, even if the  judge  were  mistaken  in
         finding  that  "imperative"  grounds  applied,  he  had,   in   the
         alternative, also found that "serious" grounds did not apply in the
         appellant's case.

         9.   Whilst initially appearing to be attractive, I  do  not  agree
         with that submission.  First, [2] is in the nature of a summary  of
         the findings and analysis which will follow in the  decision.   The
         problem with Ms Khan's  submission  is  that,  having  referred  to
         "serious" grounds at [2] Judge Oxlade did not thereafter  refer  to
         those grounds at all.  Indeed, having found at [37] that imperative
         grounds applied,  the  remainder  of  his  analysis  [40]  was  not
         favourable to the appellant.  In essence, the judge found that  the
         appellant's conduct had been poor and was unlikely to  change;  the
         appellant   seemed   unable   to   understand   the   meaning    of
         disqualification from driving.  He  had  repeatedly  driven  whilst
         disqualified and indeed, it had not even "crossed his mind that  he
         was banned".  The judge concluded [41] that the appellant  did  not
         "display any insight or understanding  into  his  problem  nor  has
         developed any coping mechanisms, lacks honesty and candour about it
         and has not and will not seek help".  Further, in  summarising  the
         submissions made by Mr Clarke, Counsel on behalf of  the  appellant
         before the First-tier Tribunal at [19] the judge noted that "... it
         was conceded that if the test was 'a genuine  and  present  threat'
         [Regulation 23(5)(c)] this could be made out,  but  this  threshold
         was not applicable to a permanent  resident".   That  statement  is
         somewhat puzzling given  that  Regulation  23(3)  provides  that  a
         decision may not be taken "in respect of a  person  with  permanent
         residence ... except on serious grounds of public policy and public
         security".  I consider it likely that the judge  is  referring,  at
         the  end  of  [19],  to  "imperative"  grounds.   In   any   event,
         notwithstanding the judge's "blanket" summary at [2], it is  likely
         that he took the view (as, it would seem, did Mr Clarke also) that,
         had "serious" grounds been relevant, the provisions  of  Regulation
         27(5)(c) at the very least had been met by appellant.

         10.  The Tribunal's findings beg the question  as  to  whether  the
         judge's summary at [2] is consistent  with  the  remainder  of  the
         analysis.  I consider that it is not.  In my opinion the  judge  at
         [42] has only allowed the appeal, especially in light  of  what  he
         has said regarding the appellant's conduct and character  at  [40],
         because the "imperative" grounds applied.  In other words, there is
         no reasoning at all in the decision to support the judge's  finding
         at [2] as regards "serious" grounds.

         11.  Ms Khan's further submission was that the appellant's  conduct
         had not been addressed in the decision letter  but  only  his  past
         offending, an analysis which offended Regulation  27(5)(e).   There
         was no OASys Report in  this  case  whilst  there  was  significant
         evidence that the appellant  had  established  integration  in  the
         United Kingdom and appeared prior to his conviction.  Further,  his
         offences were not serious when considered objectively and consisted
         only of road traffic offences.  Ms Khan  submitted  that,  even  if
         Judge  Oxlade  had  addressed  the  correct  "serious"   level   of
         protection, he would have concluded that the threshold had not been
         crossed.

         12.  I disagree with that submission.  I refer again  to  what  the
         judge has said at [40].  The judge has clearly  taken  a  very  dim
         view of the appellant's conduct and he  found  that  there  was  no
         evidence of the appellant' having any insight into his offending or
         any serious intention by him to behave differently in  the  future.
         I find that it is simply not possible to read what  the  judge  has
         said at [40-42] as indicating that neither Regulation 27  threshold
         had been crossed.

         13.  In the circumstances, I set aside the judge's  decision.   The
         decision will be re-made in the Upper Tribunal  by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Lane at or following a resumed hearing in Bradford on a  date
         to be fixed.   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  provisions  of
         Regulation 27(3) apply in the case of this appellant.  Accordingly,
         the considerations at sub-paragraph (5) of the Regulation will need
         to be considered by the Tribunal.  I see  no  reason  to  interfere
         with the findings of fact  made  by  Judge  Oxlade.   The  findings
         contained in his decision at [28] et seq shall  stand  accordingly.
         Both parties may adduce fresh evidence to bring  the  circumstances
         of the appellant and  his  family  up-to-date  as  at  the  resumed
         hearing.  Any fresh written evidence must be sent to  the  Tribunal
         and to the other party no later than 10  days  before  the  resumed
         hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         14.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 19 February 2018 is set aside.  All the findings of  fact  shall
         stand.  The Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane)  shall  re-
         make the decision at a resumed hearing on a date to be  fixed  (two
         hours allowed).

         15.  No anonymity direction is made.

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 31 August 2018, Mrs Pettersen,  a
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared for the respondent.   I
    am satisfied that notices of hearing were sent to the appellant and  to
    his representatives (All Nations Legal Services) by second  class  post
    on 25 July 2018.  No explanation or excuse has been  received  for  the
    failure of either the appellant or the representatives to  attend.   In
    the circumstances, I proceeded with the hearing in the absence  of  the
    appellant/his representatives.

 3. The appellant was served with notice of a liability to be  deported  on
    27 October 2017.  In the light of the findings which I made in my error
    of law decision (see above) it was for  the  appellant  to  demonstrate
    that he had been living in the United Kingdom for  10  years  prior  to
    October 2017 in order for him to attract a higher level  of  protection
    under the 2016 Regulations.  The appellant claims to  have  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2006 but,  as  Mrs  Pettersen  pointed  out,  the
    evidence was not  clear.   There  was  no  evidence  at  all  from  the
    Probation Services  or,  indeed,  any  evidence  at  all  updating  the
    circumstances of appellant himself following the error of law decision.
     In particular, there is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  been
    rehabilitated within the society of the United Kingdom.  I am  reminded
    also of the preserved findings  of  Judge  Oxlade  (see  error  of  law
    decision - [13]) he had set out in his own decision  at  [28]  et  seq.
    The judge found that the appellant had no insight or understanding into
    his own problems and no coping mechanisms and that  he  lacked  honesty
    and candour about his persistent offending.  In  the  circumstances,  I
    agree with  Mrs  Pettersen  that  the  appellant's  case  falls  to  be
    considered under Regulation 27(3) of the 2016 Regulations:-

         (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in  respect  of  a  person
         with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

         (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in  the
         best interests of the person concerned,  as  provided  for  in  the
         Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the  General
         Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989(17).

 4. Subparagraph (5) provides as follows:

         (5) The public policy  and  public  security  requirements  of  the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights  otherwise  conferred  by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of
         society, and where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
         public  policy  or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
         accordance with the following principles-

         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c) the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct
         of the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent;

         (d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;

         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
         justify the decision;

         (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in  the
         absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the grounds are
         specific to the person.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

 5. I am reminded that  Judge  Oxlade  found  (and  I  have  preserved  his
    findings) that the appellant remains at a  high  risk  of  re-offending
    [40].  I am aware that the appellant's previous criminal convictions do
    not in themselves justify a decision to deport him but his past conduct
    and Judge Oxlade's finding as regards his propensity to  re-offend  are
    important considerations.  I am aware also of the length of time  which
    the appellant claims to have been in the United Kingdom but I find that
    he has failed to prove any particular length of residence  which  might
    afford him a level of protection  beyond  that  offered  by  Regulation
    27(3).  Further, again in the light of the findings of Judge Oxlade,  I
    find that the appellant has failed to integrate socially and culturally
    into the United Kingdom.  I have no evidence  that  the  appellant  has
    poor health and there is very little evidence as regards his family and
    economic situation (and no evidence at  all  as  at  the  date  of  the
    resumed  hearing).   Considering  these   findings   and   observations
    collectively, I find that the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the
    decision to deport him should be dismissed. I accept that  there  exist
    serious grounds of public policy and public security which require  the
    appellant's deportation. I observe also that, although I have set aside
    Judge Oxlade's decision, I  have  preserved  his  findings;  it  is  my
    opinion that had Judge Oxlade correctly considered that he was  dealing
    with "serious" as opposed to "imperative" grounds for the  deportation,
    he too would have dismissed this appeal.



Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal of the appellant against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to deport him to  Poland  which  is  dated  27  October  2017  is
    dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 September 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 26 September 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


