
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
DA/00897/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 October 2017                        |On 30 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Edward Kabuga
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr David Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Helen Foot of Counsel, instructed by Tower
                    Hamlets Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (who we will  refer  to  as
    the  appellant)  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    promulgated on 19  May  2015  which  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal
    against a decision of the appellant of 2 May 2013 to make a deportation
    against the respondent by virtue of Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act
    1971.  The respondent was born in the  UK  on  27  October  1994.   His
    mother had come to the UK from Uganda in November 1990.   Since the age
    of 10 years he has  involved  himself  in  criminal  activity  and  had
    associated  himself  with  criminal  gangs  in  London.   He  has  been
    sentenced to periods of custody both as a juvenile  and  as  an  adult.
    Most recently, he was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment for  a  crime
    of violence.  He has been the subject of detailed reports by the police
    summarised in the MG11 report referred to below.  In the light of  that
    criminal history the appellant took the view that the  public  interest
    required the respondent's deportation to Uganda.

2.   The respondent appealed that decision to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  was
    granted permission to appeal on 16 June 2015.  The appeal was heard  on
    7 March 2016 and in a decision promulgated on 19 May  2016  the  appeal
    was allowed on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  materially
    erred in law in its approach to the question of whether the  respondent
    would face "very significant obstacles" on being  deported  to  Uganda,
    thus qualifying under the exception in Rule 399A(c) of the  Immigration
    Rules and Section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act.  The  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    found that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  apply  the
    correct test  in  relation  to  whether  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to the respondent's integration into Uganda  and  had  merely
    identified difficulties or problems  as  opposed  to  very  significant
    obstacles.

3.   That decision was itself appealed to  the  Court  of  Appeal.   It  was
    accepted by the appellant that the Upper Tribunal Judge had fallen into
    error because he  had  applied  the  very  significant  obstacles  test
    incorrectly.  In effect, the court accepted  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  had  equated  the   very   significant   obstacles   test   with
    insurmountable obstacles and thereby erred.

4.   The matter was remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a rehearing.

5.   Before us Mr Clarke for the Secretary of  State  and  appellant  argued
    some of the original grounds of appeal advanced to the  Upper  Tribunal
    in March of 2016 together with the further grounds of appeal  dated  18
    January 2016.  He argued firstly that, while  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had  found  that  the  respondent  was  and  continued  to  be  a
    persistent offender, he had also found that the  appellant  had  turned
    away from criminality.  That was on the  face  of  it  a  contradictory
    finding and was not adequately  resolved  in  the  determination.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had found also that  the  respondent  had  no
    discernible skills with which to survive or earn a living in Uganda but
    had listed his employment skills at an earlier part of the judgment  at
    paragraphs 99 and 100, together with his qualifications, such  as  they
    were, at paragraph 137.  Again, that apparent conflict was not resolved
    in any adequate way.  The fact that he  had  certain  skills  indicated
    that there would be no very significant obstacles to  integration  into
    Uganda.

6.   Mr Clarke also argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that
    the respondent would be effectively destitute if returned at  paragraph
    204 but failed to take account of  the  Facilitated  Return  Scheme  to
    which the respondent's attention was drawn on each page of the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter.  Mr Clarke submitted that  while  that  scheme  was
    available to persons who volunteered to  return  to  their  country  of
    origin the respondent in this case had  a  choice  upon  a  deportation
    being made against him as to whether to return to Uganda and if he  did
    so on a voluntary basis there was  no  reason  why  he  should  not  be
    eligible under that scheme.  Under ground 2 Mr Clarke argued that there
    was a failure to give adequate reasons for the finding at paragraph 200
    that in order to survive in Uganda it is necessary to speak one of  the
    local dialects,  namely  Luganda,  in  order  to  have  any  reasonable
    prospect of integration into that society.  While there is a  reference
    to the numerous reports and evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    there is no adequate explanation of the basis for that conclusion.

7.   Mr Clarke did not advance argument under subheading B of  ground  2  or
    ground 3.  In relation to the further grounds of appeal, Mr Clarke  did
    not advance any argument in relation to the fairness of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's refusal to adjourn the proceedings.  While at  the  time  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal's  hearing  additional  criminal  charges  in
    relation to affray were pending against the respondent, it was accepted
    that no evidence had been advanced in respect of  that  charge  and  no
    conviction had accordingly  been  recorded  against  him.   As  to  the
    additional factor referred to in the determination that the  respondent
    had breached a civil injunction banning him from entering certain parts
    of Newham and from taking part in  gang  videos  and  associating  with
    named individuals, for which he had been subsequently sentenced to four
    months' imprisonment, Mr Clarke accepted  that  the  judge  had  proper
    regard to that factor at paragraph 171.

8.   However, Mr Clarke argued that the judge materially  erred  in  law  in
    his assessment  of  the  respondent's  background  circumstances  which
    informed his conclusion that there would be very significant  obstacles
    in integration if deported to Uganda.  The  respondent  was  a  Ugandan
    national, his mother was Ugandan and he was brought  up  in  a  Ugandan
    household in the United Kingdom.  He had visited Uganda on a number  of
    occasions with  his  mother.   Accordingly,  the  conclusion  that  the
    respondent had no ties with Uganda was unwarranted.

9.   Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred  in  focusing  too
    closely on the question as to whether any ties existed with  Uganda  as
    opposed to whether there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration there if deported.  There was no reasoned  analysis  behind
    the conclusion at paragraph 200 that  it  was  necessary  in  order  to
    survive in Uganda that the respondent was able  to  speak  the  Luganda
    dialect.

10.  Ms Foot for the respondent submitted that there was no  material  error
    of law in the judgment of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Facilitated
    Return Scheme (FRS) as a whole indicated that the respondent would  not
    be eligible for assistance thereunder.

11.  Page 6, for example, states that the main  aim  of  the  scheme  is  to
    promote and assist early removals by encouraging  full  compliance  and
    cooperation from eligible FNOs (foreign national offenders) willing  to
    return to their country of origin voluntarily.  It is  aimed  at  those
    FNOs who want to cooperate with early removal.  At  page  34  there  is
    reference to a requirement to reject an application  for  participation
    in the scheme if an appellant is pursuing extant immigration appeals or
    making representations to stay in the United Kingdom.  Accordingly,  it
    was far from clear that the respondent in this case would be eligible.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal had given a detailed and nuanced  determination
    noting the context in which his criminal convictions had occurred  and,
    in particular, the  fact  that  only  two  of  those  convictions  were
    incurred when an adult.  The Tribunal had made a clear finding that the
    respondent was a persistent offender and accordingly his deportation is
    conducive to the public good.  Notwithstanding that,  detailed  reasons
    had been given why the exception contained in Immigration Rule  399A(c)
    was met in this particular case.  Under reference to the case of Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813, paragraph 14, the First-tier Tribunal had  applied
    a broad evaluative judgment in deciding whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration.  The respondent had been born
    in the United Kingdom.  The household in which he had been  brought  up
    had not been one in which he had been exposed to  Ugandan  culture,  he
    had only visited the country on a small number  of  occasions,  had  no
    family in Uganda and could not speak Lugandan.  His  mother's  evidence
    had not been challenged to  the  effect  that,  because  atrocities  in
    Uganda  which  she  had  experienced  and  domestic  violence  she  had
    suffered, she had  disassociated  herself  from  the  Ugandan  culture.
    Accordingly, the respondent was a product, not of Uganda,  but  of  the
    United Kingdom.  The finding at paragraph 214 that somebody should have
    a reasonable prospect of a normal lifestyle of opportunities to  engage
    in work, education and social interaction was a  legitimate  one  which
    could not be said to apply to the respondent in this case.

Discussion

13.  We start by recognising that the respondent, albeit a young man  of  22
    years of age, has an appalling criminal record and the conclusion  that
    he was a persistent offender who had shown a particular  disregard  for
    the law was one which was inevitable.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    set out at length the stark history of his offending between paragraphs
    16 and 40.  He took into account not only the  convictions  which  were
    recorded against the respondent, both as a juvenile and  as  an  adult,
    but also information contained in the  MG11  report  submitted  by  the
    police which went into substantial detail into  his  criminal  history.
    That information showed a pattern of criminal conduct and  a  lifestyle
    which supported that conclusion.  At paragraph 152 the  judge  narrates
    that he had a total of eight convictions for ten different offences, 54
    recorded stop and search incidents and approximately 21 matters  listed
    on the CRIS computer reports running to some 400 pages.  Much  of  this
    narrated conduct which had not resulted in any criminal conviction  but
    supported the view that the  respondent  was  involved  in  a  criminal
    lifestyle.  Having reached that conclusion,  the  judge  sets  out  the
    legislative framework in which his decision required to be  made.   The
    public interest in the deportation  of  the  respondent  is  repeatedly
    acknowledged and it is evident that he was  aware  that,  only  if  the
    respondent established that there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to  his  integration  into  Uganda,  would  the  public   interest   be
    outweighed.

14.  From  the  analysis  conducted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  we  are
    satisfied that proper consideration was  given  to  the  weight  to  be
    placed on the public interest in the  deportation  of  the  respondent.
    Nevertheless, having found that he was a persistent offender, the judge
    went on to find that  he  had  the  potential  to  make  a  significant
    contribution to the social fabric of the United Kingdom (see  paragraph
    210).  In doing so, the judge acknowledged the evidence of the  expert,
    Mr Sheldon Thomas, led on behalf of the respondent who had made a study
    of gang activity in London and who  had  mentored  the  respondent  and
    other members of the "Blood City Gang" between 2011 and 2013. A  letter
    dated 21 October 2013 was lodged by the respondent and is at pages  19-
    20 of his bundle. It thus post-dated the criminal activity for which he
    was most recently convicted.  He described the respondent as the member
    who had shown the most promise of wanting to  change.   The  respondent
    had completed training courses which Mr Thomas listed.   He  said  that
    these "show how much Edward had improved his life and  how  much  of  a
    positive asset he will become to the community". The evidence contained
    in the report and the fact that the respondent had not  been  convicted
    of any criminal offence since 2  October  2014  when  he  was  given  a
    suspended sentence, provided a basis for the belief that the respondent
    had undergone  significant  change  in  his  behaviour.   He  finds  at
    paragraph 170 upon the expert and oral evidence that the respondent had
    made "significant progress in  changing  his  lifestyle,  his  criminal
    behaviour and his associates".

15.   As Mr Clarke pointed out,  there  may  be  some  tension  between  the
    conclusion  about  the  respondent's  potential  and  his  ability   to
    integrate into Ugandan society.  However, we consider that  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  properly  had  regard  to  a   wide   range   of
    considerations  when  examining  the  question  of   very   significant
    obstacles to integration.   He  took  account  of  the  fact  that  the
    respondent had been born in the United Kingdom and had lived  here  all
    his life.  He had no family or friends in Uganda and no  employment  or
    accommodation there.  The household in which he had been brought up was
    not one which in any way prepared him  for  life  in  Uganda.   On  the
    contrary, because of his mother's experiences, there had been no  sense
    in which his Ugandan heritage was developed.  The finding at  paragraph
    193 that he  had  no  connection  with  Uganda,  save  a  very  tenuous
    connection through his mother's parentage as her country of origin  is,
    we consider, a legitimate one.

16.  The reference to him  having  some  potential  to  make  a  significant
    contribution in the United Kingdom must be read  in  its  context.   At
    paragraph 210 the judge acknowledges  that  he  has  not  yet  done  so
    because of his circumstances and his offending.  At paragraph 206 it is
    pointed out that his skills in the United Kingdom are limited and  that
    made his ability to progress here far more difficult.  He  was  in  the
    process of acquiring such skills (we assume the  word  requiring  is  a
    mistake for acquiring).  Accordingly, the  finding  in  that  paragraph
    that he has no discernible skills with  which  to  survive  or  earn  a
    living lawfully in Uganda was one open  to  the  judge  assessing  this
    matter in May 2015.  At that time the respondent was 20 years  of  age.
    His last criminal activity had been perpetrated in February  2013,  for
    which he had been sentenced in October 2014.  He had not been convicted
    of any criminal offence since then.  Accordingly,  while  there  was  a
    basis for the conclusion that this young man had some potential to make
    his way in the United Kingdom and therefore to  be  able  to  integrate
    himself into Ugandan society, that remained, at least in 2015,  only  a
    potential circumstance.

 17  In Kamara, Sales L.J. stated at paragraph 14 that:

         "the idea of integration calls for a broad evaluative  judgment  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life"


    The judge had proper regard to that description of what is involved  in
    integration.  His conclusion that that stage had not yet  been  reached
    in 2015 was one open to him on the evidence.  As he said  at  paragraph
    214, integration means that one should have a reasonable prospect of  a
    normal lifestyle of opportunities to  engage  in  work,  education  and
    social  interaction.   The  facts  found  by  the  judge  merited   the
    conclusion that there were very significant obstacles in integration in
    that sense.


18.  We do not accept  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in  omitting  to
    mention the FRS.  It is by no means clear that the respondent would  be
    eligible for assistance under that Scheme for the reasons  advanced  by
    Ms Foot.  Mr Clarke was unable to point to any part of the scheme which
    demonstrated the respondent's eligibility nor to any evidence, guidance
    or policy which assisted to show his interpretation  was  correct.   It
    does not appear to have been a factor which arose in the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  As to the finding about  the  need  to  speak
    Luganda, while it is stated at paragraph 200 that "it is  necessary  to
    survive to converse unless one has an independent  income",  the  judge
    also states there that it is necessary for survival purposes  to  speak
    one of the primary local languages "in order  to  have  any  reasonable
    prospect of integration into that society".  It is  plain  that  he  is
    considering economic survival.  When that  paragraph  is  read  in  the
    context of the decision as a whole and, in particular, the comments  in
    paragraph 214, we consider that the  judge  was  saying  no  more  than
    speaking Luganda is one of the factors which would assist in giving the
    respondent a reasonable prospect of integration in the sense set out in
    Kamara quoted above.  Mr Clarke's submission that the judge placed  too
    much emphasis on the lack of ties is also misconceived.   The  question
    of the respondent's degree of  connection  to  Uganda  was  a  relevant
    consideration of which the judge took account.  But it is plain,  again
    from a reading of the decision as a whole, that the judge took  account
    of a whole range of factors beyond the  respondent's  ties  to  Uganda.
    For example,  it  is  obvious  that  consideration  was  given  to  the
    respondent's age and his level of development and maturity.

19.  We emphasise that we have  examined  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which reflects the respondent's circumstances as at May  2015.
    No doubt an individual's abilities to integrate into an  alien  culture
    can  improve  and  develop  through  time  and  it  may  be  that   the
    respondent's own situation has now developed as he has matured.  If so,
    an analysis of the  respondent's  current  ability  to  integrate  into
    Ugandan society might lead to a different conclusion.  But we must look
    at the picture reflected in the findings of the Tribunal as at  May  of
    2015. Having done so, we cannot conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has, at the date of their decision, materially erred in law in  finding
    that the  appellant  had  established  very  significant  obstacles  in
    integration to Uganda.

18.  The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 26 October 2017


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal





