
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00328/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 April 2021                           |On 4 June 2021                  |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                BARTOSZ JANUR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who  allowed
    the appeal of Mr Janur against the Secretary of State's decision  of  8
    May 2018 in which it was decided to make a  deportation  order  against
    him under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

2.   I shall refer to Mr Janur hereafter as the appellant, as he was  before
    the judge, and to the Secretary of State as the respondent, as she  was
    before the judge.

3.   There was no appearance by either  the  appellant  nor  the  respondent
    before the judge.  The judge  heard  the  appeal  on  the  papers,  and
    allowed it, on the basis that bearing in mind the offences committed by
    the appellant, he did not find there was a future risk  of  reoffending
    or serious harm to the public and it had not been shown that such risks
    or threats as  there  were,  were  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious such as to affect one of the fundamental interests of society.

4.   The Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal on  the
    basis first that there was a procedural irregularity in that the matter
    had been determined on the papers and secondly, that  the  judge  erred
    with regard to the inadequacy of his reasoning.

5.   Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, but on renewal permission was granted by a Judge of the Upper
    Tribunal.

6.   At the hearing before me Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State.   There  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of Mr Janur.

7.   Mr Whitwell said that the appellant had in fact been removed to  Poland
    on 19 May 2018.

8.   I consider that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  It is unfortunate that the matter has to be dealt with today
    in the absence of the appellant, but as Mr Whitwell has  said,  he  was
    removed nearly three years ago  and  left  no  forwarding  address  and
    therefore it was impossible to  contact  him  to  give  him  notice  of
    today's hearing.

9.   I agree with the points made in the grant of permission that the  judge
    in considering Rule 25 of the Procedure Rules failed  to  consider  the
    discretion and the overriding objective as to whether  or  not  it  was
    fair and just to the respondent to proceed without a hearing.  Although
    there was a notice of 12 February 2019, this did not make it clear that
    the matter was to be decided on the papers and without a  hearing.   On
    the letter sent out on that date the box marked  no  representative  or
    sponsor in the United Kingdom has been nominated was crossed.  Although
    there is a reference towards the end of the directions to the fact that
    a copy of the Tribunal's decision on the appeal would be  sent  in  due
    course, it was not made clear that the matter would be  dealt  with  on
    the papers.  Accordingly I consider that the judge erred in law in that
    regard.

10.  I also consider that the judge erred in law with regard to  the  second
    ground in which it is contended that he failed to consider whether  the
    totality of the appellant's offending suggested that he  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of the United Kingdom.  I  agree  with  Judge  Blundell,  who
    granted permission, that the difficulty of the judge's task  could  not
    be overstated and no criticism of her is intended.  She had very little
    from the respondent and nothing at all from the appellant.  However,  I
    do consider that she did  not  address  sufficiently  the  question  of
    whether there was a pattern of offending of a similar nature which  was
    indicative in itself of a risk of future offending.  As a consequence I
    find an error of law in that regard also.  In light of  the  fact  that
    there has in effect been no proper hearing in this case, the matter  is
    remitted for a full hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton
    Cross before a judge other than Judge Graves.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed   Date 1st June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

