
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00412/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2020                           |On 20 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD UIST
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     E F
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant  (referred  to  as  the  Claimant  in  this  decision).  This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings. This direction has been  made  in  order  to  protect  the
    original Appellant's  (the  Claimant's)  children  from  serious  harm,
    having regard  to  the  interests  of  justice  and  the  principle  of
    proportionality.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga and Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease  of  reference,  we  shall  refer  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal as the Secretary of State and  to
    the Respondent as the Claimant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler ("the judge"), promulgated on 5  August
    2019, in which she allowed the Claimant's appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision, dated 18 June 2018, to make  a  deportation  order
    under Regulation 23(6)(b) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the Regulations").

 3. The Claimant is a national of Italy born  in  1981.  She  came  to  the
    United Kingdom  as  a  baby  and  has,  with  the  exception  of  three
    relatively short periods of  absence,  resided  in  this  country  ever
    since. The now uncontroversial factual background to the case discloses
    two features of particular note: firstly, her extremely  difficult  and
    chaotic upbringing as a child, and the consequences  of  this  for  her
    adult life; secondly, her offending  history,  which  consisted  of  40
    convictions for 68 offences  between  1998  and  2019.  In  making  the
    deportation decision, the Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the
    Claimant had acquired a permanent right of residence, nor that she  had
    resided in this country continuously for 10  years.  The  Claimant  was
    assessed as constituting a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society and it was
    concluded that  the  Claimant's  deportation  would  be  proportionate.
    Article 8 ECHR was considered by the Secretary of  State,  but  it  was
    said that no protected rights  would  be  violated  as  result  of  the
    deportation decision.

 4. In response to that decision, the Claimant asserted  that  her  lengthy
    residence in  the  United  Kingdom  afforded  her  enhanced  protection
    against  deportation,  that  she  had  no  meaningful  ties  to   Italy
    whatsoever,  and  that  in  all   the   circumstances   it   would   be
    disproportionate to remove her from this country.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At paras 13-25 the judge summarised the  Claimant's  offending  history
    and her other personal  circumstances,  including  the  fact  that  she
    suffers from PTSD, has been dependent on drugs, and that  she  has  two
    children (the eldest had been adopted  and  now  lives  in  the  United
    States, whilst the younger child lives with the Claimant's father under
    a special guardianship order made by the Family Court). Her father, who
    attended the hearing, was found by the judge to be a "highly  credible"
    witness as to the Claimant's background and current circumstances  (see
    para 26). In light of his evidence and other documents before her,  the
    judge found that  the  Claimant  had  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom and had  also  completed  10  years  of
    lawful residence (see paras 30-32).

 6. The judge then considered the relevant legal framework  with  reference
    to a number of authorities and the 2016 Regulations.  At  para  43  she
    found that the Claimant was a "serial and persistent offender" and that
    whilst the more recent offending  had  been  relatively  minor  in  its
    nature, it was rendered more serious by its prevalence. Notwithstanding
    this, at paras 45 and 46, the judge concluded  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had failed to show that there were "imperative grounds" of public
    security justifying the Claimant's expulsion from this country. At para
    47 the judge reached the first of two alternative  conclusions,  namely
    that even on the middle  tier  level  of  protection  under  Regulation
    27(3), the "serious grounds" threshold had not been met. At  paras  48-
    51, the judge sets out her second alternative conclusion, to the effect
    that   the   Claimant's   deportation   would,   in   any   event,   be
    disproportionate.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal  are  essentially  twofold.
    Firstly, and with reference to paras 2-4, it is  said  that  the  judge
    erred in concluding that the Claimant had been entitled to the  highest
    level of protection under Regulation 27(4)  of  the  2016  Regulations.
    Secondly, at para 5 it is said that the judge erred in  her  conclusion
    on the "serious grounds" test by failing to have regard to  para  3  of
    Schedule 1 to the 2016 Regulations (which states that  an  individual's
    offending history is relevant to the likelihood  that  their  continued
    presence in the  United  Kingdom  represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society). Para 5 goes on to contend:

           "In  view  of  the  very  many  convictions  received   by   the
           [Claimant], it is submitted  that  had  the  [judge]  considered
           this, she would have seen that the 'serious' test has  been  met
           and that it would be  proportionate  to  deport  the  [Claimant]
           despite her long-standing connections with the UK."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on
    5 November 2019.

 9. In advance of the hearing,  both  parties  filed  and  served  skeleton
    arguments. On behalf of the Secretary of State, it is conceded that the
    judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Claimant  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom.  The  challenge  to
    her conclusions on the "imperative grounds"  test  is  maintained.  The
    skeleton argument sets  out  references  to  Schedule  1  to  the  2016
    Regulations and puts forward a number of factors of the Claimant's case
    which it is  said  were  not  properly  considered  by  the  judge,  in
    particular when considering whether the Secretary  of  State  had  been
    able to show that "serious grounds" existed.

10. The Claimant's skeleton argument asserts that the Secretary of  State's
    challenge amounts to nothing more than a disagreement with the  judge's
    findings and conclusions.




The hearing

11. Mr Whitwell relied on the Secretary of State's  skeleton  argument  and
    the grounds of appeal. He expanded  briefly  on  the  points  contained
    therein. Mr Hawkin relied on his skeleton argument and  emphasised  the
    judge's acceptance of the Claimant's past  and  current  circumstances,
    together with what he described as the "unusually"  long  residence  in
    the United Kingdom.

12. At the conclusion of the hearing we reserved our decision.



Decision on error of law

13. In our judgment the judge has not materially erred in law.

14. We see some merit in the Secretary of State's challenge to the  judge's
    conclusion on the "imperative grounds" issue. The assessment of whether
    an individual has accrued the necessary 10 years  continuous  residence
    in a Member State involves not simply a pre-existing permanent right of
    residence (which the Claimant had), but an analysis  of  the  10  years
    immediately preceding the deportation decision (that being 18 June 2008
    to 18 June  2018)  and  whether  periods  of  imprisonment  (which  the
    Claimant had certainly  been  subject  to)  had  broken  the  necessary
    integrative links. The judge has  arguably  failed  to  carry  out  the
    necessary step-by-step approach in respect of this particular issue.

15. However, this observation may have no bearing upon the outcome  of  the
    appeal before us. The judge reached two alternative conclusions,  based
    firstly upon the "serious grounds" level of protection, and secondly on
    the proportionality assessment. If these conclusions  are  sustainable,
    any error in respect of the "imperative grounds" issue  is  immaterial,
    and the first aspect of the Secretary of State's challenge is  rendered
    otiose.

16. The Secretary of State has expressly conceded (in our  view  correctly)
    that the judge was entitled to conclude that the Claimant had  acquired
    a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom and was  therefore
    entitled to rely on the middle  tier  of  protection  under  Regulation
    27(3) of the 2016 Regulations. The judge was clearly well aware of  the
    Claimant's offending and other  relevant  history.  We  agree  with  Mr
    Hawkin's description  of  her  assessment  of  that  history  as  being
    "realistic", in the sense that there was no attempt to gloss  over  the
    nature and extent of the Claimant's criminality,  whilst  at  the  same
    time recognising the very difficult circumstances  faced  by  her  over
    time. The grounds of appeal and the skeleton argument  do  not  in  our
    view acknowledge or engage with the judge's overall assessment made  in
    the context of the "serious grounds" threshold.

17. Contrary to what is said in para 5 of the grounds of appeal and alluded
    to in the Secretary of State's skeleton argument, in our  judgment  the
    judge did have regard to Schedule 1 to the  2016  Regulations.  She  in
    fact quoted para 7 of Schedule 1 at para 7 of her decision. Whilst this
    does not represent the entirety of the Schedule, it  is  indicative  of
    the relevant provisions as a whole  being  in  the  judge's  mind  when
    reaching a decision. Schedule 1 is referred to again at paras 33 and 45
    of her decision. We would be slow to conclude  that  having  repeatedly
    referred  to  Schedule  1,  the  judge  then  effectively  ignored  it.
    Furthermore, we re-emphasise the point made in the preceding  paragraph
    that the Secretary of State's challenge fails to have proper regard  to
    the judge's holistic approach to the "serious grounds" issue  in  light
    of the evidence before her.

18. There is no error of law in respect of the judge's  conclusion  on  the
    "serious grounds" issue.

19. Even if there had been an error, in our judgment the judge was entitled
    to conclude that the Claimant's  deportation  would  in  any  event  be
    disproportionate. This second alternative  conclusion  reached  by  the
    judge is barely alluded to in the grounds of  appeal.  Para  5  thereof
    appears to suggest that if the judge had taken para 3 of Schedule 1  to
    the 2016 Regulations  into  account,  she  would  have  been  bound  to
    conclude  that  deportation  was  proportionate.  This   assertion   is
    misconceived for three reasons. Firstly, we have already concluded that
    the judge did take Schedule 1 into account. Secondly, even if  we  were
    wrong about that, para 3 of Schedule  1  relates  specifically  to  the
    question of whether an individual represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society. This question is not the same as whether it  is  proportionate
    to deport. Thirdly,  once  again,  the  grounds  of  appeal  failed  to
    recognise what the judge has actually said, with  particular  reference
    to paras 43-51 of her decision.  In  our  view,  she  has  conducted  a
    sustainable balancing exercise, having regard to the 'pros'  and  cons'
    of the Claimant's case.

20. With regard to the Secretary of  State's  skeleton  argument,  numerous
    points are made concerning the Claimant's offending and why this should
    have led the  judge  to  conclude  that  deportation  was  appropriate.
    However, when considering the decision as a whole, and in light of what
    we have said previously, in our judgment  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude as she did. Her decision is sustainable and  it  follows  that
    Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  falls  to  be
    dismissed.



Anonymity

21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction.  However,
    the Claimant has two children, one of whom has  been  adopted  and  the
    other is subject to an order of the Family Court. Whilst  we  have  not
    stated any specific information in our decision  which  might  lead  to
    their identification, their particular circumstances justify the making
    of a direction at this stage.

Notice of Decision
The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed      [pic]            Date: 29 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


