

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00599/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 16 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

   2. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge A Cresswell and Mr M E Olszewski  JP)  allowing  AAM's
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision on 19 March 2014 that
      s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied and that AAM was subject to
      automatic deportation under the 2007  Act.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
      allowed the appeal under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  but  dismissed  the
      appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and  under  the  Immigration
      Rules.

   3. For convenience, although this appeal is brought by the  Secretary  of
      State, I will for convenience refer to the parties  as  they  appeared
      before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 15 June 1977. He
      left Somalia in June 2008.  He travelled to Ethiopia where he remained
      until August 2009  when  he  travelled  to  Holland  via  Turkey.   He
      remained in Holland for approximately 3 months  before  travelling  to
      Germany from which he travelled to the UK.

   5. On 3 February 2010, the appellant pleaded guilty at  Manchester  Crown
      Court to the offence of knowing possession of false identity documents
      with intent and was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.  On 23 April
      2013, the Secretary of State wrote to the appellant  inviting  him  to
      put forward any claim that he was not subject to deportation under the
      automatic deportation provisions in the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  as  a
      foreign criminal.  In  response,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum  and
      relied upon his human rights.  As regards the former, he claimed  that
      he was at risk on return to Somalia from Al Shabaab.  As  regards  the
      latter, the appellant relied upon the fact that his former wife was in
      the UK with their son MAAM who was 13 years of age.   The  appellant's
      ex-wife had been granted refugee status in the UK previously.

   6. In her decision letters dated 12 February 2014 and 19 March  2014  the
      Secretary  of  State  rejected  the  appellant's  claim   to   asylum,
      humanitarian protection and under Article 3 of the ECHR and his  claim
      based upon his relationship with his son under the  Immigration  Rules
      and Article 8 of the ECHR.

   7. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Tribunal
      dismissed the appellant's appeal based upon any risk to him on  return
      to Somalia. In addition, the Tribunal  concluded  that  the  appellant
      could not meet the requirements of paras 399 and  399A  of  the  Rules
      based upon his "parental relationship" with his son , who is a British
      citizen, in the UK or under the Rules based on his private life in the
      UK.  However,  the  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR on  the  basis  that  his  removal  would  be  a
      disproportionate interference with his family and private life in  the
      UK, in particular his relationship with his son aged 13.

   8. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on a number of grounds which challenged the decision to allow
      the appeal under Art 8.  On 25  July  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Judge Fisher) granted the Secretary of State  permission  to  appeal.
      Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Secretary of State's Grounds

   9. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State adopted  the  grounds
      of appeal.  The Secretary of State argues that the First-tier Tribunal
      erred in law in the following respects.

  10.  First,  the  Tribunal  failed  to  identify   why   the   appellant's
      circumstances were "exceptional" given that  he  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules, in particular para 399.   There
      are no factors which set the appellant's claim apart from "an ordinary
      family life claim".  There was no evidence that the appellant's  child
      could not be cared for by his mother and no reason why  the  appellant
      could not return to Somalia and maintain contact with his son in  this
      country.

  11.  Secondly,  the  Tribunal  erred  in  law  when   carrying   out   the
      proportionality assessment under Article  8.   It  took  into  account
      'Exception 2' in s.117C of the Immigration Act 2014 which was  not  in
      force at the date of the Tribunal's decision.  In relation  to  s.117C
      there was  no  evidence  that  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  on  the
      appellant's son if the appellant were deported.  Further, the Tribunal
      had failed to give adequate consideration to the  public  interest  in
      favour of the appellant's deportation having regard  to  any  risk  of
      reoffending, society's revulsion at the commission  of  serious  crime
      and the deterrence of foreign criminals from committing  such  crimes.
      Even if there was no risk of the appellant reoffending, the  remaining
      facets of the public interest  had  not  been  adequately  taken  into
      account.

  12.  In  addition,  Mr  Richards  supplemented  this  latter  argument  by
      submitting that the Tribunal had only considered the legitimate aim of
      "fair immigration control" when a wider public interest including  the
      need for "national security"  given  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
      offending was engaged.

The Appellant's Submissions

  13. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Hodgetts adopted his detailed  Rule  24
      reply.  In essence, he argued  that  the  Tribunal  had  identified  a
      number of features of the appellant's case which  were  "exceptional".
      The Tribunal had correctly directed itself on the proper  approach  to
      the balancing exercise including taking into account all facets of the
      public interest including national security.   Finally,  he  submitted
      that the Tribunal, especially at paragraph 46, had undertaken  a  fair
      and  balanced  assessment  of  the  factors  weighing  in  favour   of
      deportation against those  weighing  against  it  and  had  reached  a
      conclusion,  namely  that  the  appellant's   deportation   would   be
      disproportionate, which  was  not  irrational.   Indeed,  Mr  Hodgetts
      pointed out that it was not suggested in the grounds directly that the
      decision was irrational.



Discussion

  14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is very detailed  running
      to some 49 paragraphs over 26 pages.

  15.  For  the  following  reasons  I  reject  the  Secretary  of   State's
      submissions that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in allowing  the
      appellant's appeal under Article 8.

  16. First, in paragraph 28 the Tribunal accepted that the appellant  could
      not meet the requirements of the relevant  Immigration  Rules  dealing
      with deportation  in  paras  399  and  399A.   Although  the  Tribunal
      accepted  that  the  appellant   had   a   "genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship" with his son in the UK who is under  18  and  a  British
      citizen,  he  was  looked  after  by  his  mother  and  therefore  the
      requirement in para 399(b) was not satisfied, namely that "there is no
      other family member who is able to care for the child in the UK".  His
      mother, I should add, having initially been recognised  as  a  refugee
      was by the time of the appeal a British citizen.  In paragraph 28, the
      Tribunal then went on to correctly address the relevant issue that:

           "[t]here is in this case a clear need to consider whether  there
           are exceptional circumstances such that the public  interest  in
           deportation could be outweighed by other factors." (my emphasis)

  17. That reflects the  requirement  in  paragraph  398(b)  that  where  an
      individual has been sentenced to at least 12 months (the appellant had
      been sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment), and where  paragraphs  399
      or 399A do not apply, "it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances
      that the public interest in deportation will be  outweighed  by  other
      factors".

  18. In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192,  the  Court  of  Appeal
      recognised that the requirement of "exceptional circumstances" in para
      399 entailed as part of a "complete code":

           "the balancing exercise  [involved  in]  the  application  of  a
           proportionality   test   as   required   by    the    Strasbourg
           jurisprudence."  (at [44]).

  19. In Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558, Beatson LJ  at  [47]  noted
      that:

           "I do not  consider  that  it  is  necessary  to  use  the  term
           'exceptional' or 'compelling' to describe the circumstances, and
           it will suffice if that can be said to be the substance  of  the
           Tribunal's decision."

  20. Consequently, I reject the submission that the First-tier Tribunal did
      not properly direct itself, in a case where the  appellant  could  not
      meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and correctly searched
      for "exceptional circumstances".

  21. At paras 29-38 and 40 the Tribunal  set  out  the  relevant  case  law
      including Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 and  Huang
      [2007]  2WLR  581  together  with  the  leading  Strasbourg  case  law
      including �ner v Switzerland (2007) 45 EHRR 14.  The Tribunal  clearly
      had well in mind the proper approach in applying  Article  8  and,  in
      particular, in determining proportionality in a deportation case.

  22. Secondly, I accept Mr  Hodgetts'  submission  that  the  Tribunal  did
      identify a number of features of the appellant's case  which  amounted
      to  "exceptional  circumstances"  so  as  to  make   the   appellant's
      deportation disproportionate.

  23. First, at para 21(xi) the Tribunal found (and this is not  challenged)
      that there existed family life between  the  appellant  and  his  son.
      This family life had been re-established in the UK when the  appellant
      came and joined his family here. The Tribunal went on to recognise:

           "it is not difficult to imagine the feelings of  a  14-year  old
           boy in re-finding his father at the age of 10 nor to imagine his
           feelings if his father was then required to leave the UK. [M] is
           British and cannot be expected to leave  the  UK  (even  if  his
           mother was willing  for  that  to  happen,  which  appears  most
           unlikely)."

      The Tribunal also noted in para 21(xi) that the appellant  had  family
      life with  his  mother  in  the  UK  as  a  result  of  him  returning
      effectively to live with her because of his depressive state.

  24. At paragraph 44, the Tribunal  assessed  the  best  interests  of  the
      appellant's son and concluded that it was in his interests for him  to
      be brought up by both parents even if he spent most of his  time  with
      his mother  but  having  regular  contact  with  the  appellant.   The
      Tribunal continued:

           "The only real choice offered by the respondent  in  facing  the
           appellant  is  to  go  to  Somalia,  effectively  breaking   the
           relationship with his young British son forever.  Just when  the
           child has achieved a settled life while the  respondent  delayed
           making a decision, the child will be placed in a situation worse
           than before the appellant  came  to  the  UK,  with  his  father
           snatched away from him when he had built bonds.   The  child  is
           British, so can expect  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  a  British
           education and access to the NHS.  It would not be reasonable (or
           practicable) to expect him to go to Somalia for  any  number  of
           obvious reasons."

  25. Second, at paragraph 28 the Tribunal recognised that  the  appellant's
      deportation  would  result  in  the  family  life  being  "effectively
      fractured".

  26. Third, at paragraph 28 the  Tribunal also recognised:

           "The fact that the Rules do not cater for the return to a  place
           of considerable disorder of a person being treated for a  stress
           illness."

  27. The Tribunal also made reference to the appellant returning to a "very
      stressful environment" and that he was being treated for a "depressive
      disorder" at para 46 of its determination.

  28. It is clear to me that the Tribunal did identify factors which led  it
      to conclude that there were "exceptional circumstances" and  that  the
      appellant's deportation was disproportionate.  I therefore reject  the
      Secretary of State's argument in the grounds that the Tribunal  failed
      to identify any exceptional circumstances or  factors  which  "set  it
      apart from an ordinary family life claim".  The Tribunal did  identify
      such factors in my judgement.

  29. Thirdly, in assessing proportionality it is clear on  any  reading  of
      the Tribunal's determination that  it  fully  took  into  account  the
      public interest reflected in the appellant's criminality.

  30. Whilst Mr Richards was right to point out that in certain passages  in
      the determination at (paras 32 and 45)  the  Tribunal  refers  to  the
      "need to maintain firm yet fair immigration control", those references
      have to be seen in the context of the Tribunal's copious reference  to
      the wider public interest in deportation cases.  At paragraph 42,  the
      Tribunal set out the guidance of the Court of Appeal in OH (Serbia)  v
      SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694 and N (Kenya) v SSHD  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1094
      setting out the three facets of the public interest, namely  the  risk
      of  reoffending,  deterrence  of  foreign  criminals  from  committing
      serious crimes  and  deportation  being  an  expression  of  society's
      revulsion at serious crimes.   The importance of the respondent's view
      as to the public interest is also referred to  by  the  Tribunal.   At
      paragraph 29 the  Tribunal  set  out  the  Upper  Tribunal's  guidance
      concerning the  public  interest  from  Masih  (Deportation  -  Public
      Interest - Basic Principles) Pakistan [2012]  UKUT  00046  (IAC).   At
      paragraphs 109 and 41 respectively the Tribunal set out at length  the
      correct approach to the issue of proportionality in deportation  cases
      set out in the decisions in the Court of Appeal of RU  (Bangladesh)  v
      SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 651 and SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  550
      and, in particular, in regard to the latter decision that the pressing
      nature of the public interest as a result  of  Parliament's  expressed
      declaration that the  public  interest  is  injured  if  a  criminal's
      deportation is not effective meant that  only  a  "very  strong  claim
      indeed" would justify finding that Article 8 of the ECHR was breached.



  31. Also, contrary  to  Mr  Richards'  submission,  the  Tribunal  plainly
      referred to, and took into account (at  para  25),  in  assessing  the
      seriousness of the appellant's offending the 'public security' aspects
      of offences involving using false  IDs  in  the  "heightened  security
      situation" in which we now live.

  32. In short, therefore, there is simply no substance in the argument that
      the First-tier Tribunal did not fully take  into  account  the  public
      interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   The  Tribunal
      expressly took the facets of the public  interest  recognised  in  the
      case law into account  and  found  that  there  was  no  risk  of  the
      appellant further offending; a finding which is not challenged in  the
      grounds.

  33. Equally, I reject any argument that the Tribunal  failed  properly  to
      carry   out   the   balancing   exercise   required    in    assessing
      proportionality.  As I have already stated, the  public  interest  was
      demonstrably  taken  into  account  by  the  Tribunal.   The   lengthy
      determination of the Tribunal sets out a number  of  findings  as  the
      determination develops including the impact upon the  appellant's  son
      of the appellant's deportation, the existence of family  life  between
      the appellant and his  son  and  with  the  appellant's  mother.   The
      Tribunal also found, as I have already  noted,  that  the  appellant's
      continued presence in the UK to maintain regular contact  was  in  the
      best interests of his son and that it would not be  reasonable,  given
      that he is a British citizen with a British citizen mother  to  expect
      him to go to Somalia.  The culmination of the Tribunal's assessment or
      proportionality is in paragraph 46 of its determination as follows:

           "We find that this is an Appellant who came to  the  UK  without
           any hope of staying, who has obtained  benefits  from  his  stay
           whilst building his family and private life, but who  has  built
           that family and private list in the knowledge that there  was  a
           real likelihood he would not to be able to remain.  The delay in
           the Respondent's decision making has enabled  the  Appellant  to
           cement his family life with his son and mother and  his  private
           life with his sister (EB Kosovo)).  The Respondent took a rather
           curious approach here because the Appellant made an  application
           for asylum at the time of his arrival in the  UK  and  yet  that
           claim was not resolved for a number of years and  then  resulted
           in a decision to deport.  He has committed a serious offence and
           has presented a dishonest asylum claim.  He would  be  returning
           to a country whose culture he was familiar with  and,  in  every
           likelihood, to family, given our findings.  On the other side of
           the balance, he has re-developed his relationship with his young
           son, who would  clearly  be  devastated  by  his  removal.   His
           offence was serious, but not at the upper level of offending and
           there has been no offending other than by the single offence  of
           presenting the travel document on arrival.  He is being  treated
           for a depressive disorder and  would  be  returning  to  a  very
           stressful environment. His opportunities for  keeping  in  touch
           with his UK family would  be  very  limited  given  the  current
           circumstances in Somalia.  His mother would  lose  her  son  and
           carer and probably see him for the last time on his departure as
           the chances of his securing re-entry would be slim  and  delayed
           as  a  result  of  deportation.   We  also  bear  in  mind   the
           Respondent's  current  stated  policy  as   evidenced   by   the
           Immigration Act  2013.   Section  19  of  that  Act  amends  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  with  the  broad
           effect  that  this  Appellant  would  appear  to  benefit   from
           Exception 2 in new Section 117C of the 2002 Act by reason of his
           relationship with his son.  We do find when we  balance  all  of
           the relevant  factors  that  the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain
           prejudices the family and private life of  the  Appellant  in  a
           manner sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
           fundamental right protected by Article 8."

  34. In my judgement, that is a balanced and  fair  assessment  (albeit  in
      summary form) of the competing public  interest  factors  against  the
      personal circumstances of the appellant and his son.

  35. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that the Tribunal's  reference
      to s.117C of the 2002 Act, because it was not in force at the relevant
      time, results in the Tribunal's decision being flawed.  That provision
      applies to a foreign criminal sentenced to a term of  imprisonment  of
      less that 4 years (see s.117C(3)) and states that :

           The public  interest  requires  [the  individual's]  deportation
           unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies."

  36. Exception 2 is set out in s.117C(5) as follows:

           "Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh."

  37. I accept Mr Hodgetts' submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
      required to take into account the impact upon the appellant's son.  As
      I have already indicated, the Tribunal considered that the Appellant's
      deportation would have a significant effect upon the  appellant's  son
      if his father were "snatched away from him when he  had  built  bonds"
      and that the appellant's deportation  would  "effectively  fracture[]"
      the family life of the appellant and his son.  In  my  judgement,  the
      reference to Exception 2 in para 46 of the Tribunal's determination is
      no more than a recognition that the appellant's deportation would have
      "unduly harsh" consequences.  That the Tribunal has made that  finding
      by reference to s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act does not amount to an  error
      of law.  It was merely stating  its  conclusion  on  the  evidence  by
      reference to this provision and thereby taking into account a relevant
      and significant factor in assessing proportionality and whether  there
      were "exceptional" or "compelling  circumstances"  which  produced  an
      unjustifiably harsh consequence so as to justify the  grant  of  leave
      outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.

  38. As Mr Hodgetts submitted, neither the Secretary of State's grounds nor
      Mr Richards' submissions directly asserted that the Tribunal's finding
      that the appellant's deportation was disproportionate is an irrational
      finding.  In my judgement, it clearly is not.  The Tribunal was, in my
      judgment, entitled to conclude that the public interest was outweighed
      by the impact of the appellant's deportation, in particular  upon  his
      son and their relationship.   In  may  well  be  that  the  Tribunal's
      ultimate finding was not necessarily a  finding  that  every  Tribunal
      would make. However, as Carnwath LJ (as he then was)  pointed  out  in
      Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at [40]:

           "The mere fact that one Tribunal has reached what  may  seem  an
           unusually generous view of the facts of a particular  case  does
           not mean that it has made an error of law...."

  39. In my judgment, the  Tribunal  fully  took  into  account  the  public
      interest  and  identified  features  of  the  appellant's  case  which
      justified its finding that there were "exceptional circumstances" such
      that the appellant's deportation would be disproportionate.

  40. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  in
      allowing the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

  41. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
      under Art 8 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   Its
      decision stands.

  42. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is, accordingly,
      dismissed.


                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Date:
