
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00866/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 10 November 2015                           | On 18 November 2015          |
|Prepared 10 November 2015                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                              Muhammad Shamriz

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, born on 23  March  1971  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Ruth who in a determination promulgated on 3 March 2015  dismissed  his
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  made  under  the
    provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 to deport him.

2.   The decision was made after the appellant had  been  convicted  at  the
    Old Bailey on 6 July 2013 for facilitating the acquisition of  criminal
    property contrary to Section 328 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002.  He
    was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.

3.   The appellant entered Britain illegally in 1997  and  asserts  that  he
    has remained here thereafter.  In February 2012 he applied for leave to
    remain on the basis of long residence.  That application was granted on
    24 May 2012.

4.   The appellant was informed of his liability to deportation and  claimed
    that deportation would interfere with his rights under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.

5.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and also  from  a  Romanian
    national, Ms Luca Petronela whom the appellant claimed to have  married
    in a proxy marriage which had taken place  in  Guinea.   There  was  no
    evidence that such a marriage would be regarded as lawful in Romania.

6.   Having heard evidence which included Ms Petronela's evidence  that  she
    would be unable to live in Pakistan because she did not speak Urdu  and
    feared being kidnapped there, the judge set out his  findings  of  fact
    and conclusions in paragraphs 40 onwards of the determination.

7.   He first considered the issue of private and family life.  He  noted  a
    number of extremely serious discrepancies. These included the fact that
    the appellant relied on a marriage certificate from  Guinea  which  had
    been celebrated on 16 October 2014 in the presence of two witnesses and
    following the payment of a dowry, whereas Ms Petronela  had  said  that
    she was not married and there had been no  marriage  ceremony  but  she
    hoped to marry the appellant sometime in the  future.   She  said  that
    there was no marriage certificate and there  had  been  no  discussions
    with her family about marriage.  There were considerable  discrepancies
    between what the appellant said about how they had met and the evidence
    of his spouse.  The appellant was unable to say which part  of  Romania
    his wife came from and the judge pointed out that in any event they did
    not share a common language, the appellant giving evidence  through  an
    Urdu  interpreter  and  Ms  Petronela  through  a   Romanian   speaking
    interpreter.  Moreover also there  had  been  a  number  of  statements
    regarding the appellant's character put in  from  friends  and  family,
    none had mentioned his relationship with Ms Petronela.

8.   The appellant had attended the Tribunal for  an  adjourned  hearing  in
    the past and had not mentioned having an EEA spouse and indeed  he  had
    informed the probation service in February 2014 that he had been  in  a
    relationship with a Pakistani  woman  for  a  long  time  but  she  had
    returned to Pakistan because of the length of the sentence.

9.   The judge did not accept the evidence  of  the  appellant's  supporting
    witnesses and gave reasons for that.

10.  He stated that  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  private  life  was
    limited.  Although he claimed to have worked as an upholster  for  many
    years, there was no document put forward in  relation  to  his  alleged
    employment.  He noted a number of letters from the appellant's friends.



11.  The judge, having referred to the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in
    MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  referred  to  the  provisions  of
    paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the Rules stating that if the appellant
    did not meet the terms  of  those  paragraphs  it  was  appropriate  to
    consider whether or not there were "'exceptional circumstances' as  set
    out in paragraph 398 (now defined as 'very compelling' circumstances)".



12.  He stated the term "exceptional circumstances" dealt with the  question
    of assessing proportionality on Article 8 grounds.

13.  Having found that the appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399(a) and 399(b) he considered that the appellant  had  been
    living continuously in Britain since 1997 but said there was no dispute
    that he had lived in Britain  unlawfully  between  1997  and  2012  and
    therefore the appellant could not satisfy  the  requirements  of  those
    rules.  He went  on  to  consider  whether  or  not  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances" and having considered the evidence, the  fact
    of the appellant's crime and relevant case law,  considered  there  was
    nothing to make the deportation of the appellant disproportionate.   He
    noted, in any event, that the appellant had left Pakistan when  he  was
    already an adult and spent  more  of  his  life  in  Pakistan  than  in
    Britain.

14.  Grounds of appeal were  submitted  which  stated  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider correct  paragraphs 398  and  399(a)  correctly   in
    that  he  had  referred  to  the  issue  of  unlawful  residence   when
    considering paragraph 399(a) but that only related  to  post-July  2014
    decisions as did the term "very compelling circumstances".  The grounds
    alleged  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  equating  "very   compelling
    circumstances" to the provisions of Article  8  and  that  he  had  not
    addressed the relevant factors in Sections 117A through D of  the  2002
    Act.  Moreover it was argued that he had  ignored  the  length  of  the
    appellant's residence in Britain and it was asserted that his  attitude
    to the appellant's reoffending was wrong as it was  at  odds  with  the
    probation officer's report.  It was  then  argued  that  he  was  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA family member.

15.  The Secretary of State served a Rule 24 notice pointing  out  that  the
    judge  had  directed  himself   appropriately   and   made   reasonably
    sustainable findings which were open to him on the  evidence.   It  was
    argued that Sections 117A to D did apply and that the judge had applied
    the correct Rules when considering paragraph 398 onwards of the  Rules.
    The judge had properly addressed the issue of whether or not there were
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into  Pakistan  in
    paragraph  80  of  the  determination  and  that  his   findings   were
    sustainable.

16.  On 27 October an application for an adjournment was made on  the  basis
    that the appellant's Counsel was not available for  the  hearing.   The
    application was refused on the  basis  there  was  sufficient  time  to
    arrange a new Counsel and a competent Counsel would be able  to  master
    the detail of the case.

17.  At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  the  appellant  appeared  in
    person and was not represented by Counsel.  He told me that his  lawyer
    had had to go away urgently and that he had been unable to find another
    solicitor.  I stated that as the application for the adjournment having
    been refused - the appellant was fully aware of this as he had  a  copy
    of the letter refusing the application for an adjournment with him -  I
    was not prepared to adjourn the hearing but would  hear  from  him.   I
    made arrangements for an Urdu interpreter to be present.  I noted  from
    the file that, in the First-tier, an appeal on 1 December 2014 had been
    adjourned, directions being given by the Immigration Judge that:-

         "The appellant take notice that this appeal will not  be  adjourned
         again  because  of  any  failure  on  his  part  to  instruct   his
         representatives or  produce  whatever  documentation  on  which  he
         relies."

    In reaching my decision I also took into  account  the  nature  of  the
    grounds  of  appeal  before  me.   Moreover,  I  consider  that  it  is
    inappropriate for the court, when presented with a fait accompli - in a
    situation where an appellant turns up without a representative  knowing
    full well that the application for an adjournment has been refused - to
    adjourn an appeal.

18.  The appellant was asked for his submissions but only again stated  that
    he applied for an adjournment.  I asked him where  his  wife  was.   He
    stated that she was working and  had  not  attended  the  hearing.   Mr
    Walker then made his submissions relying on  the  Rule  24  notice  and
    stating that it was  abundantly  clear  that  the  judge  had  properly
    applied the relevant Rules and that it was clear that the appellant was
    not in a durable relationship with an EEA family member.

19.  I asked the appellant if he wished to make any further submissions  and
    he said that he did not.

Discussion

20.  I consider that there is no error of law whatsoever in the decision  of
    the First-tier Judge and indeed I consider that the grounds  of  appeal
    were misleading and without merit.  The judge  did  apply  the  correct
    Immigration Rules and in paragraph 80 of the determination was  correct
    to indicate that the term "very compelling  circumstances"  set  out  a
    test which was, in effect, the same as the test of  whether  or  not  a
    decision was disproportionate under Article 8 of the ECHR.

21.  The judge moreover was correct to state that he had taken into  account
    the requirements Section 117 of the 2002 Act as amended.   The  reality
    is that there is nothing whatsoever in that Section that  could  be  of
    any assistance to the appellant.

22.  Given the sentence received by the appellant, the judge was correct  to
    point out that the appellant had committed a serious crime leading to a
    sentence of imprisonment  for  30  months  and  to  stress  the  public
    importance of the deportation of those who commit crimes: of  relevance
    is the deterrent effect.  The issue of whether or not the appellant was
    likely to reoffend was therefore of far less relevance  than  the  fact
    that the appellant could not meet the terms of  the  Rules  and  indeed
    that his claimed marriage to an EEA national was clearly  a  sham.   It
    was correct  to  consider  the  reintegration  of  the  appellant  into
    Pakistan and the judge was entitled to find that he would be able to do
    so.

23.  The judge correctly considered all relevant factors  and  his  decision
    was fully open to him.  I therefore find that the determination of  the
    judge shall stand.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



