
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00364/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bradford                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 16th September 2019              |On: 11th November 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Mubashar Arif
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmad, Counsel instructed by FMB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Belgium born on the 9th September  1987.
    He has lived in this country since 2007, but the Respondent now  wishes
    to deport him.


 2. The legal framework to be applied in  remaking  the  decision  in  this
    appeal is Regulation 27 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations. By my decision of the 18th June  2019  I  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in accepting  that  the  Appellant
    had established an enhanced level of protection  against  expulsion  by
    virtue of having attained a permanent right of residence.  I  so  found
    because the evidence of the  Appellant's  economic  activity  over  the
    relevant period was of such a low level that it could  only  rationally
    be described as marginal: in the tax year 2009-10, for instance, he had
    earned an average of  �2.92  per  week.     That  being  the  case  the
    Appellant had failed to demonstrate that he had  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence and the case fell  to  be  determined  applying  the
    principles set out in Regulation 27 as highlighted here:


           27.-(1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means  an  EEA
           decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public  security
           or public health.

           (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

           (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a  person
           with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except on
           serious grounds of public policy and public security.

           (4) A relevant decision may not be taken  except  on  imperative
           grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

            (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
            at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

            (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in
            the best interests of the person concerned, as provided for in
            the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General
            Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.

           (5) The public policy and public security  requirements  of  the
           United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred  by
           these Regulations in order to protect the  fundamental  interests
           of society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of
           public policy or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles-

                 (a) the decision must comply with the principle of
              proportionality;

                 (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;

                 (c) the personal conduct of the person must represent a
                 genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                 one of the fundamental interests of society, taking into
                 account past conduct of the person and that the threat does
                 not need to be imminent;

                 (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;

                 (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                 themselves justify the decision;

                 (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
                 in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                 the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

         (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of  public
   health-

           (a) a disease that does not have epidemic potential as defined
           by the relevant instruments of the World Health Organisation or
           is not a disease listed in Schedule 1 to the Health Protection
           (Notification) Regulations 2010(18); or

           (b) if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, any
           disease occurring after the three month period beginning on the
           date on which the person arrived in the United Kingdom,

         does not constitute grounds for the decision.

         (8) A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
         this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy,  public  security  and   the   fundamental   interests   of
         society etc.).


 3. The relevant part of Schedule 1 is paragraph 7:


         7.  For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

         (a) preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration
         laws, and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the
         immigration control system (including under these Regulations) and
         of the Common Travel Area;

         (b) maintaining public order;

         (c) preventing social harm;

         (d) preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

         (e) protecting public services;

         (f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of an
         EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that
         person is likely to cause, or has in fact caused, public offence)
         and maintaining public confidence in the ability of the relevant
         authorities to take such action;

         (g) tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an
         immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but where
         there is wider societal harm (such as offences related to the
         misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border dimension as mentioned
         in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
         Union);

         (h) combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly in
         relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be
         unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);

         (i)  protecting the rights and freedoms of others, particularly
         from exploitation and trafficking;

         (j) protecting the public;

         (k) acting in the best interests of a child (including where doing
         so entails refusing a child admission to the United Kingdom, or
         otherwise taking an EEA decision against a child);

         (l) countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared
         values.



 4. The question before me is therefore whether the Secretary of State  can
    show the deportation to be justified, having regard to  those  matters.
    The Secretary of State accepts  that  account  must  be  taken  of  the
    Appellant's personal circumstances, including that he has a wife and  a
    young son in the United Kingdom, but submits that  his  deportation  is
    nevertheless proportionate because of the following matters:

              i) The Appellant was cautioned for battery on the 6th December
                 2007;


             ii) On the 27th August 2010 he was  convicted  of  affray,  and
                 received a suspended sentence of 6 months  imprisonment,  a
                 community service order and a fine;

            iii) On the 28th September 2017 MA  was  convicted  of  wounding
                 with intent and was subsequently  sentenced  to  18  months
                 imprisonment,  with  the   court   imposing   a   five-year
                 Restraining Order. On the same date  MA  was  convicted  of
                 possessing an offensive weapon - a metal extendable baton -
                 for which he received a concurrent sentence of  12  months'
                 imprisonment;

             iv) This latter offence arose from a planned attack carried out
                 by MA and his brother on another man who was subject to  an
                 'ambush' by them in an isolated location. MA had come armed
                 to the scene;

              v) The April 2018 assessment by the probation service that the
                 Appellant presents a  41%  risk  of  reoffending  within  2
                 years.

 5. The Secretary of State accepts that he  cannot,  by  operation  of  Reg
    27(5)(e), simply point  to  the  Appellant's  convictions.  He  submits
    instead that two particular features of  the  evidence  should  attract
    substantial weight in my balancing exercise. First, the findings of the
    probation service, to which I return below. Second,  the  existence  of
    the Restraining Order, imposed upon the Appellant by HHJ Farrell QC  on
    the 27th October 2017; I begin by  addressing  the  relevance  of  that
    Order.




    Restraining Orders


 6. Restraining Orders may be imposed by a sentencing judge under s5 of the
    Protection from Harassment Act 1997 (as amended by s12 of the  Domestic
    Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004):


         (1) A court sentencing or otherwise dealing with a person ("the
         defendant") convicted of an offence may (as well as sentencing him
         or dealing with him in any other way) make an order under this
         section.

         (2) The order may, for the purpose of protecting the victim or
         victims of the offence, or any other person mentioned in the order,
         from conduct which-

         (a) amounts to harassment, or

         (b)  will cause a fear of violence,

         prohibit the defendant from doing anything described in the order.

         (3) The order may have effect for a specified period or until
         further order.

         (3A)  In proceedings under this section both the prosecution and
         the defence may lead, as further evidence, any evidence that would
         be admissible in proceedings for an injunction under section 3.

         (4) The prosecutor, the defendant or any other person mentioned in
         the order may apply to the court which made the order for it to be
         varied or discharged by a further order.

         (4A) Any person mentioned in the order is entitled to be heard on
         the hearing of an application under subsection (4).

         (5) If without reasonable excuse the defendant does anything which
         he is prohibited from doing by an order under this section, he is
         guilty of an offence.

         (5A)..

         (6) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable-

         (a) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not
         exceeding five years, or a fine, or both, or

         (b) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
         six months, or a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or both.

         (7) A court dealing with a person for an offence under this section
         may vary or discharge the order in question by a further order.



 7. It is established that an order may only be imposed where  a  Judge  is
    satisfied that it is  necessary  to  protect  the  victim/victims  from
    harassment or a fear of violence: R v Stuart Brough  [2011]  EWCA  Crim
    2802.


 8. An Order was in this  case  imposed  on  both  the  Appellant  and  his
    brother, who was his co-defendant.  In  his  sentencing  remarks  Judge
    Farrelly notes how the pair of them had deliberately lured the victim -
    a man with whom they had had a dispute - to an isolated place  and  set
    about him, assaulting him with the  extendable  baton  brought  by  the
    Appellant for that purpose.  He recognised  that  both  defendants  had
    expressed remorse and pleaded guilty, and commented on  the  "extremely
    positive" character references he had been shown: for  that  reason  he
    imposed the lightest sentences he felt able to impose.  The Appellant's
    brother got 15 months'  imprisonment  for  wounding  with  intent,  the
    Appellant  18  months;  the  Appellant  received  an  additional,   but
    concurrent, sentence of 12 months' imprisonment for possession  of  the
    baton. As to the reasons for imposing the  Restraining  Order  on  them
    both, the Judge noted, in light of the foregoing, that he considered it
    "necessary" to do so. The terms of the Order are that the Appellant  is
    not to contact, in any way, the victim of his assault, or to go  within
    10 metres of his home.  If the Appellant breaches the Order, he  is  to
    be sent to prison for up to five years.


 9. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Ahmed accepts that on the date upon which
    it was imposed, the Crown  Court  considered  the  Order  necessary  to
    protect the victim from harassment or conduct causing fear of  violence
    by the Appellant.  He submits however that the nature of that  risk  is
    fluid. The statute itself recognises that  the  risk  may  diminish  or
    change over time: it is  for  that  reason  that  s5(4)  provides  that
    subjects of such Orders may apply to have them  varied  or  discharged.
    The question for the Court, upon such an application, would be  whether
    the circumstances have changed to the  extent  that  the  Order  is  no
    longer necessary.  On that  basis,  submits  Mr  Ahmed,  this  Tribunal
    cannot be bound by the findings made by the Crown  Court  in  September
    2018.   The task for the Tribunal is to  make  its  own  evaluation  of
    risk.  Whilst the making of the Order remained  relevant,  it  must  be
    considered alongside the Appellant's more recent conduct.

10. The Respondent emphasises that the Court will not make an order  unless
    it considers is necessary to do so, and that the risk that it seeks  to
    prevent is a risk of criminality. Whilst the Appellant may be  able  to
    bring evidence to suggest that the  Restraining  Order  should  now  be
    varied or discharged, that would be  a  matter  for  the  Crown  Court.
    Absent evidence that the Order had in fact been  varied  this  Tribunal
    should treat as it as highly persuasive  evidence  that  the  Appellant
    does pose a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat  so  as  to
    justify deportation.

11. In confronting Regulation 27(5)(c)  the  decision  maker  is  asked  to
    consider whether the Respondent  has  demonstrated  that  the  personal
    conduct of the person  concerned  represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.  That is a global assessment, that must be made taking into
    account not simply the fact  of  the  individual's  past  conduct,  but
    whether he presents a current risk. It is self- evident that a  finding
    by a Crown Court Judge that the Appellant continues to present  a  risk
    to his victim must be relevant, but to what extent?

12. I do not accept that level of risk must be recognised to be 'fluid'. In
    making this submission Mr Ahmed in effect asks me to supplant the  role
    of the Crown Court and make my own assessment about whether that  Order
    should continue to be in force, or whether  it  should  be  discharged.
    That is not the role of this Tribunal. If the Appellant wishes to  have
    the Order discharged he should make his application to the Crown Court.
     He has not done so, and the Order continues to be in force.  In  those
    circumstances it would be quite wrong for the Tribunal, which does  not
    have the power of variation, to take  any  view  other  than  that  the
    circumstances have not changed and that it therefore remains necessary.
    In this case that amounts to  a  finding  by  another  Court  that  the
    Appellant presents a risk to his victim, and that he continues to do so
    until October 2023.  My task under Regulation 27(5) is to make  rounded
    assessment, and for that reason it cannot be said that the  Restraining
    Order - or indeed any other evidence - could in itself be determinative
    of the question of risk,  but  it  is  a  factor  attracting  the  most
    substantial weight.


13. As to the possible distinction between an order imposed with  reference
    to s5(2)(a) (protection from harassment) or s5(2)(b)  (protection  from
    conduct causing a fear of violence) I am not satisfied, in the  context
    of Regulation 27, that anything turns on that: both  limbs  go  to  the
    protection of the victim from  criminality.  Accordingly,   it  is  not
    relevant whether or not the Court  making  the  order  specifies  which
    subsection the order is made under.



    Other Evidence Relating to Risk

14. In September 2017 the Probation Service prepared a Pre-sentence  Report
    for the Crown Court.  The author found,  applying  'OGRS'  criteria[1],
    there to be a 25% chance of  reoffending  within  2  years,  which  is,
    apparently, classified as a 'low' risk. The report goes on to say  that
    "nevertheless there is a risk of serious harm  to  the  public;  namely
    those with whom Mr Arrif comes into conflict and seeks to address  this
    using violence. The nature of the risk is physical harm, including  the
    use of weapons, and the psychological impact associated with this". The
    author then considers historic events  within  the  Appellant's  family
    suggesting that he may also  pose  an  ongoing  risk  to  other  family
    members, before concluding that he poses  a  "medium  risk  of  serious
    harm".


15. The Respondent's bundle contains an OASys  assessment  dated  the  17th
    April 2018. At the time that it was completed the Appellant was nearing
    completion of his sentence at  HMP  Peterborough.   Applying  the  OGRS
    criteria at  this  stage  the  Probation  Service  concluded  that  the
    Appellant presented a 41% chance of "general offending" within 2 years.

16. The most recent evidence I have been shown is a letter dated  8th  July
    2019 from Mr Majid Mukhtar, the Appellant's  probation  officer.     Mr
    Mukhtar properly acknowledges that he has only met the Appellant  once,
    having been allocated his case only  in  June  of  this  year.  He  has
    however conferred with the Appellant's previous  Offender  Manager  and
    read all of the documents on his file in order to prepare  his  report.
    Mr Mukhtar records that whilst serving his sentence at HMP Peterborough
    the Appellant had asked to undertake the 'thinking skills'  course  but
    was unable to do so because he  did  not  meet  the  criteria.  He  was
    therefore offered  one  on  one  support  by  an  Offender  Manager  in
    completing 'offence focused' and 'victim' work  which  he  successfully
    completed:

         "The sessions required Mr Arif to explore the offence in detail and
         to identify the impact of his actions on the victim, community  and
         to identify any indirect victims. The purpose of these sessions was
         for the client to gain a deeper understanding  of  their  offending
         behaviour, exploring the gains and  losses  of  offending  and  the
         impact of offending upon other  people,  identify  the  effects  of
         crime upon victims, including long and short-term effects, positive
         and  negative  behaviours  and  identifying  coping  mechanisms  of
         dealing  with  difficult  situations.  This  explored   Mr   Arif's
         consequential thinking. It is evident that since his release, there
         have been no further incidents reported to suggest that Mr Arif has
         ever breached his licence and Post Sentence supervision.


         Throughout the sentence Mr Arif has remained of good behaviour  and
         has engaged well with supervision sessions.


         Since  release,  Mr  Arif   has   been   offered   30   supervision
         appointments. Of these, Mr Arif has  attended  27  appointments.  3
         appointments have been authorised absences and this has been due to
         childcare and on one occasions, the office  was  closed  and  as  a
         result a telephone contact was carried out".

17. Mr Mukhtar has no information to suggest that the  Appellant  has  ever
    breached the Restraining Order or the terms of his licence. In fact  he
    has always informed his Offender Manager when he has visited  the  city
    where the victim lives (and the Appellant also has family).


18. I have further read, and taken account of, the evidence relating to the
    Appellant's time in HMP Peterborough. I accept  that  he  was  a  well-
    behaved prisoner who took the opportunities made available  to  him  to
    address his offending behaviour, and to support fellow inmates.



    Integration and Family Life

19. It is not in issue that the Appellant has lived in the  United  Kingdom
    since 2007, having moved here with his family  from  Belgium.   He  got
    married (by Islamic law) on the 16th May 2015 to British national  'K'.
    K is employed as a mental health support worker. The couple have a son,
    born in June  2017.   Although  the  child  was  very  young  when  the
    Appellant was sent to prison, he has lived with his father  ever  since
    his father's release in  mid  2018.   It  is  K's  evidence,  expressed
    through her undated and unsigned witness statement, that she would  not
    be able to continue her family life with the Appellant  in  Belgium  as
    she has no other family living there.  Her job and home are here.   She
    believes that if he were to be returned to Belgium the future  for  her
    and her son would be "extremely bleak".


20. The Appellant relies on statements in his support made by no fewer than
    17 friends and family members. Although none of  these  statements  are
    signed I am prepared to accept that the Appellant is well  regarded  in
    his community and that those who have written in  his  support  believe
    that if he is allowed to remain in the United Kingdom he will commit no
    further crime and will be a dedicated family man.  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant has made a lot of friends in the United Kingdom and  that  he
    regards himself as well integrated.



    Assessment

21. The Secretary of State pursues the Appellant's  deportation  on  public
    policy grounds.


22. The Appellant has not demonstrated that he  has  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence in the United Kingdom; he therefore cannot claim any
    enhanced  protection  under  Regulation  27(3).  It  follows,  applying
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Franco Vomero [2019]  UKSC
    35, that nor can  he  claim  the  highest  level  of  protection  under
    Regulation 27(4).

23. Applying the tests in Regulation 27(5) I find as follows. The Appellant
    has shown by his conduct a disregard for the law. He was  convicted  in
    2007 of battery, and in 2010 of affray.  I  understand  from  the  Pre-
    Sentence Report that both of  these  convictions  arose  from  domestic
    disputes where despite the presence of other family members,  including
    children, the Appellant exhibited a propensity to use  violence.    The
    offence in 2017 was, as the author of that report notes, an  escalation
    in the level of violence. It was a premeditated  attack  involving  the
    use of a weapon.

24. There is some evidence that the Appellant  has  worked  to  manage  his
    anger. I can see that whilst in prison the Appellant tried his best  to
    address his offending behaviour, in particular his recourse to violence
    in order to settle personal disputes.  I  accept  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Mukhtar that  the  Appellant  has,  since  his  release,  substantially
    complied with the terms of  his  licence,  and  that  he  has  actively
    engaged with offender management.  I read all of that evidence in light
    of the very many character references provided  for  the  Appellant  in
    which a diverse group of witnesses speak to the  Appellant's  integrity
    and devotion to his wife and child.  I have given all of that  evidence
    significant weight.

25. As to the assessment  of  the  probation  service  that  the  Appellant
    indicated a 41% chance of reoffending within two years that is evidence
    that is bound to  attract  some  weight,  coming  as  it  does  from  a
    specialist agency whose primary function is to assess and  manage  risk
    of re-offending.  That weight is, I accept,  marginally  diminished  by
    the fact that the Appellant has, some 15 months after his release  from
    prison, managed to stay out of trouble. Although it could be said  that
    this is, given the threat of  deportation,  unsurprising,  I  give  the
    Appellant some credit for that.

26. There remains however the matter of the Restraining Order.  That  order
    was imposed by HHJ Farrelly after careful consideration of the facts in
    the case, and upon him reaching the conclusion that such an order,  for
    a term of five years, was necessary to prevent the Appellant  harassing
    or otherwise causing the victim to fear further  violence.  That  order
    remains in force. Although I have borne in mind  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's success so far on the path to  rehabilitation,  that  is  a
    factor which continues to attract substantial weight. That, taken  with
    the view of the probation service and the Appellant's past conduct,  is
    sufficient for the Secretary of State to discharge the burden of  proof
    in respect of Regulation 27(5)(c).  I am satisfied,  having  regard  to
    all of the foregoing, that the Appellant's  conduct  does  represent  a
    genuine, present and "sufficiently serious" threat to law and order.

27. Against that  finding  I  weigh  the  unchallenged  evidence  that  the
    Appellant has established a significant family and private life in  the
    United Kingdom.  He has lived here since 2007  and  has  a  great  many
    friends and  family  members  here.  I  recognise  that  this  must  be
    contrasted with his relative lack of such connections  in  Belgium.   I
    have given as much weight as I can to that, in particular the fact that
    the Appellant's wife is a British national who lives and works in  this
    country. I appreciate that she has no desire to uproot herself and  her
    son and go and live in Belgium. I also note, however, that I have  been
    provided with no evidence at all to support her  contention  that  life
    for them would be "bleak" without the Appellant,  or  that  they  would
    face any particular obstacles in establishing  themselves  in  Belgium.
    The  Appellant's  deportation  would  certainly   present   them   with
    significant logistical and emotional challenges, but these are not,  on
    the  evidence  before  me,  sufficient  to  render   that   deportation
    disproportionate.


    Decisions

28. There is no order for anonymity.


29. The appeal is dismissed.









                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                              30th October 2019
                           -----------------------
[1] 'Offender Group Risk Scale' is a measure described by the Ministry of
Justice to be a "a predictor of re-offending based only on static risks -
age, gender and criminal history".

