
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00225/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: (UT) IAC Liverpool               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 30 November 2018                       |On: 10 December 2018            |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     BZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Poland, born on 26 October 1986.  Following  a
grant of permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal allowing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  deport
him from the United Kingdom pursuant to regulation 23(6)(b)  and  regulation
27 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  ("the  EEA
Regulations"), it was found, at an error of law hearing on  2  August  2008,
that the Tribunal had made errors of law in its decision  and  the  decision
was set aside. Directions were made for the decision to be  re-made  by  the
Upper Tribunal.

Background to the Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2012.  He
first came to the attention of the UK authorities on 17 November  2016  when
he was convicted of three counts of battery.  He  was  remanded  in  custody
until 2 December 2016. On 6 December 2016 he was sentenced  to  a  community
order to run until 5 December 2017 with an unpaid  work  and  rehabilitation
activity requirement. He  was  made  the  subject  of  a  restraining  order
prohibiting him from contacting his  partner  and  he  was  ordered  to  pay
costs, compensation and a victim surcharge. On 10 April 2017  the  appellant
was convicted of theft shoplifting and conviction for an  offence  whilst  a
community order was in force. He was sentenced to  a  24  month  conditional
discharge and was ordered to  pay  costs  and  a  victim  surcharge.  On  15
February 2018 the appellant was convicted of  failing  to  comply  with  the
requirements of a  community  order,  the  order  was  revoked  and  he  was
sentenced to 16 weeks' imprisonment.

On 23 February 2018 the appellant was served with a notice of  liability  to
deportation to which he did not respond. On 22  March  2018  he  was  issued
with a notice of decision to make  a  deportation  order  and  it  was  also
decided to certify his case under  Regulation  33  of  the  EEA  Regulations
2016. A deportation order was signed against him on  22  March  2018.  On  4
April 2018 the appellant lodged an appeal against  the  decision  to  deport
him, referring to his children and to his  medical  condition.  The  matters
raised in his grounds of appeal were addressed  in  a  supplementary  letter
dated 27 April 2018.

In the deportation decision, the respondent noted the  absence  of  evidence
of residing and exercising treaty rights in the UK for a  continuous  period
of five years or more and therefore did not accept that  the  appellant  had
acquired a permanent right of residence under the EEA Regulations 2016.  The
respondent considered the appellant's criminal  offending,  noting  that  he
had assaulted his partner by beating her on three  occasions,  on  8  August
2016, 27 September 2016 and 18 October  2016,  and  had  been  convicted  of
three counts of battery. He had received a community order  with  an  unpaid
work requirement but had failed to attend work sessions  on  4  and  11  May
2017 and  subsequently  received  16  weeks'  imprisonment.  The  respondent
considered that the appellant had thereby shown disregard for orders  placed
on him by the courts which indicated an  anti-social  attitude  towards  the
public and community. The respondent also noted that the appellant had  been
convicted of shop-lifting. It was considered that  his  offending  indicated
an  established  pattern  of  repeated  acquisitive   offending   within   a
relatively  short  period  of  time.  It  was  considered  that  there   was
insufficient evidence that he had adequately addressed the reasons  for  his
offending behaviour and it was noted that he had  provided  no  evidence  of
completing  any  rehabilitation  programmes.  The   respondent   accordingly
concluded that the appellant had a  propensity  to  re-offend  and  that  he
represented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
interests of public policy justifying his deportation on grounds  of  public
policy.

The respondent noted that the appellant had been diagnosed with  Ventricular
Septal Defect (VSD) and pancreatitis  and  that  he  had  been  admitted  to
hospital twice whilst in detention but considered that  there  was  adequate
medical care and treatment available in Poland. There was no  evidence  that
the appellant had been in employment and exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
UK. There was no evidence to substantiate  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
family ties in the UK with his two  children  D  and  O.  It  was  therefore
considered that the decision to deport the appellant was  proportionate  and
in accordance with the principles of regulation 27(5) and  (6)  of  the  EEA
Regulations. With regard to Article 8, the respondent did  not  accept  that
the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  children,
noting that there was a restraining order in place  restricting  his  access
to his children, and considered that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  his
children to remain in the UK whilst he was deported. The respondent did  not
accept that the appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
his partner, noting that there was a restraining order prohibiting him  from
contacting her as a result of his conviction for battery. It was  considered
that the appellant could not, therefore, meet the requirements of  paragraph
399(a) and (b) of the immigration rules. With regard to paragraph  399A  the
respondent considered that the appellant had not been  lawfully  in  the  UK
for most of his life, that he was not socially and culturally integrated  in
the UK and that there were no very significant obstacles to his  integration
into Poland. Accordingly he could not meet the private  life  exceptions  to
deportation. The respondent concluded that there  were  no  very  compelling
circumstances outweighing the public interest in his  deportation  and  that
his deportation would not,  therefore,  be  in  breach  of  Article  8.  The
respondent went on to certify  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  under
regulation 33 of the EEA Regulations 2016 on the basis  that  there  was  no
risk of serious irreversible harm if he was removed pending the  outcome  of
any appeal and that his removal pending an  appeal  would  not  be  unlawful
under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 30 May 2018 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lal.
The  appellant  appeared  without  a  legal  representative.   He   was   in
immigration detention at the time. He produced a witness statement  entitled
"supplementary  letter"  for  his  appeal,  in  which   he   set   out   his
circumstances. He claimed, in his statement, that  his  former  partner  and
another woman had lied and given false testimony in the  magistrates'  court
leading to his unlawful conviction and that there had been  no  assault.  He
had breached the community order because he was depressed and was unable  to
work. He had had a breakdown after losing his  freedom,  his  flat  and  his
work. He did not have a propensity to re-offend and did not have a  lack  of
respect for the law. He did not attend any courses whilst  in  detention  as
none were available to him. His illness had a big impact  on  his  life.  He
was integrated into life in the UK and had  many  good  friends  and  was  a
loving father and close friend to his children and a  carer  for  his  close
friend HD. The appellant agreed with the respondent that he did not  have  a
subsisting relationship with  his  partner  and  confirmed  that  they  were
getting divorced. He had contact with his children through a third party,  a
mutual friend of his and his former partner, and he  fully  participated  in
his children's upbringing. He wanted to remain in the UK with his children.

The appellant, in his oral evidence before the judge, said that he  came  to
the UK in 2012 to seek work and found a job. He returned to Poland  in  2013
as his wife had given birth to his daughter and  she  was  unwell.  He  came
back to the UK and worked in a restaurant. His wife and children joined  him
in the UK in March 2016. His conviction in November 2016 was a result  of  a
domestic incident when he found out that his wife was having an  affair.  He
lost his job and his house. His divorce was being processed.  He  maintained
contact with his children and had  them  on  weekends,  arranged  through  a
third party. He spoke to his son every day on the telephone. His  conviction
in April 2017 for shop-lifting was  when  he  was  at  his  lowest  and  was
homeless.

Judge Lal was satisfied that the appellant had come to the UK  in  2012  and
that he had shown through his oral evidence  that  he  had  been  exercising
treaty rights for more than five years. The judge considered there to be  no
evidence to suggest that the appellant  posed  a  risk  or  that  he  had  a
propensity to re-offend. The judge accepted that the  appellant  had  family
life in the UK with his  two  children  and  considered  that  it  would  be
disproportionate for him to be deported. He allowed  the  appeal  under  the
EEA Regulations.

The respondent sought, and was granted, permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.  At an error of law hearing on 2 August 2018, which  proceeded  in
the appellant's absence, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  found  there  to  be
material errors of law in the judge's decision.  He  referred  to  a  letter
produced on behalf the respondent from HMRC showing evidence  of  employment
for the tax year 2012/13 but no employment recorded for 2013/14 or  2014/15,
with work recommencing on 2 April 2016. He considered that to be  consistent
with the appellant entering the UK in 2012, returning to Poland in 2013  and
then coming back to the UK in 2016 and, as  such,  did  not  show  that  the
appellant had acquired five years exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK.  He
considered that Judge Lal had therefore failed to give adequate reasons  for
finding there to have been five years continuous exercise of  treaty  rights
on the basis of  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  alone.  UTJ  Hanson  also
considered that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  finding
the appellant posed no risk, that there was  credible  evidence  of  insight
and that he had meaningful relationship with his children,  when  there  was
only the appellant's oral evidence in those  respects.  He  accordingly  set
aside Judge Lal's  decision  and  made  directions  for  the  submission  of
further evidence in a resumed hearing.

The appellant's case initially came before  me  on  3  October  2018  for  a
resumed hearing, with Mr McVeety  appearing  for  the  respondent,  but  was
adjourned part-heard as a result of concerns arising  part-way  through  the
hearing from the medical evidence produced by the appellant  as  to  whether
he had an infectious medical condition.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appellant appeared at both hearings, on 3 October 2018 and  30  November
2018, without a legal representative.

At the hearing on 3 October 2018 the  appellant,  when  asked  about  HMRC's
records showing no employment from 2014 to 2015, confirmed that he had  done
some work for cash in hand and had also received money from his parents  and
had savings in the bank. He said that he  had  finished  treatment  for  his
medical condition two  weeks  ago  and  had  a  hospital  appointment  on  6
November 2018. As for evidence of his relationship  with  his  children,  he
only had photographs. He lived  in  Warrington  and  his  children  were  in
Bristol. He would see them when he could  afford  to  travel.  He  had  been
seeing them every two weeks but then his ex-wife tried to alienate him  from
them. He had now found a third party through whom he  was  able  to  arrange
contact. He had not seen his children since February 2018.

At the hearing on 30 November 2018 the appellant produced  more  photographs
including recent photographs taken when he  last  saw  his  children  on  23
October 2018 in Bristol. He had previously  been  in  immigration  detention
and so had not been able to see them after February 2018. The meeting on  23
October 2018 was arranged through a mutual friend, a third  party,  and  she
trusted him enough to leave him in charge of her own two children  as  well.
He also kept in touch with his  son  by  telephone.  There  was  no  written
agreement for contact. As for the incident leading to the  convictions,  the
appellant said that it was one mistake when he lost his temper. He  accepted
that it happened but he had  spent  a  long  time  in  prison  for  a  false
accusation. He had wanted  to  take  courses  such  as  English,  addressing
offending  behaviour,  but  none  of  the  courses   were   available.   The
restraining order against him was indefinite. The  appellant  said  that  he
had been working cash in hand and also had savings. He  had  not  asked  the
people for whom he had worked for letters of support  as  he  did  not  know
where they were. He had returned to Poland only once since coming to the  UK
in 2012, after Christmas in 2012. It was a  short  visit  of  about  six  to
seven days. When referred to the evidence of his  friend  HD  the  appellant
agreed that he had in fact gone to Poland twice. The appellant said that  he
was currently employed through an agency on a zero  hour  contract.  When  I
asked the appellant why he did not attend the unpaid work  sessions  in  May
2017 he said that he was sick and further that he had  changed  address  and
his probation officer had not sent his files to Warrington from Bristol.

Mr Bates made submissions before me. With regard to the  appellant's  length
of residence in the UK he submitted that there was a gap in the  appellant's
employment record and inconsistencies in his evidence as to how  many  times
he had returned to  Poland.  The  appellant  had  failed  to  give  reliable
evidence of exercising treaty rights for five years and the  respondent  was
accordingly  entitled  to  consider  his  case  under  the   simple   policy
provisions. As  for  the  risk  of  re-offending,  the  appellant  had  been
inconsistent as to whether he accepted that he had offended.  There  was  no
evidence of rehabilitation. The Secretary of State was entitled to  conclude
that he was a risk. With regard to contact with his children, the  appellant
had only provided undated photographs. If there  had  been  a  visit  on  23
October 2018, that was after the error of  law  hearing  and  there  was  no
confirmation from the third party. The appellant could maintain  contact  by
telephone from Poland. If it was accepted that the appellant posed  a  risk,
the  nature  of  his  family  life  was  not  sufficient  to  outweigh   his
deportation to Poland.

The appellant, in response, said that he was a simple man, that he  was  not
a criminal, that he loved his kids and he was sorry for his mistake.



Consideration and findings.

I turn first of all to the appellant's length of residence in the UK. It  is
for the  appellant,  if  relying  on  the  higher  level  of  protection  in
regulation 27(3), to demonstrate that he has been exercising  treaty  rights
in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years.  The  respondent,  in
concluding that the five year period has not been demonstrated, relies  upon
evidence  from  HMRC  confirming  the  appellant's  employment  record   for
2012/13, 2015/16 and 2016/17, but with no employments recorded for  2013/14,
2014/15 and 2017/18. The appellant claims to have worked cash  in  hand  and
to have lived off savings for those periods where HMRC  have  no  record  of
employment. However, there  is  no  evidence  of  such  employment.  In  the
circumstances I agree with Mr Bates  that  there  is  insufficient  reliable
evidence of five years continuous exercise of treaty rights in  the  UK  and
the appellant has therefore been unable to  show  that  he  has  acquired  a
permanent right of residence in the UK. As such, he is not entitled  to  the
enhanced level of protection in regulation  27(3)  and  is  subject  to  the
provisions in regulation 27, with particular reference to  regulation  27(5)
of the EEA Regulations, which states as follows:

      "Decisions taken on grounds of public  policy,  public  security  and
  public health


      27.-(1) In this regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
      decision taken on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
      public health.


      (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.....


      ...


      (5) The public policy and public security requirements of the United
      Kingdom include  restricting  rights  otherwise  conferred  by  these
      Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of society,
      and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy or
      public security  it  must  also  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
      following principles-


         (a)the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;


         (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
         of the person concerned;


         (c)the personal conduct of the person must represent a genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
         fundamental interests of society, taking into account past conduct
         of the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent;


         (d)matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify the
         decision;


         (e)a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
    justify the decision;


         (f)the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in the
         absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the grounds are
         specific to the person.


    (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
    and public security in relation to a person ("P") who  is  resident  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must   take   account   of
    considerations such as the age, state of health,  family  and  economic
    situation of P, P's length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  P's
    social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent
    of P's links with P's country of origin. "

Accordingly the next question is whether the appellant's conduct  represents
a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
fundamental interests of society. There is a notable lack of  evidence  from
both parties in this respect. I am mindful not to make the same errors  made
by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal whose decision was set aside on  the  basis
of inadequate reasoning in the light of an absence  of  supporting  evidence
in relation to the appellant's account. It is indeed the case that there  is
little by way of supporting evidence from  the  appellant,  other  than  his
oral evidence. I note that in his  supplementary  statement  he  denied  the
offending but yet was found guilty by the court. Before me he said  that  he
felt guilty for the incident in  which  he  lost  his  temper  and  that  he
regrets his mistake, but there is little other than  his  oral  evidence  in
that regard. There is also little in the way of evidence  of  rehabilitation
and the appellant's explanation for that  was  that  there  were  simply  no
courses available to him despite his attempts  to  enrol  on  such  courses.
Having said that,  there  is  evidence  of  one  course  undertaken  by  the
appellant on an "Integration and Employability" course in  May  2018  and  a
letter from Susan Blyth, manager of the Room at the  Inn,  dated  2  October
2018, in which she confirms having known the appellant for  over  12  months
and provides positive support for  him  as  a  "good  person".  Furthermore,
having heard from the appellant on two occasions, I found him to be  sincere
in his evidence before me. I take all of this into account.

It is also the case that there is a lack of  supporting  evidence  from  the
respondent, which is particularly relevant given the first paragraph of  the
headnote to the Presidential panel's decision in Arranz (EEA  Regulations  -
deportation - test : Spain) [2017] UKUT 294, that  "The  burden  of  proving
that  a  person  represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  threat
affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society  under  Regulation
21(5)(c) of the EEA Regulations rests on the  Secretary  of  State".  It  is
relevant  to  note  that,  aside  from  the  offence  of  shop-lifting,  the
appellant's criminal history was solely related to  the  domestic  incidents
involving his ex-wife. Whilst the conviction in that respect was  for  three
counts of battery, and therefore comprised three separate  incidents,  there
is no elaboration on the nature and extent of the battery  and  no  evidence
to support the  description  of  assault  by  beating  as  provided  by  the
respondent at [17] of the supplementary letter.  The  respondent's  evidence
consists solely of the PNC at F1 of the respondent's  appeal  bundle,  which
simply refers to the offence of battery with  no  further  details,  whereas
the offence itself varies in degrees of seriousness. In that respect I  take
note of the limited nature  of  the  sentence  initially  imposed  upon  the
appellant for the offence. The appellant's further offence  arose  from  his
failure to attend unpaid work sessions in respect  of  the  community  order
issued against him for the offences of battery, but it seems to me that  two
missed sessions in one year, albeit warranting the imposition of a  16  week
sentence, is not particularly consistent with the  respondent's  description
at [20] of a history of failure to comply with court orders.  Neither  do  I
find the appellant's offending to amount to a pattern of repeated  offending
as stated by  the  respondent  at  [22]  of  the  supplementary  deportation
decision. Whilst in no way seeking to underplay  the  appellant's  offences,
with respect to the domestic incidents, the failure to attend  two  sessions
of unpaid community work and the shop-lifting, I do not  consider  there  to
be evidence to suggest that  the  appellant  poses  a  future  risk  to  the
public. I note that  the  appellant  has  respected  the  restraining  order
against him and has had the consent of his ex-wife to see  his  children  by
way of arrangements made through a third party.  Accordingly,  having  taken
all the evidence into account, I do not find that the  evidence  establishes
that the appellant represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
threat for the purposes of regulation 27(5).

Having concluded as such I do not consider that  the  respondent's  decision
to deport the appellant is  proportionate.  Whilst  there  is  very  limited
supporting evidence of the appellant's contact with his children,  I  accept
from the photographs and the appellant's own evidence that  there  has  been
some contact and I also accept that the appellant's intentions in regard  to
maintaining contact are genuine and are not simply motivated by a desire  to
avoid deportation. I note that his intentions are supported  by  the  letter
from Susan Blyth and I found the appellant's oral evidence in regard to  his
children to be sincere and  credible.  Susan  Blyth  also  confirms  in  her
letter that the appellant has recently obtained employment. The  appellant's
employment is further supported by the contract  from  Single  Resource  and
the credits to his bank account from Single Resource, as  evidenced  by  his
Lloyds bank statements. Whilst I have to agree with Mr Bates that,  in  view
of the very limited evidence, the nature  of  the  appellant's  family  life
would not be sufficient in itself to outweigh the  public  interest  in  his
deportation if it were accepted that he posed an ongoing risk.  However,  in
light of my findings that he does not pose such a risk, and weighing up  all
the evidence, it is my conclusion that the respondent's decision  to  deport
the appellant is not proportionate and is not  justified  on  public  policy
grounds.

Accordingly I find that the respondent's decision is not in accordance  with
the EEA Regulations and I allow the appeal on that basis.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations.


    Anonymity


    The anonymity order previously made is continued, pursuant to  rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


 Signed[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 3 December
2018
