
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00738/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport|Determination Promulgated       |
|On 12 November 2014             |On 24 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                     WO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr A Chakmakjian (of Counsel), instructed by Leonard and
             Company Solicitors
Respondents:  Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (the "FtT")  whereby  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to deport him from  the  United  Kingdom  to  his  country  of
    origin, Uganda, was dismissed.

 2. I am satisfied that the FtT erred in law in failing to  accede  to  the
    joint application of both parties to adjourn the hearing of the appeal.
     In its determination, the FtT described this in these terms, referring
    to the Secretary of State's representative:

         ".....  applied for an adjournment. He told the  Tribunal  that  he
         had been instructed to make a 'strong' application by a case worker
         in the Respondent's criminal case  work  directorate  so  that  the
         Respondent could investigate how new information impacts  upon  her
         deportation decision ......"

    The "new information" emanated directly from the  Metropolitan  Police.
    It was to the  effect  that  the  alleged  victim  of  the  Appellant's
    criminality had sent a  letter,  authenticated  by  the  Irish  Police,
    stating that she had falsely accused the Appellant of the  offences  in
    question.  The Police further intimated  that  they  had  completed  an
    investigation with a view to prosecuting the victim for perjury and had
    submitted their file to  the  Crown  Prosecution  Service,  awaiting  a
    decision on prosecution.


 3. On behalf of the Secretary of State, it was acknowledged  by  Mr  Mills
    that the FtT had erred in law in refusing to adjourn  the  hearing.  It
    was acknowledged that the tribunal had failed to  attribute  sufficient
    significance to both the nature of the new information and its  origins
    viz the Metropolitan Police.  The tribunal erred in proceeding with the
    appeal  in  circumstances  where  further   evidence   of   potentially
    fundamental significance is materialising but not yet  available.   The
    adjournment  refusal  decision  is  further  vitiated  by  a   material
    misdirection in [8] of the determination.  The fundamental error of law
    committed was the FtT's failure to consider and apply  the  overarching
    criterion of fairness.   No  consideration  was  given  to  either  the
    applicable procedural rules or  the  governing  principles,  which  are
    rehearsed in Nwaigwe - v - SSHD [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

 4. The decision of the FtT cannot be sustained in consequence.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 5. I decide as follows:

    (i)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.

         (ii) I remit the appeal to a differently constituted FtT.

    (iii)    The relisting of the remitted appeal  will  be  stayed  for  a
         period of some seven months: relisting will  not  predate  01  July
         2015.

    (iv) The FtT will conduct  a  case  management  hearing  on  the  first
         available date following 01 July 2015.

    (v)  Any application by the Appellant for a further stay will  be  made
         in writing, supported by particularised grounds and  appending  all
         relevant evidence, on seven days notice to the Respondent.



                                                THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                    Date:   12 November 2014

