
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/00201/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Tuesday 19 February 2019          |On 28 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

            MR JUSTICE WAKSMAN SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  MR RAPHAEL ALEXANDRE PIRES CORREIA VARELA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Caseley, Counsel instructed by Bail for
                    Immigration Detainees (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Telford promulgated on 1  June  2018  ("the  Decision").  By  the
    Decision  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 14 March 2016 making  a  deportation  order
    against him.   It  is  common  ground  that,  as  the  Appellant  is  a
    Portuguese national, his appeal fell to be determined by application of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  EEA
    Regulations").  The only ground of appeal is whether deportation  would
    breach the Appellant's EU law rights.

2.    By the Decision, Judge Telford dismissed the appeal on Article 8  ECHR
    grounds and against the decision to deport. The Appellant  appealed  on
    the basis that the EEA Regulations  were  not  properly  considered  or
    applied by the Judge and/or that the Judge failed to  provide  adequate
    reasons for the  Decision  and  made  various  factual  errors  in  the
    findings.

3.    Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
    on 10 October 2018 but granted on further application by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Hanson on 19 December 2018 in  the  following  terms  so  far  as
    relevant:

         "...The Judge was made aware the decision  under  challenge  is  an
         order for the appellant's deportation to Portugal made on the basis
         that the appellant had been convicted in a period of 13  months  on
         more than one occasion of criminal offences which carried with them
         an immediate term of imprisonment of up to 6 months  and  that  the
         offences exhibited a pattern of  criminality  which  will  continue
         unless an order was made to remove the appellant.  The  Judge  sets
         out issues at [16].  The Judge noted at [18] the appellant did  not
         accept his convictions and sentences  and  minimised  his  criminal
         involvement.  The Judge does find at [19] that the appellant  tried
         to complete courses when in prison which the  appellant  claims  is
         factually incorrect as he has never been to prison.   The Judge had
         available to him a printout of the Police National Computer  record
         in  relation  to  the  appellant  which   arguably   supports   the
         appellant's  assertion  that  he  has   not   been   sentenced   to
         imprisonment in  the  UK.  The  grounds  are  arguably  correct  in
         identifying the issues the Judge was required to consider which was
         whether  the  appellant's  future  conduct  represented  a  genuine
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society which the Judge refers to at [25].
          This is, unfortunately, preceded by a comment  at  [24]  that  the
         appellant relied on the fact  he  had  spent  some  time  at  least
         "inside" which is not supported by the PNC.  The Judge refers to  a
         number of cases some of which do not relate to EEA cases but  which
         the Judge indicates had been referred to him.

         The Judge notes the appellant is not exercising treaty  rights  and
         not studying and had shown  no  reason  for  qualifying  under  the
         Treaty, indicating the level of protection was at the lower  level.
         The difficulty at this stage  is  that  it  does  appear  at  least
         arguable, for the reasons set out in the grounds, that the decision
         of the Judge is difficult to understand in light of what appear  to
         be factual errors that  may  have  been  material  to  the  Judge's
         decision.  Whether, on further analysis at an Initial Hearing  this
         is so or whether any errors are found not to  be  material  to  the
         decision to dismiss the appeal, is a matter the Upper Tribunal  can
         consider at that stage.   Permission  is  granted  on  all  grounds
         submitted by BID."

4.    The matter comes  before  us  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
    disclose an error of law and to re-make the decision or  remit  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


Decision

5.    By a rule 24 response dated 22 January 2019, the  Respondent  concedes
    that the Decision contains errors of law in the following terms so  far
    as relevant:

         "...2.   The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application
         to set aside the judgment of the FtT.  The SSHD  accepts  that  the
         FtJ has applied numerous legal schemes which  were  not  applicable
         either at all (see the reference to the refugee claim at  [47])  or
         which were not the main analysis of the appeal  -  that  being  the
         constant reference to Article 8 deportation caselaw and IRs etc.

         3. It may well be as UTJ Hanson points out,  that  the  Appellant's
         underlying claim under any legal scheme is a very weak one but  the
         SSHD accepts that the FtJ has manifestly failed to lawfully dispose
         of the case under the EEA Regs and as such the judgment is flawed."

6.    We accept the Respondent's concession.  Although the Judge  refers  at
    [1] of the Decision to the fact that the Appellant's case falls  to  be
    considered applying the EEA Regulations (albeit  the  2006  regulations
    and  not  the  2016  regulations)  there  is  very  limited   reference
    thereafter to the EEA Regulations at all.  The statement of the  issues
    arising at [16] fails to mention the EU law aspect but  instead  refers
    to Article 8 ECHR (which would arise only if there were also a  refusal
    of a human rights  claim  which,  consistently  with  the  Respondent's
    decision letter, the Appellant says there was  not).   The  only  issue
    which the Judge was required to  determine  therefore  is  whether  the
    decision to deport the Appellant is in breach of  his  EU  law  rights.
    The Judge  makes  reference  to  regulations  27  and  23  of  the  EEA
    Regulations at [28] of the Decision but,  for  reasons  which  are  not
    clear to us goes on to say that "[w]hen it comes to the wider principle
    of a discretion to not follow that which is concluded as  made  out  or
    proved through the Regulations, namely deportation, it is very much the
    case that I can and should take into account the law of  the  land  and
    the common  law  principles  influencing  a  decision  of  discretion".
    Thereafter, the Judge resorts to  case  law  and  factors  relevant  to
    Article 8 ECHR rather than  considering  the  position  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

7.    It may be that  the  Judge  considers  that  he  is  not  required  to
    consider the test for deportation under  the  EEA  Regulations,  having
    regard to the findings made at [38] and [40] of the Decision  that  the
    Appellant is not and never has exercised Treaty  rights.   However,  if
    that was his reason, it was incumbent on him to make that  finding  and
    thereafter to reach a conclusion about the effect  of  deportation  and
    whether that would breach the Appellant's EU law rights (since that was
    the  only  ground  of  appeal).   Instead,   the   Judge   returns   to
    consideration of factors material only to Article 8 ECHR and  dismisses
    the appeal on two grounds which are not (and could not be) raised.

8.    For those reasons, we are  satisfied  that  the  Decision  contains  a
    material error of law.  We  therefore  set  aside  the  Decision.   The
    parties' representatives were agreed that we should remit the appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal to be considered afresh.

9.    We have had regard to the Joint Practice Statement of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in  this
    Tribunal.  That reads as follows:

         "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

           a) the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party  before
              the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair   hearing   or   other
              opportunity for that party's case to be put to and considered
              by the First-tier Tribunal; or

           b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which  is
              necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-
              made is such that, having regard to the overriding  objective
              in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-
              tier Tribunal."

10.   In light of the multiplicity of findings which  are  not  relevant  to
    the  consideration  whether  the  deportation  decision  breaches   the
    Appellant's EU law rights and the lack of findings on issues which  are
    material, we agree that it is appropriate to remit the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a Judge other than Judge
    Telford.

DECISION

We are satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a  material  error
on a point of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Telford
promulgated on 1 July 2018 is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.


Signed      [pic]                 Dated: 20 February 2019

Mr Justice Waksman sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
