
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00738/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow                        Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 2nd November 2018                         On 23rd November 2018




                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               MR. AIVARS [A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent



Representation:
For the appellant: Mr Bradley of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors, Glasgow
For the respondent: Mr Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Latvia, born on [~] 1984. On 28
      November 2017 an order for his deportation was made further to
      regulation 23 (6)B of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
      Regulations 2016.

   2. On 6 November 2017 he was convicted of possessing a controlled drug
      and admonished at Glasgow Court. The respondent became aware of
      earlier convictions in his home country. On 4 June 2004 he was
      convicted of grievous bodily harm and sentenced to 3 months
      imprisonment. On 9 May 2005 he was convicted of theft and sentenced to
      one year and 10 days imprisonment, suspended for 2 years. On 27 April
      2006 the suspended aspect was revoked. On 21 December 2010 he was
      convicted of theft and damage to property and sentenced to one year
      and 6 months imprisonment. This was followed by a conviction on 15
      February 2013 of robbery for which he received a sentence of 3 years
      imprisonment.

   3. The respondent took the view he was entitled to the lowest level of
      protection available to a person exercising Treaty rights. By
      regulation 27(5) of the 2016 Regulations the decision must be
      proportionate and based on personal conduct. This must represent a
      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
      fundamental interests of society, taking into account past conduct.
      Matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which relate to
      considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision to
      deport. Previous criminal convictions do not in themselves justify the
      decision. The conclusion was that his deportation was justified.

The First tier Tribunal

   4. His appeal was heard by Designated Immigration Judge Murray at Glasgow
      on 1 May 2018. In a decision promulgated on 14 June 2008 his appeal
      was dismissed.

   5. The judge referred to the threat he posed to the public and his
      article 8 rights. The judge heard evidence from a British national, Mr
      Trebor Anderson, who 1st met the appellant in 2003 and had been in a
      relationship with him. They did not have contact from 2006 until the
      end of 2010. The appellant had returned to Latvia and then moved to
      Lithuania. He returned to the United Kingdom and renewed his
      acquaintance in 2016 after release from prison. Mr Anderson said he
      relied upon him as his care giver as he suffered from poor health.

   6. The judge found Mr Anderson to be a credible witness. The judge found
      the appellant was addicted to drugs and on a methadone programme. His
      explanation for his conviction in Glasgow, namely, that he was given
      class B drugs by a shopkeeper which he reported to the police was
      accepted. The judge referred to a 'blip' in his progress when he
      tested positive and an absence of evidence about the methadone program
      and how he was progressing.

   7. The judge did not find the appellant entirely credible and questioned
      his sincerity towards Mr Anderson. The judge did not find they were in
      a genuine and subsisting relationship and did not find the existence
      of family life within the meaning of article 8. The judge also did not
      find evidence of a private life beyond the time spent was Mr Anderson.
      The judge also found that the appellant had not been exercising Treaty
      rights in the United Kingdom.

   8. The judge concluded that if the appellant abstained from illegal drugs
      he may present as a low risk of reoffending. However, there was a lack
      of evidence about his progress in the methadone programme.
      Consequently, the judge was unable to conclude he would not resume
      taking drugs and if this happened, he would be a genuine, present and
      sufficiently serious threat. The Judge found a real risk he would
      reoffend in the future and concluded that deportation was
      proportionate.

The Upper Tribunal

   9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge failed to engage properly with regulation 27 of the 2016
      regulations. The Judge's conclusion at paragraph 57 that he would
      represent a threat if he went back to taking drugs was arguably
      speculation.

  10. A second-ground advanced was that the judge failed to engage with
      regulation 8(5) of the 2016 regulations and the possibility of him
      being an extended family member of Mr Anderson. It was arguable the
      judge conflated the notion of a genuine and subsisting relationship as
      used in the immigration rules with a durable relationship in the
      regulations. Finally, it was argued that the article 8 assessment was
      flawed because the proportionality assessment was inadequate.

  11. In ground 7 of the application it was argued that the judge in
      referring to a real risk the appellant will reoffend at paragraph 58
      of the decision conflated the standard of proof in an asylum hearing
      with that in an EEA deportation case.

  12. At hearing, reference was made to paragraph 42 where the judge said
      the burden of proof is upon the appellant. Both representatives are in
      agreement that this was incorrect (see Arranz (EEA Regulations -
      deportation - test) [2017] UKUT 00294 (IAC)) and it was then submitted
      on behalf of the appellant that this tainted the decision. The
      presenting officer faced difficulties arguing this was a simple slip.
      I note at paragraph 45 the judge stated that it is for the appellant
      to show he is entitled to remain in the United Kingdom and he has to
      show he should not be deported.

  13. At hearing I was given a copy of the decision of the Inner House in SA
      -v- SSHD [2018] CSIH 28.A First-tier Tribunal had incorrectly said, as
      here, that in a deportation appeal the burden of proof was upon the
      appellant. The Upper Tribunal concluded that when read as a whole the
      reference was a standard recital and not part of the decisive passages
      and was considered to be an immaterial slip. However the Inner House
      accepted that this misstatement influenced the First-tier Tribunal's
      whole approach to decision-making process.

  14. I do not find the Inner House decision cited establishes any general
      principle but has parallels with the present. I agree with the
      presenting officer that when taken with comments elsewhere,
      particularly paragraph 45, this cannot be explained away as a simple
      immaterial slip. The misstatement of the burden of proof does taint
      the essential findings made by the judge including the benefits of the
      methadone programme and the associated likelihood of the appellant
      reoffending and the evaluation of his relationship with Mr Anderson.
      In the circumstance I find it would be unsafe to allow the decision to
      stand. Consequently, I would set the decision aside and remit the
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing de novo.

Decision

A material error of law has been demonstrated. The decision is set aside
and the appeal is remitted for determination de novo in the First-tier
Tribunal



Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                           Date 15th November
2018



