
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00103/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 June 2014                                  |On 10 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     JM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in relation to  the
    appellant.  There has been no application before the Upper Tribunal for
    this direction to be discharged and  consequently  it  continues.   The
    appellant is granted anonymity unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs
    otherwise.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify him or any member of his family.  Failure to comply with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zambia born in August 1968.   He  arrived
    in the  United  Kingdom  in  August  1995  having  been  granted  entry
    clearance until 4 February 1996.  On 6 September 1996  he  was  granted
    exceptional leave to remain until 30 August 1997 as the carer  for  his
    stepsister, who is now deceased, and her son KCC.  An  application  for
    further leave was refused on 19 March 2001 but an appeal  against  this
    decision  was  allowed  in  September  2004  and  the   appellant   was
    subsequently granted discretionary leave to remain as a carer until  20
    January 2008.  On 2 August 2008 he  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a consequence of the length of his residency here.

 3. On 13 January 2012 the appellant was convicted at Basildon Crown  Court
    of (i) possession with intent to supply a class B drug,  for  which  he
    was sentenced to two years' imprisonment  and  (ii)   facilitating  the
    acquisition of criminal property, for which he  was  sentenced  to  one
    year's imprisonment to run concurrently.

 4. On or around 9 January 2013 the Secretary of State made a decision that
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies to the appellant  and,
    on the same date, signed a deportation order drawn in  the  appellant's
    name.  The appellant lodged an appeal against the  former  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and, in a determination promulgated on  2  July
    2013, First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese, sitting with Mrs Street (non-
    legal  member)  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all   grounds.
    Thereafter,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  granted   the   appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  in  a  decision  of  28
    October 2013 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana found error  of  law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's  determination  and  set  that  determination
    aside.  Full reasons for  this  conclusion  are  found  in  a  separate
    document sent out to  the  parties  on  11  November  2013.   The  core
    reasoning was as follows:

         "4.  After  discussion,  Mr  Tufan  accepted  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal's determination contained an error of law  such  that
             it should be set aside.  In particular he  accepted  that  the
             First-tier Tribunal had erred in failing to come to a reasoned
             conclusion on the issue of whether the appellant's marriage is
             genuine and subsisting.  Mr Tufan  further  acknowledged  that
             the First-tier Tribunal had erred in (i)  failing  to  make  a
             finding as to whether the appellant's wife was  pregnant  with
             the appellant's child, as claimed (ii) failing  to  take  into
             account the prison visit records  and  (iii)  for  failing  to
             state what it had made of the social  worker's  report,  which
             indicates on its face that the appellant was in  a  subsisting
             relationship with his wife.

         5.   These errors are plainly material.  In relation  to  paragraph
             399(B) of the Rules, Mr Tufan accepted  that  the  appellant's
             wife is a British citizen, but the appellant has lived in  the
             United Kingdom for a period in excess of fifteen  years  prior
             to  the  decision  under  appeal,  and  that  there  would  be
             insurmountable   obstacles   to   her   living   in    Zambia.
             Consequently the only issue left for consideration  under  the
             Rules was whether the appellant is in a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with his wife.  It is this matter  that  each  of
             the aforementioned evidence relates."

 5. The appeal then came before Judge Chana and me on 14 January  2014,  at
    which time the Tribunal  raised  issue  with  the  reliability  of  the
    marriage certificate that had been provided  by  the  appellant.   This
    necessitated that the hearing be adjourned for  further  investigations
    to be undertaken by both parties.  When the matter came back before the
    Tribunal on 27 February 2014 the Secretary of State had yet to finalise
    her investigations and the hearing was adjourned once  again.   By  the
    time the matter came back before me on 6 June 2014 a transfer order had
    been made so as to enable the Tribunal to be formed of a  single  judge
    in order to avoid any  further  delay  in  the  determination  of  this
    matter.  Neither party took any objection to this course.

 6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Saunders indicated that  the  Secretary
    of State's investigations into the marriage certificate  had  now  been
    completed and she accepted that the  certificate  was  a  reliable  and
    genuine document.  As  a  consequence  no  issue  was  taken  with  the
    assertion that the appellant married EC in Arusha on 13 December  2008,
    as claimed.

 7. The appellant and his wife (EC) were  called  in  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal, adopting the contents of their witness statements of 4  April
    and 8 April 2014 respectively. Mr Saunders indicated  that  he  had  no
    questions for either of the witnesses, and their evidence rested there.



 8. In submissions Mr Saunders stated that although the Secretary of  State
    was not willing to concede the appeal, he had nothing else to add other
    than to rely on the Secretary of State's decision letter.   I  did  not
    invite Mr Wilford to make submissions.

Findings and Reasons

9.   Pursuant to Section 32(5) UK Borders Act 2007 the SSHD is  required  to
    deport the appellant unless one of the exceptions set out in Section 33
    apply.  One such exception is where removal of the foreign criminal  in
    pursuance of a deportation order would breach that person's  Convention
    rights.  In the present case it is  contended  by  the  appellant  that
    deportation would  infringe  his  Article  8  rights.   The  applicable
    Immigration Rules state as follows:


    "398.    Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             at least 4 years;

         (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 12
             months; or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of  State,
             their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors.


    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -



         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                       leave the UK; and

                  (b) there is no other family member who is able  to  care
                       for the child in the UK; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
             the UK, or in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and

             (i)   the  person  has  lived  in  the  UK  with  valid  leave
                  continuously  for  at  least  the  15  years   immediately
                  preceding   the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment); and

             (ii)     there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
                  with that partner continuing outside the UK

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
             if -

              (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                  20  years  immediately  preceding   the   date   of   the
                  immigration   decision   (discounting   any   period   of
                  imprisonment) and  he  has  no  ties  (including  social,
                  cultural or family) with the country to  which  he  would
                  have to go if required to leave the UK; or

              (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least
                  half  of  his  life  living  continuously   in   the   UK
                  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the   immigration
                  decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and  he
                  has no ties (including social, cultural or  family)  with
                  the country to which he would have to go if  required  to
                  leave the UK."

10. The relevant provision for consideration in this  appeal  is  paragraph
    399(b).  It is now accepted by the Secretary of State that (i) EC is  a
    British citizen, (ii) the appellant has lived  in  the  UK  with  valid
    leave in excess of fifteen years immediately preceding the date of  the
    immigration decision and (iii) there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life between the appellant and  EC  continuing  outside  of  the
    United Kingdom.  This appeal therefore turns on  the  single  issue  of
    whether  the  appellant  and  EC  are  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship.  I have no doubt that they are.

11. First, it is accepted that the appellant and EC married  in  Arusha  in
    December 2008.  I have been provided with witness statements  from  the
    appellant, EC, EC's 17 year old British citizen son and the appellant's
    nephew, all dated in November 2012.  Each of these statements  identify
    in some detail the strength of the relationship between  the  appellant
    and EC.  Both the appellant and  EC  gave  evidence  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, adopting statements from April 2014 which, again, set out the
    nature of their relationship.  EC is now said to be pregnant and due to
    give birth in September 2014, a matter which is  supported  by  medical
    evidence before me. It is said that the appellant is the father of  the
    unborn child.  Mr Saunders did not seek to  cross  examine  either  the
    appellant or EC as to their evidence.

12. I also have before me documents relating to telephone calls made by the
    appellant whilst he was  in  detention,  EC  being  identified  on  the
    "controlled numbers - prisoner listing"  document  as  the  appellant's
    partner - her mobile telephone number being identified  thereon  and  a
    breakdown of the telephone numbers called with the duration and cost of
    each call also being provided. From this one can readily identify  that
    there were a significant number of calls made from the appellant to  EC
    during the time the appellant spent in detention. I, also, have  before
    me detailed prison visit  records  relating  to  the  appellant,  which
    identify a significant number of visits by EC  during  the  appellant's
    time in prison, as well as visits by the appellant's  nephew  and  EC's
    son.

13. Further, EC is also identified as the appellant's partner in a document
    authored by the Offender Management Unit at HMP Norwich,  completed  on
    or around March 2012.  In addition there are two reports authored by  a
    Diane Jackson before me,  who  identifies  herself  as  an  Independent
    Social Worker.  The former report is dated 12 June 2013 and  the  later
    supplementary/addendum report, 8 January 2014.  Miss  Jackson  has  had
    contact with the appellant, EC, EC's  son  and  daughters,  EC's  son's
    Social Worker and Year Tutor, as well as a Carer Support  Officer  from
    the London Borough of Newham familiar with the  family.   Miss  Jackson
    opines, having taking into account information from the above  sources,
    that the appellant and EC are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.



14. I finally observe that the  appellant  is  on  immigration  bail,  this
    having been originally granted by the First-tier Tribunal on  26  March
    2013 but thereafter maintained by the Secretary of State, or  at  least
    one of her Immigration Officers.  The material matter to be taken  from
    the grant of bail is that one of the conditions of  bail  requires  the
    appellant to live and sleep every night at EC's address.

15. Looking at all the evidence before me in the round, including, but  not
    limited to, that which I identify above, I have no doubt in  concluding
    that the appellant and EC are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

16. Consequently, given the concessions in relation to the other aspects of
    paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules, I find that the requirements
    of that Rule are met.  The appellant's appeal is to be allowed  on  the
    basis that the Secretary of State's decision leads to a breach  of  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.





Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error on a point of  law
and is set aside.

I substitute a decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal  for  the  reasons
identified above.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

Date: 11 June 2014
