
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00271/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 20th June 2016                   |On: 29th September 2016              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Audrone Siniciene
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Lithuania date of  birth  3rd  February
    1965. On the 16th June 2015 she was made subject to a deportation order
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.   The
    case was certified with  reference  to  Regulation  24AA  of  the  same
    Regulations and she was deported to Lithuania.


 2. So it was that when the matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal  Ms
    Siniciene was not present. Nor was  she  represented.  A  copy  of  the
    notice of hearing had been served on her last known representatives; so
    too subsequently a copy of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  No
    Rule 24 response has been received by the Upper Tribunal and it is  not
    known whether Ms Siniciene is even aware that her appeal was allowed at
    first instance.   In view of these matters, I took  the  view  that  it
    would not be in the interests of justice to  adjourn  the  proceedings.
    Although it would be far preferable if the the Respondent were able  to
    take part, or at least communicate her views to the Tribunal, there was
    nothing to suggest that contact would be re-established so as to ensure
    that she could take part in proceedings at a future date.


    Background and Matters in Issue before the First-tier Tribunal


 3. It is believed that Ms Siniciene came to the United Kingdom sometime in
    March 2007. The Secretary of State  accepts  that  she  was  exercising
    treaty rights between her arrival and 2011, and then again in  2013-14.
    The Secretary of State identified a gap in 2012 when it  is  not  clear
    what the Respondent was doing in the United Kingdom. The  Secretary  of
    State relied on that gap to conclude that the Respondent had  not  been
    exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of five years or more.
    She did not therefore quality for any 'enhanced protection'  under  the
    scheme at Regulations 19 and 21.


 4. The matter which brought the Respondent to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    attention was that on the 17th November 2014 she was  sentenced  to  33
    months'   imprisonment   upon   conviction   for   six   offences    of
    conspiring/assisting illegal immigration. The sentencing remarks of  Mr
    Recorder Craven summarises the  background  to  those  convictions.  Ms
    Siniciene  had,  over  a  period  of  approximately  two  years,   been
    instrumental in the organisation of sham marriages,  entered  into  for
    the purpose of circumventing immigration control.  She  had  personally
    recruited six Polish or Lithuanian women  in  order  to  marry  non-EEA
    nationals and  acted  as  their  chaperone  at  the  wedding  ceremony.
    Although she was not found to be at the top of  the  organisation,  she
    clearly played an essential role in the operation.

 5. The Secretary of State directed herself to the principles  set  out  at
    Regulation 21(5).  This  was  a  very  serious  offence.  Although  the
    'offender manager' had assessed the Respondent's risk of reoffending as
    low, the Respondent took the view that the serious harm which would  be
    caused as a result of any similar instances of offending is  such  that
    it would not be reasonable  to  leave  the  public  vulnerable  to  the
    potential that she might reoffend.  The Respondent was found to have  a
    lack of remorse for her behaviour and overall  the  conclusion  reached
    was  that  she  continued  to  pose  a  risk.  It  would  in  all   the
    circumstances be proportionate to remove her.

 6. On appeal the Tribunal was required then to first to assess whether  Ms
    Siniciene had in fact acquired any enhanced protection rights by virtue
    of her length of residence, and  second  whether  her  deportation  was
    justified under Regulations 19 and 21.



    The Determination

 7. The first matter was resolved in the Secretary of  State's  favour.  In
    the absence of any evidence as to what Ms Siniciene was doing  in  2012
    the Tribunal found that she had not shown herself  to  be  resident  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years
    or more.


 8. As to the second matter the Tribunal directed itself to  the  terms  of
    the Regulations, and to jurisprudence of the CJEU  concerned  with  the
    removal provisions. Having reviewed  that  jurisprudence  the  Tribunal
    concluded that criminal offences  can  only  in  themselves  constitute
    grounds for deportation where the circumstances which had given rise to
    the conviction were evidence of personal conduct constituting a present
    threat to the requirements of public policy: "The ECJ thus seems  clear
    that the evidence (including past criminality) must establish a  future
    risk  to  society  for  any  removal  to  be  justified".   As  to  the
    circumstances of Ms Siniciene's offending the  determination  sets  out
    the sentencing remarks at length.  The Secretary of State's view as  to
    the seriousness of the offences is noted in detail.  Having  considered
    those matters the Tribunal proceeds  to  examine  the  evidence  as  to
    current/ future risk.

 9.  The  only  professional  assessment  before  the  Tribunal  about  the
    Respondent's propensity to reoffend was the OASys report  completed  by
    the Probation Service on the 4th February  2015.   The  Respondent  was
    found to have a low risk of probability of proven  reoffending,  a  low
    risk of probability of proven non-violent offending and a low  risk  of
    probability of proven violent type  offending.  The  Tribunal  accepted
    this professional assessment. At various points the OASys report  makes
    clear that on any scale of assessment, the Respondent  presented  as  a
    low risk. In answer to the  question  "is  the  offender  motivated  to
    address offending?" the answer is recorded "very motivated".

10. Assessing that evidence against the tests set down in Regulation  21(5)
    the Tribunal reminds itself that it is not permissible to deport an EEA
    national simply because of a past conviction, or to deter others. It is
    for the host state  to  demonstrate  that  the  deportee  represents  a
    genuine present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  In respect of  rehabilitation  as  a
    relevant factor it has regard to the guidance in  Essa  v  SSHD  [2013]
    UKUT 00316 (IAC).  It accepts that there is a strong public interest in
    deporting those who participate in a large scale  commercial  fraud  to
    facilitate illegal entry by use of fraudulent practices and  documents.
    That said, the Tribunal finds the offence not to be as  significant  as
    say, offences of illegal dealing in narcotics or the  sexual  abuse  of
    children. Weighing all of that in the balance  the  Tribunal  concludes
    that the Respondent's deportation cannot be justified. The Secretary of
    State has not shown that her conduct represents a genuine  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society. In all the circumstances the  Tribunal  does  not  consider
    deportation to be proportionate.


11. The Tribunal went on to consider Article 8 ECHR. The appeal was allowed
    on the grounds that the decision had not been shown to be proportionate
    interference with Ms Siniciene's family life in the UK. The  Respondent
    had been living with her widowed daughter and grandson in  Peterborough
    prior to her imprisonment and  deportation.   Having  regard  to  those
    relationships and to the fact that she had been living in  the  UK  for
    some time the Tribunal found Article 8 to  be  engaged.   The  Tribunal
    directed itself to consider the criteria set out  in  Uner  and  having
    done so found the  Respondent's  removal  to  be  disproportionate  and
    allowed the appeal with reference to Article 8 ECHR.


    Error of Law

12. The second ground concerns whether  adequate  reasons  were  given  for
    allowing the appeal on human rights grounds. I need not deal with  this
    ground in any great detail save to say that  it  is  plainly  made  out
    since the reasoning on proportionality makes no  reference  at  all  to
    ss117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The
    Article 8 reasoning was thereby flawed in law  and  that  part  of  the
    decision cannot  stand.  As  Mr  Walker  acknowledged,  this  makes  no
    difference at all to Ms Siniciene if the Tribunal's decision in respect
    of the EEA Regulations is upheld.


13. The challenge to the findings on Regulation 21(5)  is  that  there  has
    been a paucity of reasoning. The Secretary of State  submits  that  the
    Tribunal has failed to give adequate reasons in several key respects. I
    deal with each in turn.

14.  It is submitted that the Tribunal has failed to consider whether there
    have been any attempts at rehabilitation  in  the  UK  or  whether  the
    Respondent could be rehabilitated in Lithuania. It is further submitted
    that the Tribunal has failed to consider the fact that the presence  of
    the Respondent's grandchild and daughter in the UK did not prevent  her
    offending.  This is, with respect, not a ground that  is  going  to  be
    capable of demonstrating any materiality. The only evidence before  the
    Judge that went to future risk of reoffending  was  the  OASys  report.
    That  comprehensively  concluded  that  she  was  at  a  low  risk   of
    reoffending on a number of scales. Other than that the Tribunal had not
    been furnished with any information one way or the other. The Secretary
    of State asserted (and this  is  repeated  in  the  grounds)  that  the
    Respondent had refused to take responsibility for  her  involvement  in
    the offence; whilst this was the case at  the  date  of  sentencing  it
    would not appear to have featured in the subsequent conclusions reached
    by the Probation Service who  found  her  to  be  "very  motivated"  to
    address her offending behaviour. Having had regard to that report,  and
    presumably the fact this was a woman who at nearly  50  years  old  had
    never been convicted of any other offence, the Tribunal was entitled to
    conclude that she presented a low risk of  reoffending.    One  wonders
    then why the Tribunal would be moved to conduct a forensic analysis  of
    which country would offer her the best prospects of rehabilitation.

15. The remaining particulars all relate to whether the Tribunal did enough
    to justify its conclusion that the Respondent's conduct did not present
    a sufficiently serious threat to one of the  fundamental  interests  of
    society. Most of these are express disagreements with  the  conclusions
    reached.  The Secretary of State's strongest point is that the Tribunal
    arguably seeks to minimise the seriousness of the offence by  comparing
    it to drugs trafficking and child abuse.  The  Secretary  of  State  is
    understandably at pains to point out how serious an offence  this  was.
    I have considered Mr Walkers well made submissions on this point. I  am
    however  satisfied  that  this  is  something  that  the  Tribunal  was
    cognizant of at all times. The point made about other types of offences
    did not serve to exclude this type of  offence  from  the  category  of
    "serious offences", but the Tribunal was properly drawing examples from
    the caselaw as to what kind of  offending  behaviour  might  ordinarily
    reach the threshold set in Reg 21 (5). Overall I am satisfied that this
    was a conclusion open to the Tribunal on the  evidence  before  it  and
    that clear reasons have been given: on the facts the Secretary of State
    simply could not establish that there was a sufficiently serious future
    risk of reoffending.




    Decisions


16. The First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach to  Article  8  but  that
    error was not such that the decision  should  be  set  aside.  That  is
    because the decision in respect of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 contains no error of law and it is  upheld.  The
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

17. I make no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                             29th September 2016
