
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00038/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 May 2019                       |On 25 July 2019                      |
|Ex tempore judgment                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr EMMANUEL KYEREMEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    it is convenient to continue to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands born in 1990.  He arrived
    in the UK in 2004 at the age of 14.  The appeal before  the  FtT  arose
    following a decision by the respondent on 13 January  2017  to  make  a
    deportation order against him.   The  appellant  was  convicted  of  an
    offence of importation of Class  A  drugs,  committed  on  or  about  2
    December 2012.  In the Crown Court at Isleworth on 10 February 2015  he
    received a sentence of six years' imprisonment.

 3. The circumstances of the offence are evident from the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker ("the FTJ") who heard the appeal on  19
    December 2018, whereby she allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").   No
    point is taken by either party in terms  of  what  are  the  applicable
    Regulations, those of 2006 or 2016.

    The FTJ's decision summarised

 4. The FtJ referred to the conviction, and the sentencing judge's remarks.
    The appellant had an operational function within  the  criminal  chain,
    which the sentencing judge was satisfied revealed  that  the  appellant
    was motivated by financial or other advantage.  The submission that  he
    fell within a lesser role was rejected.

 5. The FtJ referred at paragraph 6 to an OASys report which  stated  there
    were no concerns indicative of a risk of serious harm  in  the  current
    offence, this being his only offence and that there were no  additional
    concerns indicative of  a  risk  of  serious  harm,  although  no  full
    analysis had been completed. It seems that the OASys  report  to  which
    she was referring is dated 9 January 2017.  There is in fact a  further
    OASys report dated  2  October  2018  contained  at  page  259  of  the
    appellant's bundle of documents.

 6. The FtJ summarised the respondent's decision and set out the procedural
    history of the appeal.  She identified the evidence that she had before
    her and summarised the appellant's background, including  that  he  was
    deported to the Netherlands on 3 February 2017 following the  death  of
    his eldest sister in Ghana on 3 April 2017.  He returned to the UK  the
    next day and he was arrested for breach of a deportation order.  He was
    granted bail; then re-detained and again granted bail.  He was deported
    for a second time on 4 December 2017.

 7. The FtJ summarised the  appellant's  witness  statement,  including  in
    terms of his education and qualifications, and family background.

 8. As part of his evidence before the FtJ the appellant accepted his guilt
    although that is  not  what  is  reflected  in  the  OASys  report.  He
    accepted, as recorded at para 37 of the FtJ's decision, that he had not
    pleaded guilty at trial and that he had reiterated that he did not know
    what was  in  the  parcel  that  he  had  signed  for  (which  was  the
    importation).

 9. The FtJ summarised the evidence of  the  witnesses,  and  some  of  the
    documentary evidence which the appellant relied on in  support  of  the
    claim that he was entitled to the highest level of  protection  against
    deportation under the EEA Regulations, that is imperative grounds.

10. She made a further summary of the circumstances in  which  the  offence
    was committed and summarised the OASys reports.  She referred  at  para
    68 to a letter dated 22 June 2017 from the National  Probation  Service
    stating that its author had  carried  out  a  probation  assessment  in
    relation to the risk of harm. In summary, that risk was said to be  low
    in all areas when in custody.  In the community it was assessed that he
    was at medium risk of serious harm to members of the public due to  the
    index offence but at low risk in all other areas.

11. The  FtJ  then  referred  to  what  was  described  as  an  independent
    psychological risk assessment dated 10 October 2018 from  Lisa  Davies.
    The FtJ referred to para 1.7  of  the  report  which  stated  that  the
    appellant presented as a low risk for general non-violent offending and
    presented a very low risk of causing serious harm at that time.

12. The FtJ referred to other aspects  of  the  report  including  apparent
    inconsistency in terms of what the appellant said about denying  coming
    into contact with friends involved in  the  use  of  illicit  drugs  or
    alcohol but yet stating that he had mixed  with  the  wrong  crowd.   A
    further inconsistency was noted in that he told the author of the OASys
    report of September 2016 that he was not in receipt of any student loan
    but then said that he was.

13. That was all relevant to the financial background to the index offence.
     Nevertheless, the FtJ returned at para 76 to refer to  the  conclusion
    in Ms Davies' report to the effect that the risk of reoffending was  in
    the low range.  The FtJ then summarised the parties' submissions before
    moving on to her findings.

14. As regards evidence of the appellant's  father's  employment,  the  FtJ
    said that the Presenting Officer  accepted  at  the  hearing  that  the
    letters produced from HMRC were reliable and that the records from HMRC
    accorded with the appellant's father's evidence as to his employment in
    the UK.  At para 91 she said this:

         "Ms McKenzie at the hearing on 19 December  2018  after  a  careful
         consideration of documents accepted that the appellant fell  within
         the imperative category, maintained that removal was  justified  as
         the appellant had not demonstrated that he had addressed any of his
         offending behaviour although she accepted that  rehabilitation  was
         an issue in Essa."

15. On behalf of the respondent a question is raised in the grounds  as  to
    whether in fact any  concession  was  made.  The  Presenting  Officer's
    minute or note has been provided.  We shall return to that momentarily.



16. At para 95 the FtJ concluded that the appellant had entered the  UK  in
    2004 aged 14 and from that date until the  date  of  expulsion  he  had
    remained in education, had progressed to university and was seeking  to
    qualify as a quantity  surveyor.   She  concluded  that  his  immediate
    family were exercising Treaty rights in the UK  and  that  he  remained
    dependent on his father, living at home whilst a student,  and  is  now
    dependent on his father in the Netherlands.

17. She concluded that through his education he is socially and  culturally
    integrated in the UK. The FtJ referred to support from his local church
    and his engagement in church-related activities.  She  found  that  the
    appellant had not returned to the Netherlands apart from  when  he  was
    deported in 2017 and that he does not have  significant  links  to  his
    country of nationality.

18. However, although the appellant said that he could not speak Dutch, the
    FtJ found that he would be able to speak some words of Dutch because he
    was in education there until the age of 14.

19. The FtJ noted that  the  EEA  Regulations  require  that  the  personal
    conduct of the individual in question must represent a genuine, present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society and that criminal convictions  themselves  do  not
    justify an expulsion decision.

20. At para 97 it was noted that this was the  appellant's  first  offence,
    but that he had not accepted responsibility and continued  to  maintain
    that he was set up or framed, notwithstanding that he  had  been  found
    guilty by a jury.

21. The grounds contend that the FtJ failed to have regard to the fact that
    the appellant denied his guilt, but it is clear that the FtJ  was  well
    aware of the fact that he still maintained his innocence.

22. The FtJ noted that he had not committed any further offences since  the
    offence was committed and since his release from prison  or  detention.
    She took into account that he had returned to the UK in breach  of  the
    deportation order but said that that was an impulsive  act  that  arose
    from the death of his elder sister. The FtJ nevertheless regarded  that
    matter as a negative factor in her assessment.

23. At para 98 the FtJ reminded herself that the  appellant  was  convicted
    and sentenced to six years' imprisonment.  She further noted  that  the
    sentencing judge expressed some sympathy for the circumstances in which
    the appellant found himself but nevertheless reiterated  the  appellant
    was convicted and sentenced to a lengthy term of imprisonment. The  FtJ
    said that  motivation  for  the  offence  still  remained  unclear  and
    concluded that did not assist in the assessment of  whether  there  was
    any propensity to reoffend.  She referred to the OASys report  prepared
    on 11 December 2017 and that it indicated at para 7.5 that  the  author
    was aware that the appellant appeared to be involved in a larger  scale
    drugs operation but there was no further evidence of  that  before  her
    and nor was it an issue highlighted by the respondent.

24. At para 99 the FtJ referred to the conclusion that the appellant was at
    medium risk to the public in the community and medium risk  of  serious
    harm.  She referred to the factors that were identified as to the  risk
    of serious harm and she said that the  issue  of  finance  was  clearly
    related to the  risk  of  reoffending  at  it  was  believed  that  his
    motivation was financial.  She  concluded  that  that  was  probably  a
    correct assessment on the evidence available.  She found that there was
    no evidence before her to indicate that there was any risk arising from
    lifestyle and  associates  and  that  it  was  difficult  therefore  to
    quantify that matter.  She further  summarised  aspects  of  the  OASys
    reports and then returned to the report of Ms Davies.

25. The FtJ referred to the issue of rehabilitation and cited the  case  of
    MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC) and made  an
    assessment of the question of rehabilitation.  She stated that the more
    serious the risk of offending  and  the  offences  that  a  person  may
    commit, the greater the right to interfere with the right of residence.
     No complaint is made about that aspect of her decision.

26. At para 103 the FtJ said that the appellant had established that he had
    acquired a permanent right of residence, that the offence was committed
    or completed in December 2012 when he was aged  22,  and  that  he  was
    therefore a young adult at the time.

27. She referred to there having been no breach of bail conditions  or  any
    reoffending.  The FtJ thus concluded that in all the circumstances  the
    appellant may be receptive to reform for the reasons that she gave.

28. She did, however, find that in  the  Netherlands,  where  he  would  be
    subject to some degree of isolation, the prospects  for  rehabilitation
    were likely to be less than in the UK.

29. Drawing the threads of her analysis together at paras 104 and  105  the
    FtJ reminded herself again that the fact of a criminal  conviction  was
    not enough to establish a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat.

30. She concluded that on the evidence there was not "a present threat"  as
    the appellant had not been involved in further offending  between  2012
    and 2015 or in 2017 and 2018.  She said that the OASys  report  and  Ms
    Davies' report that the appellant is of medium risk to the  public  had
    to be considered within the methodology, as Miss Davies had said.  That
    is to say, referring to the risk as set out in the  OASys  report,  the
    FtJ found that Ms Davies' comments had some weight.

31. The FtJ referred to the passage of time, the fact that the offence  was
    committed at the age of 22 and that the appellant was now aged 28.  She
    found that if there had been any peer pressure on him at the time, this
    had not been evidenced before her and  in  any  event,  there  was  the
    possibility that he had now grown away from any adverse influence given
    that he had been living in the Netherlands and had now matured.

32. The appellant had been separated from his family  since  2017  and  was
    well aware of  the  consequences  of  offending  which  would  lead  to
    deportation, the FtJ said.  She concluded that that factor alone  would
    assist the appellant in "reforming".

33. She referred to her earlier conclusion  that  the  respondent  had  not
    established that the  appellant  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat. There was a slip of the pen  at  para  105
    where it states that the appellant had established that fact,  but  her
    conclusions are clear.

34. She found that the appellant had resided in the  UK  for  a  continuous
    period of at least 10 years prior to the  relevant  decision  and  that
    removal may only therefore be taken on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security.  The FtJ concluded that the concept of imperative grounds pre-
    supposes not only the existence of a threat to public  security,  which
    she repeated she had found not to be established, but also that such  a
    threat is of a particularly high degree of  seriousness.   She  further
    said at para 105 as follows:

         "I accept that if it has been established that the appellant is  at
         risk of further offending,  that  this  would  reach  the  standard
         required by way of imperative grounds but I  have  not  found  that
         such a risk exists."

     Assessment

35. The respondent's grounds can  be  summarised  relatively  shortly.   We
    referred earlier to the  respondent's  contention  that  there  was  no
    concession, so to speak, made on behalf of the respondent to the effect
    that the appellant was entitled to the highest level of  protection  of
    imperative grounds.  We also referred to a minute from  the  Presenting
    Officer.  The minute, as was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    before  us  by  Mr  Walker,  is  not  entirely  clear  on  the   point.
    Nevertheless, it seems to us that the matter in issue before the FtJ so
    far as the Presenting Officer was concerned was the extent to which the
    documentary evidence established  firstly,  the  period  of  10  years'
    residence but secondly and more importantly, the extent of the exercise
    of Treaty rights by the appellant's father.  Once  those  matters  were
    established to the satisfaction of  the  Presenting  Officer  and  more
    importantly to the satisfaction of the FtJ, it is clear that the  issue
    of imperative grounds was not argued on behalf of the  respondent.   To
    all intents and purposes the matter  was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.

36. The grounds contend that the FtJ did  not  accept  that  the  appellant
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  because
    there had been no further offending in the periods  to  which  we  have
    referred. However, as is clear from her decision, that was not the only
    basis upon which the FtJ made her assessment.  Crucially, she took into
    account the independent report by Ms Davies, quite apart from the  fact
    of the passage of time and the lack of further offending.

37. The FtJ did, contrary to what is asserted in the grounds, make  a  full
    assessment of the contents of the OASys reports and in  coming  to  her
    conclusions she was entitled to make the findings that  she  did  about
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.

38. The grounds contend that imperative grounds of public security did  not
    only equate to national security but also applied where there  is  some
    risk or danger to the security  or  well-being  of  the  nation.   That
    proposition, it seems to us, is uncontentious.  However,  the  fact  is
    that the FtJ concluded that imperative grounds' protection were in play
    here. But even if there were not, as is clear from the final  paragraph
    of the FTJ's decision, which we have quoted, she would have come to the
    same conclusion in any event because she was not satisfied  that  there
    was a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
    the fundamental interests of society.  In other words,  the  FtJ  found
    that the risk of reoffending was not present such  as  to  justify  the
    appellant's deportation.

39. The grounds further argue that the FtJ did  not  undertake  a  holistic
    appraisal of the evidence and that the appellant had clearly  exhibited
    behaviour which resulted in the finding in the OASys report  of  medium
    risk to the public and medium risk of serious harm generally.  However,
    the factors involved in that assessment: finance, lifestyle, associates
    and thinking behaviour, are all matters that the FtJ considered.

40. We do not accept the contention that there was a failure to undertake a
    holistic assessment of the evidence.  That  contention  is  simply  not
    borne out.

41. It is argued that the FtJ failed to take into account  the  appellant's
    failure to accept responsibility for his actions and lack of remorse, a
    matter to which we alluded earlier.  On that, it is  evident  from  our
    summary of the FtJ's decision that those matters were  expressly  taken
    into account.

42. The grounds at para 11 state as follows:

         "Put simply, the appellant poses a significant risk to  society  at
         large and in light of his conviction for dealing in drugs  as  part
         of an organised network in which he  took  a  significant,  if  not
         leading role, the Tribunal's rationale  for  concluding  imperative
         grounds are not made out is inadequate to the extent it amounts  to
         a material misdirection in law."

43. That paragraph, in fact, betrays  the  essence  of  the  grounds  which
    amount to nothing other than a disagreement with  the  FtJ's  decision.
    Having summarised the FtJ's  decision  and  appraised  the  grounds  of
    appeal, we are not satisfied that the grounds establish that  there  is
    any error of law in the decision in any respect. Accordingly, the FtJ's
    decision must stand.

    Decision

44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. Its decision to allow the appeal  therefore
    stands.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            18/07/19





