
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00610/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th June 2017                     |On 30th June 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                        Sebastian Lukasz Straszewski
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Bobb, Aylish Alexander Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Poland born on 15th  November  1980.   He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  L  K  Gibbs,
    dated 27th March 2017, dismissing his appeal against deportation  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.



2.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the grounds that  the
    judge misdirected herself in applying the 2016 Regulations  instead  of
    the 2006 Regulations and in failing to apply enhanced protection  under
    Regulation 21(4)(a) of the 2006 Regulations. Further, the  judge  erred
    in law in  her  assessment  of  whether  the  Appellant  represented  a
    'genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat'  and   in   her
    assessment  of  proportionality  in   relation   to   the   Appellant's
    integrating links and prospects of rehabilitation.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  on
    5th May 2017 on the grounds that it was arguable the Tribunal may  have
    erred in applying the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, in particular
    Schedule 1. It was arguable that paragraph 3 of Schedule 4  applied  to
    this appeal and consequently the  2006  Regulations  as  amended  still
    applied. Judge Ford found there was no arguable error in the Tribunal's
    finding that the Appellant had  not  completed  ten  years'  continuous
    residence in  the  UK  whether  cumulatively  or  prior  to  his  first
    incarceration as an adult on the basis  of  integration  or  otherwise.
    Permission was granted only on ground 1.

4.   In the Rule 24 response the Respondent stated: "The Appellant has  been
    granted permission to appeal purely on the basis that the FTIJ  was  in
    error for determining the Appellant's appeal under the 2016 Regulations
    and not the 2006 Regulations.  It  is  accepted  that  paragraph  3  of
    Schedule 4 as amended  by  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    (Amendment) Regulations 2017 requires that the 2006  Regulations  apply
    to an appeal pending on 31/7/17. It is however submitted, in  light  of
    permission to appeal being refused under grounds 2, 3 and 4,  that  the
    Appellant's complaint is not material.  The  Appellant  has  failed  to
    particularise how the error has rendered the decision unsafe."

5.   In a letter dated 7th June 2007 the  Appellant's  solicitors  submitted
    that all the grounds in his application for  permission  were  properly
    arguable and he should be permitted to  rely  on  them  at  the  appeal
    hearing because the points  were  Robinson  obvious.   Judge  Ford  had
    wrongly stated that the Appellant entered the UK in 2007 when  in  fact
    he entered in 1998. This error affected the assessment of the level  of
    protection and proportionality.


Submissions

6.   Mr Bobb submitted that permission should  be  granted  on  all  grounds
    because the Appellant had ten years' continuous residence and therefore
    was entitled to enhanced protection. He submitted that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in applying Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations because she
    had taken into account a number of minor  offences  for  possession  of
    class B and class A drugs. These were not offences which could be  said
    to harm the fundamental interests of society. The matters  referred  to
    in Schedule 1 and mentioned in Article  83(1)  of  the  Treaty  on  the
    Functioning of the European  Union  were  far  more  serious  than  the
    Appellant's previous  convictions.  The  judge  was  looking  at  minor
    offences and under the 2006 Regulations it was not  necessary  for  the
    judge to take these into account.

7.   The Appellant had only one offence for supplying  drugs  and  therefore
    it was unlikely to be repeated. The judge had erred in law in assessing
    the fundamental interests of society in  accordance  with  Schedule  1,
    which was not applicable. Had she applied  the  2006  Regulations,  the
    offences would not have reached  the  threshold  in  order  to  show  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.

8.   Additionally, the judge had  erred  in  law  at  paragraph  21  of  her
    decision in  finding  that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  ten  years'
    continuous residence. The judge stated that she was aware of the length
    of the sentences, but this may not  reflect  the  time  served  by  the
    Appellant. Mr Bobb submitted that this was obvious  from  the  skeleton
    argument  before  her.  The  Appellant  had  only  served  a  term   of
    imprisonment of  eight  months  and  therefore  her  finding  that  the
    imprisonment interrupted the continuity of residence was perverse.  The
    judge was correct to count backwards for a ten  year  period,  but  she
    also had to look at the Appellant's integration and she was entitled to
    take into account his integration prior to the period of imprisonment.

9.   Mr Bobb  submitted  that  the  judge  misdirected  herself  in  law  at
    paragraph 21 and her finding was not open to her on the evidence before
    her. Judge Ford was incorrect in refusing  permission  on  this  ground
    because he had misunderstood the Appellant's length of residence in the
    UK. On the basis that there  was  an  error  in  assessing  ten  years'
    continuous residence, then the further grounds of appeal were made out,
    namely that the Appellant was entitled to enhanced protection under the
    2006 Regulations and his criminal behaviour did not reach the threshold
    of imperative public policy grounds.

10.  Mr Duffy submitted that in applying Schedule 1 the judge had  not  made
    a material error of law. The judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    threat to the fundamental interests of society. His last conviction was
    recent, 28th September 2016, and his history of offences dated back  to
    2001. On the particular facts of this case it would have been  perverse
    for the judge to find that the Appellant was not a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat to one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.  He had been involved  in  illegal  drug  use  and  was  still
    committing crimes to date.  The situation would have been  exactly  the
    same had the judge applied the 2006 Regulations instead.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing took  place  five  months  after
    the Appellant's last conviction and the judge was entitled to take into
    account the continuing use of cannabis. She gave adequate  reasons  for
    finding as she did. This case turns on the threshold to be applied.  Mr
    Duffy submitted that, if the Appellant cannot enlarge his  grounds  and
    rely on an enhanced threshold, then the appeal is doomed to fail.

12.  In relation to paragraph 21 of the decision, Mr Duffy accepted that  in
    assessing continuity of residence the judge could look  at  integration
    prior to the conviction.  However, the Appellant  had  been  committing
    crimes for a considerable amount of time and was not integrated. On any
    reading of these facts, the  Appellant  could  not  show  that  he  was
    entitled to the higher threshold of protection. In fact, there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant even met the serious grounds  test  because
    he did not have five years' permanent residence.

13.  Integration must be undermined by the Appellant's  offending  behaviour
    and the lack of evidence that he was exercising treaty rights. Mr Duffy
    submitted that the error in applying the incorrect Regulations was  not
    material. The Appellant cannot show that he is integrated.

14.  Mr Duffy submitted that, having been refused permission by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on grounds 2, 3 and 4, the Appellant should have appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal in order to obtain permission  on  those  grounds
    and it was not sufficient to  appear  at  the  hearing  and  seek  that
    permission. However, he acknowledged that it might be better  to  waive
    any refusal of permission and deal with all the grounds put forward  by
    the Appellant. The first ground was not material and there was no error
    on ground 2. Grounds 3 and 4 were merely disagreements.

15.  In response, Mr Bobb  submitted  that  there  was  no  authority  which
    stated that the Appellant would have to show that he  was  entitled  to
    the first enhanced level of protection before he was  entitled  to  the
    highest level of protection. The Appellant did not have to show he  had
    permanent residence (serious grounds of public policy) before he  could
    show that he had ten years' continuous residence (imperative grounds of
    public policy).

16.  In relation to integration, the Appellant's  length  of  residence  was
    particularly relevant and this was set out in the Directive. The length
    of residence was relevant irrespective of  whether  the  Appellant  was
    working. Although it was accepted in the  skeleton  argument  that  the
    Appellant did not have a permanent right of residence, this was because
    there was  insufficient  documentary  evidence  to  show  that  he  was
    exercising Treaty rights.  However,  the  Appellant  had  been  working
    continuously for five years and the sentencing judge  had  referred  to
    his work history in  his  judgment.   There  was  nothing  in  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 to show that the Appellant had  to  have  a  permanent
    right of residence to be entitled to enhanced protection.

17.  Mr Bobb accepted that  he  did  have  to  show  ten  years'  continuous
    residence to  be  entitled  to  the  highest  form  of  protection  and
    submitted that paragraph 21 was perverse because on the facts  of  this
    particular case the Appellant was entitled to enhanced protection.

18.  Mr Bobb submitted that the last conviction for supply  of  amphetamine,
    a class B drug, did not reach the level of seriousness required to show
    that  the  Appellant's  conduct  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society. The judge referred to the index offence, but found that the
    Appellant was a threat to one of the fundamental interests  of  society
    because of his continued use of cannabis. The offences  for  possession
    of cannabis for personal use did not reach  the  lower  threshold,  and
    certainly did not  reach  the  higher  threshold.  The  judge  was  not
    required to look at the index offence in isolation, but she had put too
    much weight on the nature of the Appellant's offending  over  the  last
    ten years. The vast bulk of the offences  were  for  personal  use  and
    therefore this did not affect  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society. Mr Bobb submitted that    possession of a  class  B  drug  for
    personal use did not harm society. The offences in  Article  83(1)  are
    very serious; trafficking in arms and people, and  cross  border  drugs
    trading. These offences were far more serious than the personal use  of
    cannabis.  The Appellant was not a dealer in drugs;  he  was  supplying
    amphetamine to his partner. This did  not  reach  the  threshold  of  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.


Discussion and Conclusions

19.  I find that the judge misdirected herself in applying  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016 instead of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006. The Respondent in the Rules 24 response  properly  conceded  this
    point. The 2006 Regulations apply to appeals  pending  on  1st  January
    2017 and therefore the judge was incorrect to rely on Schedule 1 of the
    EEA Regulations 2016. Whether this  is  a  material  error  depends  on
    whether the Appellant's further grounds are made out.

20.  The Appellant did not apply to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal on grounds 2, 3  and  4  after  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    refused permission. The application was made to me at the hearing  and,
    whilst it is out of time, in the interests of the overriding objective,
    I grant permission to appeal  on  grounds  2,  3  and  4  so  that  the
    Appellant's appeal can be dealt with at one hearing.

21.  The first point to deal with is ground 2.  Mr  Bobb  submits  that  the
    Appellant has established  ten  years'  continuous  residence  and  the
    judge's finding at paragraph 21 is perverse. I am not persuaded by this
    submission. For the following reasons.

22.  The Appellant was convicted of burglary of a dwelling and sentenced  to
    30 months imprisonment on 21st September  2006.  He  was  convicted  of
    possession with intent to  supply  amphetamine  and  cannabis  on  28th
    September 2016 and sentenced  to  12  months  imprisonment.  The  judge
    concluded that since the Appellant had served a custodial  term  within
    the last ten years, this interrupted continuity of  residence  and  the
    Appellant was  not  entitled  to  enhanced  protection.  Continuity  of
    residence is broken  when  a  person  serves  a  term  of  imprisonment
    (Onuekwere [2014] EUECJ C378/12). Mr Bobb accepted that  the  Appellant
    had served a term of imprisonment of eight months within the  ten  year
    period.


23.  The Appellant came to the UK in 1998 when he was 16 years old. He  soon
    became addicted to heroin and his  first  criminal  conviction  was  in
    1999. He was first imprisoned in 2001. The Appellant  has  17  criminal
    convictions for 29 offences  including  theft,  burglary  and  handling
    stolen goods. The Appellant has breached  community  orders  and  other
    alternatives to custodial sentences. It is clear from  the  Appellant's
    offending behaviour that  he  been  continually  involved  in  criminal
    activity, committing offences prior to  and  throughout  the  ten  year
    period. On the facts asserted by the Appellant, his  integrating  links
    are clearly weak.

24.  The judge properly directed herself following Warsame v  The  Secretary
    of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  16  and  she  was
    entitled to take into account the factors that she set out at paragraph
    21. Her findings were open to her on the evidence before her.

25.  Accordingly, the Appellant was not entitled to enhanced  protection  in
    the form of imperative grounds of public policy because he  has  failed
    to establish ten years' continuous residence. It  is  accepted  in  the
    skeleton argument that he did not have permanent residence  in  the  UK
    and therefore serious grounds of  public  policy  did  not  apply.  The
    threshold which was applicable was  that  of  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.

26.  Grounds 3 and 4 as set out in the grounds of  appeal  can  be  subsumed
    within ground 1. The submission that is made is  that  the  Appellant's
    offending behaviour was not so serious so as to reach the threshold  of
    a genuine, present and serious threat because the Appellant's offending
    behaviour did not harm one of the fundamental interests of  society  in
    that his drug use was largely personal.  The judge dealt with  this  at
    paragraphs 22 and 23.  She states:-

         "22. Schedule 1, Paragraph 7 sets  out  what  is  included  in  the
             concept 'fundamental interests of society'. I  find  that  the
             Appellant is a person who has committed numerous offences, the
             majority of which have occurred because of his drug addiction.
              Although I accept his evidence that he is no longer  addicted
             to heroin the fact  remains  that  his  evidence  is  that  he
             continues to use cannabis  on  a  daily  basis,  as  does  his
             partner.   Whilst  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Terry  are  to  be
             commended for their honesty their evidence is  nonetheless  an
             admission  that  they  continue  to  use  illegal  drugs,  the
             possession of  which  is  a  criminal  offence.  I  and  (sic)
             therefore satisfied that  the  Appellant's  past  and  present
             conduct is such that it is consistent with the definitions  at
             Paragraph 7(g) and (h) of Schedule 1.


         23.  I find that because of the Appellant's admission regarding his
             cannabis use  he  continues  to  represent  a  threat  to  the
             fundamental interests of society  and  that  on  release  this
             behaviour would continue, aided and abetted by Ms Terry who is
             herself a cannabis user.   In  assessing  whether  this  is  a
             sufficiently  serious  threat  I  remind   myself   that   the
             Appellant's most recent conviction arose because of possession
             of cannabis, and even if I accept his evidence that  the  only
             person who he intended to supply was Ms Terry the fact remains
             that the evidence before me is that he/they will  continue  to
             purchase cannabis which I consider represents  a  sufficiently
             serious threat to society."

27.  Whilst it is accepted that Schedule 1 does not apply and therefore  the
    judge erred in law in finding that the Appellant's  criminal  behaviour
    satisfied paragraph 7(g) and (h) of Schedule 1, I find that this  error
    was not material because the judge would have reached the same decision
    for the  same  reasons  had  she  applied  the  2006  Regulations.  The
    possession of drugs for personal use does affect one of the fundamental
    interests of society. The Appellant also had convictions for theft  and
    burglary. The judge found that Appellant's most recent conviction arose
    because of his possession of cannabis.

28.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  judge  considered  the  whole  of  the
    Appellant's criminal record and offending behaviour and she  took  into
    account his lifestyle and all the matters  which  are  referred  to  in
    Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations which are preserved in Regulation
    27 of the 2016 Regulations.

29.  The judge's decision complied with the  principle  of  proportionality.
    It was based exclusively on the conduct of the person concerned and not
    just his previous convictions and the judge also took into account  his
    integration into  the  UK  at  paragraphs  24  and  25.   She  assessed
    rehabilitation at paragraph 28  and  found  that  the  Appellant  still
    engages in illegal behaviour. On these facts it was open to  the  judge
    to conclude that the Appellant did represent  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.

30.  The judge's findings were open to her on the material before  her.  Her
    application of the 2016 Regulations was not a material error given  the
    facts on which the judge relied and set out at paragraphs 22 to 31. The
    decision would have been the  same  had  the  judge  applied  the  2006
    Regulations.

31.  I find there was no material error of law in the  decision  dated  27th
    March 2017 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30th June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30th June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

