
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00240/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2016                     |On 19 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  MR VITOR EMANUEL SEBASTIAO GOMES MIRANDA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr N Bramble, Home Office
                                   Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Miranda):    Ms C Mascord, Solicitor of Lawrence
                                   Lupin Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Cockrill  who  had  allowed  Mr  Miranda's  appeal
    against her decision to deport him.  For ease of  convenience  I  shall
    refer throughout this decision to Mr  Miranda,  who  was  the  original
    appellant, as "the claimant" and to the Secretary of State who was  the
    original respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Portugal who was born on 17 May  1988  and
    he arrived in this country in 1999 when he was  11  years  old.   Since
    then he has lived continuously in this country.  There  was  originally
    an issue as to whether or not there was a gap in his residence here but
    at the hearing before Judge  Cockrill  as  referred  to  above  it  was
    accepted by the judge, and the Secretary of State does not  any  longer
    dispute, that  the  claimant  had  been  in  this  country  effectively
    throughout the period since he arrived.

 3. On 5 September 2011 the claimant was convicted of  common  assault  and
    using threatening and abusive insulting words or behaviour with  intent
    to cause fear or  provocation  and  violence  at  the  City  of  London
    Magistrates' Court for which he was sentenced to  carry  out  community
    service,  that  is  an  unpaid  work  requirement  of  80  hours   with
    compensation and a fine.  Subsequently on 9  March  2012  the  claimant
    committed a very serious offence indeed  because  he  was  subsequently
    found guilty by a jury at St. Alban's Crown Court  of  grievous  bodily
    harm with intent for which in 2014 he was  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of four years.  Subsequent to his conviction the  claimant
    was notified  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  to  his  liability  to
    deportation and a deportation order was made.

 4. The claimant appealed against this  order  and  his  appeal  was  heard
    before  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Cockrill   sitting   at   Hendon
    Magistrates' Court on 4 November 2015.  In a decision promulgated on 17
    November 2015 Judge Cockrill allowed his appeal.

 5. Although as I have indicated there was an issue as to the continuity of
    the claimant's residence in this  country,  Judge  Cockrill  determined
    that he had in fact been resident since 1999 and had  accordingly  been
    present in this country as a European citizen for some  thirteen  years
    before the date of the index offence  and  some  fifteen  years  before
    being sentenced to imprisonment.   In  those  circumstances  the  judge
    concluded that in order for deportation to  be  lawful  it  had  to  be
    justified on "imperative" grounds of public security.  This is pursuant
    to Regulation 21(4) of the 2006 EEA Regulations which  seek  to  embody
    the relevant Directive  2004/38/EC,  the  applicable  Article  of  that
    Directive being Article 28(3)(a).  Judge Cockrill decided (at paragraph
    147) that the threshold which needed to be crossed before  there  could
    be said to be "imperative" grounds of public security  justifying  this
    claimant's deportation was  not  reached  because  "quite  simply  this
    offence is simply not serious enough".  He categorised the  offence  as
    being "indeed a drunken incident outside a nightclub at night, a person
    was injured by being punched and kicked and of course  there  could  be
    very serious consequences for  the  victim".   However,  having  regard
    (which he did at paragraph 148) to what the sentencing judge  had  said
    in respect of this offence, the judge "did make a  number  of  positive
    points" which included that "it was not premeditated.  It  appeared  to
    be isolated [and] the [claimant] had some recognition of  what  he  had
    done, although I can appreciate that he did not  fully  understand  the
    application of the principle of joint enterprise".

 6. The Secretary of State now appeals with leave against this decision  on
    the basis  that  the  judge  had  not  properly  considered  what  were
    "imperative" grounds affecting public security.  From  the  grounds  it
    appears to be the Secretary of State's case, as asserted at  ground  1,
    "that imperative grounds of public security is not limited  to  matters
    of national security" but that "it is a wide reaching concept" and that
    in this case "the [claimant's] conduct and extant risk is such that his
    deportation is justified on imperative grounds of public security".  It
    is said that the judge had made a material error of law by  not  having
    in mind the statement to the effect that imperative grounds  of  public
    security was not limited to  matters  of  national  security  contained
    within the judgment of the Court of Appeal in LG (Italy) v SSHD  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 190.

 7. Interestingly, there is no reference within the grounds to the judgment
    of the European Court in MG, handed down on 16 January  2014  in  which
    the judgment of the court is summarised as follows at the conclusion:

         "1.  On a proper construction  of  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive
             2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and  of  Council  of  29
             April 2004 on the right of citizens of  the  Union  and  their
             family members to move and reside freely within the  territory
             of the  Member  State...,  the  10-year  period  of  residence
             referred  to  in  that  provision  must,  in   principle,   be
             continuous and must be calculated by counting  back  from  the
             date of the decision ordering the  expulsion  of  the  persons
             concerned.

         2.   Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted  as
             meaning that  a  period  of  imprisonment  is,  in  principle,
             capable both of interrupting the continuity of the  period  of
             residence for the purposes of that provision and of  affecting
             the decision regarding the grant of  the  enhanced  protection
             provided for  thereunder,  even  where  the  person  concerned
             resided in the host Member State for the ten  years  prior  to
             imprisonment.  However, the fact that that person  resided  in
             the host Member State for the ten years prior to  imprisonment
             may be  taken  into  consideration  as  part  of  the  overall
             assessment  required  in  order  to  determine   whether   the
             integrating links previously forged with the host Member State
             have been broken."

 8. Accordingly, Judge Cockrill  arguably  should  have  started  from  the
    position that counting back because the claimant had  been  in  custody
    immediately prior to the decision being made, he  was  not  necessarily
    entitled to the highest protection, because counting back  he  did  not
    have ten years' continuous residence  in  this  country.   However,  he
    would then have had to consider whether the period of imprisonment  had
    been such as to break the integrating  links  which  the  claimant  had
    previously forged.

 9. This is however in my judgment academic in the  circumstances  of  this
    case and to the extent that the judge was in error in not starting from
    this basis.  It is not a material error for two reasons.  The first  is
    that it is not disputed on behalf of the Secretary of State before this
    Tribunal that the integrating links which this claimant had forged with
    this country had not  been  broken  but  secondly,  in  any  event,  at
    paragraph 160 of his decision Judge Cockrill found in  terms  that  his
    assessment  was  that  "the  claimant]  is  socially   and   culturally
    integrated here" because  "his  family  have  really  made  the  United
    Kingdom their home and that has been the position for  this  [claimant]
    as well".

10. Accordingly, the only issue which has to be determined is  whether  the
    judge made any arguable material error in his consideration of  whether
    or not there were imperative grounds justifying the deportation of  the
    claimant.

11. Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State merely asks the Tribunal
    today to have regard to what is in the grounds on which he relies.   In
    my judgment there is really no  basis  in  this  case  on  which  Judge
    Cockrill or any other judge could possibly have found other than  there
    are not imperative grounds justifying deportation.  I  should  note  in
    this regard that at paragraph 146 of his decision Judge  Cockrill  even
    went as far as to find that "even if I am wrong in that analysis as  to
    the appropriateness of the imperative threshold... that even if  it  is
    'serious' grounds that it is distinctly arguable  that  the  [claimant]
    should not be deported" so the judge clearly did not even  regard  this
    as a finely balanced case and neither do I.

12. The judge correctly stated that the offence was very serious  and  that
    but for the fact that this claimant was an EU national  he  would  most
    likely have been deported, because under the  Rules  there  would  have
    been no reason why he would not (see paragraph 169 of the decision) but
    as the judge rightly notes the case has to be decided on the  basis  of
    the Rules which apply and it simply cannot realistically be  argued  in
    this case, given the one serious conviction, albeit coupled with a much
    less serious offence which did not result in his imprisonment, that the
    risk to the public is sufficiently high as to  justify  deportation  on
    imperative grounds.

13. Accordingly it follows that there being no material  error  of  law  in
    Judge Cockrill's decision, this appeal by the Secretary of  State  must
    be dismissed and I will so find.

Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill, allowing the claimant's  appeal  against
the Secretary of State's decision to deport him, is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 18 August 2016
