
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/ 00912/ 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Victoria Law Courts, Birmingham  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 December 2013                       |On 01 December 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S J
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dixon, Counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  respondent
    (hereinafter "the claimant"). Breach of this order can be punished as a
    contempt of court. I make this order  because  the  claimant  has  been
    identified as a victim of trafficking. If she was identified  and  then
    removed she might be retrafficked.

 2. The claimant is a French  national  who  was  born  in  1975.   She  is
    therefore now 39 years old. She appealed successfully to the First-tier
    Tribunal a decision of the appellant,  hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of
    State", to make her the subject of a deportation order.  The  Secretary
    of State was satisfied that  the  claimant's  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom "would pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    to the interests of public policy" if she were allowed to remain in the
    United Kingdom and that the deportation was justified under  Regulation
    21 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. It is quite clear  that  the  claimant  has  an  unimpressive  criminal
    record.

 4. On 15 October 2010 she was sent to prison for  fifteen  months  for  an
    offence of attempted robbery. She has been in trouble since then.  When
    she was on bail from immigration detention she committed an offence  of
    theft for which she was sent to prison on 9 February 2012.

 5. The reasons for deportation were given in a letter dated 15  May  2013.
    They set out the Secretary of State's reasons for her decision and  are
    instructive. The Secretary of State noted that the claimant  said  that
    she arrived in the United Kingdom sometime in 2007 or 2008 from France.
     She had no close family ties to the United Kingdom.  She was estranged
    from her husband and three children who she understood were  living  in
    France.

 6. Whilst the claimant had undoubtedly been in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    considerable period of time the Secretary of State  was  not  satisfied
    that she had a continuous period of five years' residence in accordance
    with the Regulations.  The Secretary of State  noted,  correctly,  that
    time spent in prison did not count.

 7. The Secretary of State decided  that  the  claimant's  deportation  was
    warranted on  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public  security.   The
    Secretary of State clearly had regard to Regulation 21(5) of  the  2006
    Regulations  and  addressed  herself  particularly  to  the  need   for
    proportionality, for the  decision  to  be  based  exclusively  on  the
    personal conduct of the person concerned, that  that  person's  conduct
    must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society,  that  matters
    isolated  from  the  particulars  of  the  case  or  which  relate   to
    considerations of general prevention do not justify  the  decision  and
    the decision could not  be  justified  by  reason  of  the  convictions
    themselves.

 8. The offence that provoked the decision was described  as  an  attempted
    theft of a woman's handbag whilst the victim was shopping.

 9. There was a NOMS1 assessment where the claimant was  found  to  pose  a
    "medium risk of harm to the public".

10. The claimant's motivation for offending was said to be connected with a
    need to raise money to pay for the care of her 11 year old daughter.

11. Although the offender manager in the NOMS  assessment  noted  that  the
    claimant had expressed remorse and had been able  to  demonstrate  some
    insight into the impact her actions had had  on  her  victim,  who  was
    described as elderly and vulnerable, the offender  manager  also  noted
    that the claimant had been in prison before and was  not  deterred  but
    rather placed "her needs above those of the victim and the law".

12. The sentencing judge, in his sentencing remarks, noted that the offence
    was committed a short time after the claimant had  been  released  from
    prison.

13. She did not even have the insight, for example, to have taken advantage
    of the "Enhanced  Thinking  Skills  (ETS)  programme  which  was  often
    available to people in custody.

14. The Secretary of State concluded  that  the  claimant  had  "failed  to
    recognise the implications of your offence and would act  in  this  way
    again in the same circumstances."

15. At paragraph 47 of the letter the Secretary of State said:

         "All the available evidence indicates that you have  propensity  to
         reoffend and that you represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
         serious threat to the public to justify your deportation."

16. The Secretary of State then found deportation to be  proportionate  and
    found no reasons on Article 8 grounds to refrain from making the order.

17. Against this background, and with respect to the experienced First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who, I think, was sitting with a non-legal  member,  the
    claimant's prospects of succeeding in her appeal did  not  seem  to  be
    very high. Nevertheless, the appeal  was  allowed  and  I  have  looked
    carefully at the determination to understand the reasons.

18. The First-tier Tribunal decided, uncontroversially, that the claimant's
    stay in the United Kingdom had not been an exercise  of  treaty  rights
    for more than perhaps a short  period  of  time  and  although  an  EEA
    national she  qualified  for  only  the  "basic  level  of  protection"
    (paragraph 44).

19. At paragraph 55 of  the  determination  the  Tribunal  reminded  itself
    expressly that the protection of the public  is  an  aspect  of  public
    policy and recognised that the claimant had been assessed as  facing  a
    high risk of reoffending.  The Tribunal accepted that this  did  indeed
    suggest a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  public
    policy.  In short, the Tribunal completely understood and  agreed  with
    the Secretary of State's decision when she made it.

20. The Tribunal had to deal with the  evidence  that  was  before  it  and
    things had changed.  In particular the claimant had for the first  time
    opened  up  about  her  appalling  personal  history.   She  had   been
    introduced to the Poppy Project which is a  respected  and  specialised
    organisation with expertise in dealing with the victims of trafficking.

21. The Tribunal said at paragraph 51:

         "We accept given the findings of the Poppy Project report that  the
         [claimant] has been a victim herself in that  she  was  trafficked,
         forced into crime and abused over a prolonged period.  She  is  now
         being supported by the Poppy Project and  other  sources  including
         Praxis and will be counselled.  Her conduct in prison has been good
         and she is an enhanced  prisoner.   A  prison  officer  provided  a
         letter in her support.  She has  undertaken  some  work  in  prison
         towards rehabilitation for example the  'Confident  Woman'  course.
         She is remorseful and has some  awareness  of  the  impact  on  her
         victims."

22. The Tribunal concluded that if the claimant was allowed  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom "there are reasonable prospects of rehabilitation."

23. The Tribunal allowed the appeal because it was satisfied that  removing
    her at that stage in her life was a disproportionate act.

24. The Tribunal was aware that things  may  not  develop  as  planned  and
    observed that further trouble from the claimant would be likely to lead
    to her being deported.

25. The Tribunal recognised that it was the claimant's case that she  would
    be under intolerable pressure in the event of her return to France  but
    did not accept that there was any real risk to her Article 3 rights  in
    the event of living  there.   Although  inclined  to  accept  that  the
    claimant would come under attack by her family the  French  authorities
    could be expected to provide appropriate protection.

26. The real reason  the  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  is  that  it  was
    desperately sorry for a woman who for the first time in  her  life  had
    found a way to free herself from the bad influences that  were  causing
    her to go into crime. She was sorting out her  life  and  the  Tribunal
    decided that she needed another chance.

27.  The  matters  raised  in  the  Poppy  Project  report  are  summarised
    accurately in the determination but only very briefly. I  have  to  say
    that it was only when I read the report that I appreciated just what  a
    dreadful time this claimant had experienced and how the support of  the
    Poppy Project represented an enormous change.

28. The Poppy Project report accepted that the claimant had been trafficked
    within France as a child and then trafficked to the United  Kingdom  as
    an adult.  Her childhood was characterised by frequent  beatings.   She
    was made to marry when she was 13  or  14  years  old.   Her  husband's
    family taught her and required her to steal.

29. I have looked carefully at the grounds challenging the decision.

30. Ground 2 complains that the Tribunal made no clear finding of  fact  of
    the risk posed by the claimant at the date of the  hearing.   According
    to the ground the Tribunal, by saying there were  reasonable  prospects
    of rehabilitation, considered that at the date of the hearing there had
    not been rehabilitation "and therefore remained  at  risk".  I  do  not
    accept the logic of that at all.  I do not accept that a person who  is
    not yet rehabilitated is  necessarily  and  in  all  cases  a  risk  to
    society.  The process of rehabilitation is an ongoing  process.   Maybe
    it is not something that ever reaches a complete conclusion.

31. It would have been helpful if the Tribunal had said in  terms  that  it
    did not find that  the  claimant  now  presented  a  risk  to  society.
    However I cannot make any sense of paragraph 55 without  assuming  that
    that is what the Tribunal meant.  I set out below paragraph 55:

         "The protection of the public is an aspect of public  policy.   The
         assessment of a  high  risk  of  reoffending  suggests  a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat to public  policy  but  the
         assessment was made eighteen months ago, the [claimant]  has  since
         sought help, is eligible for the support and  counselling  provided
         by the Poppy Project and notwithstanding  the  previous  persistent
         offending, at least in part under duress  from  family  members  we
         find there are reasonable prospects of rehabilitation."

32. This must mean that the lapse of eighteen months and the  contact  with
    the Poppy Project had changed things so that  the  no  doubt  perfectly
    sensible finding of the NOMS report no longer carried weight.

33. I am reinforced in this view by the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  the
    evidence from the prison  officer  reviewed  at  paragraph  26  of  the
    determination where the claimant was said  to  be  desperate  for  "the
    chance of a fresh start and a safe place with appropriate support".

34. The Tribunal did not accept that the claimant was a  threat  to  public
    policy when it made its decision and so did not fail to heed the advice
    in  Essa  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home   Department   (EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration) Netherlands [2013] UKUT 316 (IAC).  Neither
    did the Tribunal fail to follow the decision  in  Vasconcelos  (risk  -
    rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378 (IAC).  There the Tribunal was  quick
    to emphasise that the NOMS report is not determinative.  In  that  case
    the Tribunal found that the NOMS report gave  too  glowing  a  picture.
    Here the Tribunal has found that the  NOMS  report  gave  too  bleak  a
    picture.

35. Grounds 1 and 4 are linked.  Ground 4 complains that the  Tribunal  had
    no jurisdiction to determine whether the claimant had  been  trafficked
    and ground 1 complains it was  procedurally  unfair  not  to  give  the
    Secretary of State an opportunity  of  considering  the  Poppy  Project
    report.

36. Although Mr Smart was as helpful as ever I did not follow the  argument
    in the hearing room and I have not been able to understand it  properly
    since.  Perhaps the deficiency is mine.  Clearly the Secretary of State
    wants to decide if a person has been  trafficked  because  if,  in  her
    opinion, a person has been trafficked there may  be  a  requirement  in
    international Conventions to treat the  person  in  a  particular  way.
    That is a matter for the Secretary of State.   There  is  no  right  of
    appeal to the Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision that a
    person  has  not  been  trafficked  for  such  a  decision  is  not  an
    "immigration decision". However a person is  not  barred  from  arguing
    that she has been trafficked because the Secretary of State  disagrees.
    Here there was a reasoned decision by the Secretary of State  that  the
    claimant had not been trafficked but a  flood  of  additional  evidence
    provided at the last minute to say that she had.  The evidence was from
    a respected source and fully reasoned.  The First-tier Tribunal decided
    as a matter of fact that the claimant had been trafficked because  that
    is what she said and, much more importantly, because the Poppy  Project
    report supported  her  case.  Without  trespassing  on  the  Tribunal's
    function that report gave full reasons for believing the  claimant  and
    these included referenced to parts of the account and behaviour by  the
    claimant which were wholly typical of  a  victim  of  trafficking.  The
    claimant would be unlikely to have known that and this,  no  doubt,  is
    something that the Tribunal took into account when deciding, as it  has
    to do, if the claimant was telling the truth.

37. I do not see what an adjournment would have achieved.  The Secretary of
    State could decide for herself if she was satisfied that  the  claimant
    had been trafficked and if she was satisfied that the claimant had been
    trafficked it was open to her to take a  certain  course  whatever  the
    Tribunal said.  If the Secretary  of  State  did  not  agree  that  the
    claimant had been trafficked (and, indeed if  the  Secretary  of  State
    agreed that the claimant had been trafficked) the Tribunal  would  have
    to decide if it accepted the evidence.  Realistically  it  is  hard  to
    think that anything could have been done differently except a delay  if
    there had been an adjournment.

38. If the Secretary of State was keen to reconsider  the  case  she  could
    have withdrawn the decision. The "competent authority" is not prevented
    from making a decision by reason of the Tribunal's findings.

39. Mr Smart argued the case close to the grounds but said, rightly, that a
    finding on future reoffending was fundamental to the decision but there
    was no such finding.  I have explained that above.  I am satisfied that
    if the determination is read properly in context the necessary  finding
    should be implied.

40.  There  is  a  proper  reply  under  Rule  24   from   the   claimant's
    representatives.  I do not mean to criticise  it  by  saying  it  makes
    obvious points.  They are points worth making.

41. I was reminded in argument that I cannot interfere  with  the  decision
    unless I am satisfied it is wrong in law.  The grounds  make  it  clear
    that it is the claimant's case that the  decision  was  right  in  law.
    There were matters supporting the conclusion other than the  one  given
    by  the  NOMS  report  about  future  risk  of  reoffending.   A  clear
    implication, although not the expressed finding,  was  that  there  had
    been a change and there was no longer a great risk.

42. With hindsight the determination could have been done better  but  that
    can be said about most determinations.  I am satisfied that it was done
    well enough.  The essential point here is that the judge  decided  that
    the claimant's circumstances had changed because, for the first  times,
    she had faced up to her past and knew someone wanted to help her.   She
    did not present a risk to the public or at least not one that  made  it
    necessary for her to be removed, in fact removing her now when she  was
    starting to sort out her life would be disproportionate.

43. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is kindly and, I  emphasise,  one  I
    understood  rather  better  when  I  read  the  Poppy  Project   report
    carefully.  I do not accept that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
    and I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 November 2014               |

