
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00449/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2016                              |On 3 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                          MR DOMINIC CHARLES KOCHER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Leskin, Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  who  dismissed  his  appeal   under
    Regulation 26 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 against the respondent's decision to deport him  to  France.   The
    appellant is a citizen of France born on 8 February 1979.  His wife  is
    a French citizen.  They have three children.   His  wife  and  children
    reside in the UK.

2.   On 10 March 2014 the appellant was convicted at Chester Crown Court  of
    murder.   He  was  sentenced  to  life  imprisonment  with  a   minimum
    recommendation of 23 years to be served in prison.

3.   The respondent issued a deportation order pursuant to Regulation 19  of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations on 16 September 2015.  The respondent seeks to
    deport the appellant so far in advance of his anticipated release  date
    so that he can be transferred to a French prison.  The  appellant  also
    has German citizenship.

4.   The appellant and his family came to the  UK  in  2006.   In  2009  the
    appellant and accomplices bludgeoned to death Christophe Borgye, a near
    neighbour and acquaintance, in his  own  home.   The  murder  was  pre-
    planned by the appellant who bought  weapons  in  advance  as  well  as
    bricks and cement with which to build a tomb in which the victim's body
    was hidden.  The appellant deceived police, friends and the  family  of
    the victim by saying that the victim had moved to China.  He maintained
    the deception for over four years.  The crime was only revealed when an
    accomplice confessed.  The  appellant  pleaded  not  guilty  and  still
    denies his guilt.  He is a trusted prisoner and receives privileges  as
    a result.  He wishes to serve his sentence in a UK prison so  that  his
    wife and children can visit him as they intend to remain in the UK.

5.   The judge stated that the respondent must satisfy her that  a  transfer
    to a  French  prison  would  enhance  the  possibility  of  the  social
    rehabilitation of the appellant.  It is for the  appellant  to  satisfy
    her that his circumstances are such that he should not be deported from
    the UK.

6.   The judge made the following findings

         "19. However it is  usual  for  deportation  orders  to  be  signed
             towards  the  end  of  a  sentence  of  imprisonment,  as  the
             jurisprudence recognises.  This is  because  the  issues  that
             might militate against deportation may well be very  different
             in 23 years time from today.  However deportation is  possible
             under the Council Framework  Decision  Principle  9  where  it
             would lead to a transfer to a French prison and  would  'serve
             the purpose of facilitating the social rehabilitation  of  the
             sentenced person'.  This is the main issue for me to decide.


         20.  I am satisfied that transfer to a French  prison  would  serve
             that purpose for the following reasons:


             -    The Appellant is a French citizen who has spent  most  of
                  his life in France.  I find that he is bound  to  be  more
                  familiar and comfortable in his home country where  he  is
                  familiar  with  the  culture  and  surrounded  by   fellow
                  citizens;


             -    As a foreign criminal in the UK the Appellant might  well
                  be subjected to racial abuse from other prisoners; this is
                  likely to hamper rehabilitation;


             -    In a French prison the Appellant would  be  living  in  a
                  situation where his first language is  the  main  language
                  spoken.  This  is  likely  to  improve  his  prospects  of
                  rehabilitation;


             -    The Appellant's mother lives in  France  and  could  more
                  easily visit him there;


             -    In the Appellant's own letter  dated  29  September  2015
                  (Respondent Bundle 2) he stated that  he  and  his  family
                  intended to leave the UK upon his release from prison.  It
                  is therefore likely that France in any event, transfer  of
                  the Appellant would simply bring that relocation forward a
                  little.  His family would therefore be in  a  position  to
                  visit him in France as they do in the UK.


         21.  I am not at all persuaded by Mr Leskin's argument that as  the
             Appellant denies his guilt he is not going to be rehabilitated
             in any event.   Mr  Justice  MacDuff  described  the  evidence
             against the Appellant as overwhelming.  Given the  Appellant's
             propensity for manipulation of others I am satisfied that when
             his attempts to appeal his conviction fail  he  will  probably
             resign himself to his sentence and make some  belated  efforts
             to rehabilitate.


         22.  I am not satisfied that the health problems of  the  Appellant
             are sufficient  to  make  the  deportation  of  the  Appellant
             disproportionate.  He is not close to death.  He suffers  from
             common conditions that he will certainly be treated for  in  a
             French prison.  He lived in France with  conditions  for  many
             years without coming to serious harm".


7.   Permission was granted on grounds which  argued  that  the  only  valid
    reason for the appellant to be deported would be if that  would  assist
    his rehabilitation and that as he still has twenty years of the minimum
    sentence to remain there is nothing to indicate that that would be  the
    case.

8.   Mr Leskin relied on paragraphs 52  to  54  of  Dumliauskas  and  Others
    [2015] EWCA Civ 145 where the Court of Appeal accepted on the authority
    of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Daha Essa that the  Secretary
    of State, and  therefore  the  Tribunal,  must  consider  the  relative
    prospects of rehabilitation, in the sense of ceasing to  commit  crime,
    when considering whether an  offender  should  be  deported.   However,
    different considerations apply to questions of evidence and the  weight
    to be given to the prospects of rehabilitation.  As to evidence,  as  a
    matter of practicality, it is easier for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    obtain evidence as to support services in other member states.  In  the
    absence of evidence, it is not to be assumed that medical services  and
    support for, by way of example, reforming drug addicts, are  materially
    different in other member states from those available here.  The  Court
    of Appeal went on to say that the whole  point  of  deportation  is  to
    remove from this country someone whose offending renders him a risk  to
    the public.  The Directive recognises that the more serious the risk of
    reoffending, and the offences that he may commit, the greater the right
    to interference with the right  of  residence.   In  other  words,  the
    greater the risk of reoffending, the greater the right to deport.

9.   Mr Leskin also relied on the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MC
    (Essa principles recast) Portugal  [2015]  UKUT  520  (IAC),  paragraph
    29(e), where the Upper Tribunal in  explaining  Dumliauskas  held  that
    "reference to prospects of rehabilitation concerns reasonable prospects
    of a person ceasing to commit crime (Essa [2013] at [35]), not the mere
    possibility of rehabilitation".

10.  Mr Leskin submitted that in this case the respondent  has  to  show  in
    the circumstances that the appellant would be  better  off  in  France;
    that  his  removal  to  France  would   facilitate   or   enhance   his
    rehabilitation.  The Secretary  of  State  needs  to  put  forward  the
    conditions in a French prison which will enhance the appellant.

11.  Mr Leskin submitted that the  judge's  findings  at  paragraph  20  are
    speculative.   It  is  the  prison  culture  that  the  appellant  will
    experience.  He has lived in the UK for ten years.   He  writes  fluent
    English and there is no suggestion that he  cannot  speak  it.   As  to
    racial abuse, there is no suggestion that  he  is  suffering  adversely
    because he is French.  There are letters from prison officers  to  show
    that he is a good prisoner.  The fact that his mother is in France does
    not outweigh the presence of his wife and children in the UK who  visit
    him regularly here.

12.  Mr Leskin  submitted  that  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  the
    respondent at paragraph 36 said that having regard to all the available
    information, it is concluded  that  deportation  to  France  would  not
    prejudice the prospects of  the  appellant's  rehabilitation.   In  any
    event, it is considered that interference in his  rehabilitation  would
    be proportionate and justified when  balanced  against  the  continuing
    risk he poses to the public.  Mr Leskin submitted that this may be  the
    case but it is not the  same  as  meeting  the  test  of  enhancing  or
    facilitating his social rehabilitation.

13.  Mr Bramble submitted that there was  a  VIP  document  in  the  bundles
    submitted by the respondent  which  was  before  the  judge.   The  VIP
    document contained information about prisons in France.  It  refers  to
    the tasks of the prison administration in that  in  collaboration  with
    public partners and associations, the prison administration  implements
    integration services for inmates and for persons having  a  restriction
    on freedom: hosting, training,  employment  and  medical  care.   Under
    family relationship, it states that inmates can be  visited  by  family
    and friends in parlours.  There is a possibility to work for the prison
    itself, each prison has a library available to all inmates. There is  a
    probation and  integration  service  in  conjunction  with  the  prison
    directors,  the  cultural  organisations  of  towns  and  local  areas,
    programme activities like artistic workshops.  Prisoners have access to
    computer devices.  Mr Bramble submitted that the VIP sets out goals  in
    what is required in French prison.  Unfortunately the judge did not set
    out the submissions of the parties.

14.  Mr. Bramble submitted that under Principle 9 of the  Council  Framework
    Decision 2008/909/JHA, the enforcement of the sentence in the executing
    state should enhance the possibility of social  rehabilitation  of  the
    sentenced person.  Mr Bramble submitted  that  the  key  word  here  is
    "possibility" of social rehabilitation.  Principle 9 gives examples  of
    what should be taken into account, such as, the person's attachment  to
    the executing state, whether he  or  she  considers  it  the  place  of
    family, linguistic, cultural, social or economic and other links to the
    executing state.

15.  Mr Bramble submitted that the appellant was born  in  France  and  that
    was where he lived  for  a  number  of  years.   He  has  a  linguistic
    attachment to France.  In  the  light  of  the  evidence,  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 20 were open to her.  He further  submitted  that
    if the judge had taken into account the VIP document which clearly sets
    out what is available in a French prison,  her  conclusions  would  not
    have been any different.

16.  In reply Mr Leskin was very critical of the VIP document.  He said  the
    document contained  criticisms  of  the  services  provided  in  French
    prisons.  There was nothing in  it  to  outweigh  the  situation  in  a
    British  prison  or  facilitate  or  enhance  the  appellant's   social
    rehabilitation.

17.  I find on the evidence and following consideration of  the  submissions
    by the parties that the judge's decision discloses no error of law.

18.  It is rather unfortunate that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  VIP
    document which was before her.

19.  Article 3(1) of the Council Framework Decision states:

         "The purpose of this Framework Decision is to establish  the  rules
         under which a member state, with a view to facilitating the  social
         rehabilitation of the sentenced person, is to recognise a  judgment
         and enforce the sentence".


20.  Article 4(2) states:

         "The forwarding of the judgment and the certificate may take  place
         where  the  competent  authority  of  the   issuing   state   where
         appropriate after consultations between the  competent  authorities
         of the issuing and the executing  states,  is  satisfied  that  the
         enforcement of the sentence by the executing state would serve  the
         purpose of facilitating the social rehabilitation of the  sentenced
         person".


21.  Principle 9 which the judge relied on states:

         "Enforcement of the sentence in the executing state should  enhance
         the possibility of social rehabilitation of the  sentenced  person.
         In the context of satisfying itself that  the  enforcement  of  the
         sentence  by  the  executing  state  will  serve  the  purpose   of
         facilitating the social rehabilitation of the sentenced person, the
         competent authority of the issuing state should take  into  account
         such elements  as  for  example  the  person's  attachment  to  the
         executing state, whether he  or  she  considers  it  the  place  of
         family, linguistic, cultural, social or economic and other links to
         the executing state".

 22. Having cited the relevant principle  and  articles,  I  agree  with  Mr
    Bramble that the key word is "possibility" of social rehabilitation  of
    the sentenced person.  It is in satisfying itself that the  enforcement
    of the sentence by the  executing  state  will  serve  the  purpose  of
    facilitating the social rehabilitation of  the  sentenced  person  that
    examples are given as to what evidence should be taken into account.

23.  In Dumliauskas the Court of Appeal  in  looking  at  what  evidence  is
    required  and  the  weight  to  be  attached  to   the   prospects   of
    rehabilitation said that it is easier for the  Secretary  of  State  to
    obtain evidence as to support services in other member states.  In this
    case the Secretary of State submitted the VIP document which  contained
    within it evidence of the support services available in French prisons.
     Unfortunately, the judge did not consider this document, which  in  my
    opinion, would have greatly assisted her in reaching  her  conclusions.
    In any event, I find that on the evidence  that  was  before  her,  the
    judge's conclusion were open to her for the following reasons.

24.  At paragraph 20 the judge set out in five  bullet  points  her  reasons
    for finding that the transfer to  a  Fresh  prison  would  enhance  the
    possibility of social rehabilitation of the appellant  as  set  out  in
    Principle 9.  The first bullet point contains a finding  of  fact,  and
    that is the appellant is a French citizen who has  spent  most  of  his
    life in France. I find that the judge's second reason was open  to  her
    as the appellant would be spending time in a French prison  where  most
    of the inmates will in all probability be French nationals.   I  accept
    that the finding in the second bullet point was  speculative.   I  find
    that the third bullet point is linked to the reasons  set  out  in  the
    first bullet point and was a finding open to  the  judge.   The  fourth
    bullet point makes a finding of fact.

25.  With regard to the fifth bullet  point,  I  find  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider the appellant's own letter dated 29 September 2015
    that he and his family intended to leave the UK upon his  release  from
    prison. There was no indication by the appellant in his letter that  he
    was intending to go to Germany upon his release, as  submitted  by  Mr.
    Leskin.  The judge was entitled to find that being in a  French  prison
    his family would be in a position to visit him in France as they do  in
    the UK.  I also find that the judge's finding at paragraph 21 was  open
    to her and does not disclose an error of law.

26.  I find that  the  VIP  document  contains  evidence  that  support  the
    judge's findings.  The criticisms relied on by Mr. Leskin do not in  my
    opinion detract from the judge's findings.  The appellant  committed  a
    horrendous crime and the sentence he received reflected the  nature  of
    the offence.  The  judge  applied  the  correct  test  as  set  out  in
    Principle 9 and considered the factors set out therein.  I find on  the
    evidence that the judge's decision does not disclose an error of law.

27.  I uphold the judge's decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.

28.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

