
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00614/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2020                    |On 6 October 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GB
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms C Fletcher instructed by Sharma Law Solicitors.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The respondent appeals with permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Clarke ('the Judge') promulgated on 13 March 2020 in
        which the Judge concluded that GB  had  shown  that  the  custodial
        sentence had changed him and that he would avoid reoffending in the
        future; such that the test of whether he posed a  present,  genuine
        and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  public  to  justify  his
        deportation on the grounds of public policy had not been  made  out
        on the evidence.
     2. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was
        granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis it
        was arguable Judge Clarke materially  erred  in  law  for  all  the
        reasons set out in the application.



Background


     3. GB is a Romanian national who on 11 December 2010 was cautioned for
        providing facilities for gambling other than under an exemption. On
        1 October 2015 GB was also cautioned by the Metropolitan Police for
        racially or religiously aggravated alarm or distress  by  words  or
        writing. On 29  July  2016  GB  was  convicted  at  Central  London
        Magistrates Court of 24 counts of providing facilities for gambling
        other  than  under  an  exemption  and  sentenced  to  four  months
        imprisonment wholly suspended for 2 years. On 15 May 2018,  GB  was
        convicted of dishonestly making false representations to make  gain
        for self or another or cause loss to  or  expose  others  to  risk,
        acquiring, using or possessing  criminal  property  and  breach  of
        suspended sentence order and sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.
     4. The Judge did not find that GB had acquired a  right  of  permanent
        residence in the United Kingdom meaning it was only the lower level
        of protection that was being considered.
     5. The Secretary of State asserts in her grounds that the Judge failed
        to consider the seriousness of the consequences of  reoffending  on
        the basis that the consistency  of  GB's  offending  is  in  itself
        strongly indicative of a propensity to reoffend and  the  potential
        consequences of reoffending serious. The Secretary of State asserts
        the number of cautions and convictions, combined with the fact  the
        appellant reoffended during the duration of his suspended sentence,
        demonstrate that he has no respect for the law and  has  failed  to
        accept the consequences of his actions and  represents  a  genuine,
        present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  the  fundamental
        interests of society, as set out at paragraph 3  of  schedule  1  -
        Consideration of Public Policy, Public Security and the Fundamental
        Interests of Society etc of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.


     6. The Secretary of State argues there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
        show GB has adequately addressed  the  reasons  for  his  offending
        behaviour and that absent any form  of  rehabilitation  to  address
        such behaviour there is no basis to support a finding that GB  does
        not pose a threat to society. The Secretary of State notes  GB  was
        only released in December 2018 and it is said to be too soon to say
        he does not represent a threat.  His  family  failed  to  stop  his
        offending in the past and there is a lack of reasoning  as  to  why
        they could now.
     7. The Secretary of State asserts the Judge failed  to  give  adequate
        reasons as to why GB, given his age,  work  skills  and  relatively
        good health, could  not  find  employment  and  accommodation,  and
        undertake his rehabilitation in Romania.
     8. The Secretary of State also argues the Judge failed to engage  with
        the Schedule to the 2016 Regulations and that  the  Judges  reasons
        for finding there is no genuine and present threat  are  inadequate
        and that the appellants deportation is proportionate and  justified
        on the grounds of public policy.
     9. Ms Fletcher has filed a rule 24 reply opposing the appeal.




Grounds and submissions



    10. Mrs Aboni relied upon the pleaded grounds asserting the  Judge  had
        not given  adequate  reasons  for  why  GB  presented  no  risk  of
        reoffending. It was submitted the  judge  had  not  given  adequate
        attention to the consequences of reoffending and to the  fact  that
        GB is a prolific offender with no respect to the law of the  United
        Kingdom.
    11. Mrs Aboni submitted that at [23] the Judge refers to the pattern of
        reoffending but fails to give adequate reasons as to why GB did not
        present an ongoing threat.
    12. Mrs Aboni accepts the Judge noted GB claimed he was remorseful, but
        submitted that an analysis of the Judge's findings focus mainly  on
        the effect on the family and not on  the  basis  of  offending  and
        reasons for the same as the foundation for such alleged remorse. It
        was submitted the Judge accepted that at the time GB committed  the
        offences it was financial reasons that motivated his offending  but
        the evidence before the Judge was that  GB's  wife  was  no  longer
        working and the risk of a similar situation of financial  necessity
        arising existed, which it was submitted was enough to create a real
        risk.  Mrs Aboni submitted  this  is  also  a  situation  where  no
        rehabilitation work had been undertaken in the United Kingdom.
    13. On behalf of GB Ms Fletcher submitted the Judges  reasoning  arises
        from the evidence before the First tier  Tribunal  and  the  effect
        upon the appellant of having been imprisoned and also the  evidence
        from his Probation Officer in the appeal  bundle  stating  that  GP
        posed a low risk of reoffending.
    14. It was accepted GB explained the reason for his offending  was  for
        financial gain but it is submitted the Judge was entitled  to  find
        that what had occurred to him  was  a  deterrent,  being  detained,
        which enabled GB to gain insight into his offending.
    15. In relation to the Enhanced Thinking Scheme,  a  course  to  assist
        offenders gaining insight  into  their  offences  with  a  view  to
        preventing reoffending,  it was accepted  the  same  had  not  been
        undertaken by GB although he still had insight as to the  cause  of
        his offending arising from financial problems which the  judge  was
        entitled to take into account; including the appellants evidence he
        was not associating with those he associated with in the past.
    16. It was submitted that  the  Judge,  having  received  the  evidence
        balanced the rehabilitation that had  taken  place  with  risk  and
        addressed his mind to this as noted in the rule 24 reply.
    17. It was further submitted the Judge was  entitled  to  find  on  the
        basis of the Probation Report and evidence from the appellant  that
        he did not pose a real risk of reoffending and  that  his  time  in
        prison in the UK had rehabilitated him. Ms Fletcher submitted there
        was evidence of a genuine commitment to change.



Error of law


    18. It was no OASys report but there is  a  letter  received  from  the
        appellants Probation Officer setting out the  reasons  why  GB  was
        considered to present as a low risk if offending and confirming the
        work that had being undertaken with him.
    19. The point made by the Secretary of State in her  grounds  that  the
        Judge failed to consider the seriousness  of  the  consequences  of
        reoffending may be relevant in cases if  there  was  a  finding  an
        individual is likely to reoffend. The case quoted of  Kamki  [2017]
        EWCA Civ 1715 involved a convicted rapist who denied committing the
        sexual the offence for which he had been charged and convicted by a
        jury, as a result of which he undertook no rehabilitation  work  in
        prison.  Although it was found that the probability of  reoffending
        was a low the overall risk impact arising from  the  commission  of
        similar offences meant that the risk to vulnerable young women  was
        high. There was not before the  Judge  in  this  appeal  sufficient
        evidence to warrant a similar or like finding  being  made  on  the
        evidence.
    20. The Judge clearly took GB's offending into account writing at  [23]
        "The appellant has shown a pattern of criminal wrongdoing,  and  an
        escalation in his wrongdoing, and the  fact  that  he  went  on  to
        commit a much more serious offence during the course of a suspended
        sentence showed a flagrant disregard for the laws of the UK ."  The
        Judge, between [26 - 29] writes:

             "26  The letter  from  the  probation  office  reads  how  the
                  Appellant showed compliance throughout  his  sentence  and
                  shows a low risk of  harm  and  the  supervision  every  3
                  months  from  September  2019  would  focus  on  him   not
                  reoffending.  Given  that  it  is  now  February  2020,  I
                  conclude the Appellant has shown he has complied with  the
                  sentence, the licence after he was released  from  custody
                  after serving 6 months of the 12 months sentence.


             27   I have  considered  carefully  the  initial  and  blatant
                  disregard for the laws of the UK by the repeated  gambling
                  and money laundering offences, but set against  this,  the
                  Appellant has shown in the evidence of his wife  and  what
                  he  has  told  me,  together  with  the  letter  from  his
                  Probation Officer, that his risk of reoffending is now low
                  because the custodial sentence has rehabilitated him.


             28   The Appellant and  his  wife  explained  the  very  great
                  impact it has had upon them, and their children, and  they
                  have the insight to understand why it was he committed the
                  trigger offence - lack of money to pay the rent and  bills
                  -  but  how  this  is  not  the  appropriate   avenue   to
                  financially provide for the family. The wife  was  adamant
                  and emphatic about how the appellant would not reoffend.


             29   The Appellant has various skills in the workplace, he can
                  fix plasterboard, worked in demolition and in farming, and
                  he trained in his country to be a car mechanic although he
                  has never worked at this. I accept  that  his  ability  to
                  take on new work skills is evidence that if he  wishes  to
                  change and behave in a  non-criminal  manner  he  has  the
                  determination to do so. I also note they are living  in  a
                  family unit which provides additional emotional as well as
                  economic support by sharing the bills, and  the  wife  can
                  also work as well."

    21. In addition to the documentary evidence the Judge had  the  benefit
        of seeing and hearing oral evidence being given. The Judge  clearly
        considered the nature and frequency of the  appellant's  offending.
        It is not made out the Judge failed to consider that evidence  with
        the required degree of anxious scrutiny.
    22. The Judge was satisfied there was evidence of rehabilitation in the
        United Kingdom. Ms Fletcher, in  answer  to  a  question  from  the
        Bench, indicated the appellant  had  not  undertaken  the  enhanced
        thinking courses in prison as the same had not been offered to  him
        but said he had undertaken work  with  his  Probation  Officer;  as
        noted in the evidence before the Judge.
    23. The Judge having assessed that evidence concluded the appellant had
        established he did not pose a present,  genuine,  and  sufficiently
        serious threat to the public to  justify  his  deportation  on  the
        grounds of public policy. The  opposite  had  not  been  made  out.
        Whilst the Secretary of State may disagree with that conclusion, it
        is not a conclusion that is  arguably  irrational,  not  adequately
        reasoned by the Judge,  or  is  a  finding  outside  the  range  of
        findings the Judge was entitled to make on the evidence.
    24. As the Judge finds it had not been established the appellant  poses
        a present, genuine, and sufficiently serious threat, the Judge  was
        not arguably required to do more.
    25. Having careful considered the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the
        Secretary of State I find she has failed to establish  legal  error
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal. The Judge's finding
        that the evidence did not  indicate  a  likelihood  of  GB  causing
        serious harm or committing further offences at the date of decision
        has not been shown to be unsafe.

Decision

    26. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    27. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 24 August 2020


