
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00303/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2014                                |On 9 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Afzal, instructed by Law Clinic


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal against the determination dated  7  October  2013  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd  and  Mr  G  F  Sandall  which  allowed
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to deport him.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department as the respondent  and  to  SG  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appeal was allowed under the Refugee Convention and Articles 3  and
    8 of the ECHR.

 4. The grounds of appeal maintain that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    give adequate reasons for finding that the appellant had shown that  he
    had made  a  genuine  conversion  to  Christianity.  The  grounds  also
    maintained that the First-tier Tribunal failed to address properly  the
    late nature of the claim to conversion, the lack of evidence as to  the
    level of any involvement in Christianity and the lack of credibility in
    other aspects of his evidence.

 5.  The  grounds  also  maintained  that  the  Article  8  findings   were
    unsustainable given that the appellant's family and private life  could
    not in any circumstances defeat automatic  deportation  and  that  this
    aspect of the appeal had really been allowed only as  the  Refugee  and
    Article 3 claims had succeeded, so contained an error in the same way.

 6. I did  not  find  that  the  grounds  had  merit.  The  challenge  that
    inadequate reasons were given is  essentially  a  procedural  one,  the
    respondent maintaining that she was not in a position to know  why  the
    appeal was allowed. The First-tier Tribunal set out their reasoning  on
    the appellant's conversion to  Christianity  at  [53]  to  [63].  Those
    reasons were sufficiently detailed to show the  principles  upon  which
    the First-tier Tribunal acted and the reasons  for  its  decision.  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not err as regards procedural fairness to  give
    reasons explaining its decision.

 7. I also did not find that the First-tier Tribunal failed to address  the
    late claim to have converted to Christianity, the lack of  evidence  on
    the level of the appellant's practice of  his  faith  or  the  lack  of
    credibility in other aspects of the applicant's claim.

 8. The panel showed clearly at [60] that they appreciated the lateness  of
    the claim, thus:

         "It has to be said that the appellant came to Christianity late  in
         the day  in  the  context  of  his  asylum  claim.  This  could  be
         interpreted in two ways - in fairness to him he did not seize  upon
         Christianity for tactical reasons on  or  soon  after  arrival  but
         given our findings as to his credibility, we have looked  carefully
         at this aspect  of  the  claim.  Only  a  short  time  ago  he  was
         considering Zoroastrianism."

 9. The Tribunal note the  context  of  the  claim  to  have  converted  to
    Christianity and therefore assess that claim "carefully". That approach
    is without error.

10. At [61] the Tribunal went on to state:

         "He [the appellant] is a Muslim who has converted  to  Christianity
         and been baptised into the church. Reverend  Goss  has  many  years
         experience as a Church of England minister and of Iranian converts.
         He has known the appellant for a fairly  short  term,  only  a  few
         months, but sees him every week and visits  him  regularly  in  his
         home as well as seeing him at church. We  find  ourselves  able  to
         accept his opinion that the appellant is a  genuine  and  committed
         convert. We therefore accept this aspect of the evidence"

11. It was open to the Tribunal to find that the appellant's evidence, when
    supported by that of Reverend Goss, was sufficient to  show  a  genuine
    conversion, particularly so  where  the  weight  afforded  to  Reverend
    Goss's evidence is not questioned by the respondent.

12. As regards the level of activity or involvement of this  appellant  and
    his intentions on return to Iran, at [56]  the  Tribunal  recorded  the
    appellant's evidence that it  was  his  understanding  that  it  was  a
    "principle of the Christian religion to invite others  to  Christianity
    to share the glad tidings and he would do so in Iran."

13. At [57] the Tribunal records the evidence of  Reverend  Goss  that  the
    appellant:

         "... had a deep faith which he wanted to communicate. Preaching and
         proselytising could take different forms - it was not a  matter  of
         standing on a street corner but could  involve  private  discussion
         with a few people."

14. At [63], the Tribunal concluded:

         "As the appellant said he wished to promote his faith and  Reverend
         Goss believed he would do so we find a real risk that the appellant
         would be persecuted in Iran for a UN Convention reason if  returned
         and face a breach of his article 2/3 rights."

15. That appeared to me  to  set  out  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  clearly,
    adequately and sustainably. The appellant gave evidence that he  wished
    to proselytise, his evidence was supported by  Reverend  Goss  and  was
    accepted. The Tribunal found that proselytising would lead  to  a  real
    risk of mistreatment. No error arises.

16. I accept that, in essence, the Article 8 claim was allowed by the First-
    tier Tribunal  as the Refugee Convention and Article 3 claims had  been
    allowed rather than there being a  substantive  Article  8  claim  that
    could defeat deportation; see the final sentence of  [72].  It  remains
    the case that where the findings  under  the  Refugee  Conventions  and
    Article 3 stand, nothing material arises.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law such that it should be set aside and therefore  and  shall
    stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 9 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to prevent the facts that form  the  substance
of this claim leading to a likelihood of severe harm to the appellant.
