
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00127/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23rd February 2016                    |On 12th July 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                           CURTIS ALEXANDER FRASER
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A Seelhoff; A. Seelhoff Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke;  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This appeal comes back before the Upper Tribunal following a hearing
       on 7th December 2015.  Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor found an  error
       of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The error of law
       decision, described as a 'decision and directions' is attached as an
       Annex to this decision.


    2. The  salient  facts  of  the  appeal  are  uncontroversial  and  are
       helpfully set out at paragraphs [2] to [4] of the decision of  Upper
       Tribunal Judge O'Connor.


             "2.  The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 4 December
             1965. He entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on  1  August
             1998, having been given leave to enter for six months at port.
             The appellant's leave was thereafter extended - as a student -
             until 30 December 1999.  Despite  the  appellant's  subsequent
             continued presence in the United Kingdom there is  nothing  in
             the evidence before me to indicate that after 30 December 1999
             this presence was lawful.


             3.   There are a number of features of the appellant's time in
             the UK that have direct relevance to this decision: (i) on  22
             April 2011  he  was  served  with  an  IS151A  notice,  as  an
             overstayer; (ii) on 20  December  2011  he  was  convicted  of
             possessing a class A controlled drug (Cocaine) with intent  to
             supply and of possessing a class C controlled drug (Cannabis),
             for which he was sentenced to a 24 month Community  Order  and
             18 months of drug rehabilitation supervision; and, (iii) on 20
             February 2014  he  was  convicted  of  possessing  a  class  A
             controlled drug (Crack Cocaine) and a class B controlled  drug
             (Cannabis/Cannabis  resin)  and  was  sentenced  to   a  total
             of 8 months imprisonment (this equating to the period of  time
             that the appellant had already spent on remand).


             4.   As a consequence of the aforementioned convictions on the
             29 April 2014 the respondent sent a "Liability for Deportation
             Notice and Questionnaire" to the appellant, which was returned
             to the respondent on the 12 May 2014 suitably marked so as  to
             reflect the fact that the appellant  was  not  living  at  the
             address to which the notice was sent. On the 18 June 2014  the
             respondent made a decision that  the  appellant's  deportation
             would be conducive to the public good. A deportation order was
             subsequently signed in the appellant's  name  on  the  4  July
             2014."


    3. Having found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an
       error of law capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal,  Upper
       Tribunal Judge O'Connor set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  He directed that paragraph 398 of the  Immigration  Rules,
       and the  appellant's  reliance  upon  Article  8  grounds  should  be
       considered de novo  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Having  rejected  the
       submissions made on behalf of the appellant that  the  scope  of  the
       appeal should also encompass a challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's
       conclusions relating to the Refugee Convention and Article  3,  Upper
       Tribunal Judge O'Connor expressly directed that the re-making of  the
       decision on appeal is to be limited to the Article 8  grounds.   Both
       parties were directed to file and serve a skeleton argument.


    4. A skeleton argument dated 28th January 2016 has been filed and served
       by the appellant.  No skeleton argument was filed and served  by  the
       respondent.  The appellant relies upon the documents set out  in  the
       consolidated bundle that comprises of some 72 pages. I have carefully
       read through the documents  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  and  in
       reaching my decision, I have had regard to the documents contained in
       that bundle, whether expressly referred to in this decision or not.


    5. It is useful to begin my consideration of this  appeal  by  reminding
       myself of the relevant provisions of the immigration rules.


The Immigration Rules


    6. Part 13 of the Immigration Rules relating to deportation  provide  as
       follows;


           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and


             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or


             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law,


             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


           399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
           applies if -


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and


                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or


                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case


                      (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported;
                      and


                      (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to  be  deported;
                      or


             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and


                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and


                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.


             399A. This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -


                  (a) the person has been lawfully resident in  the  UK  for
             most of his life; and


                  (b) he is socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK;
                and


                  (c) there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported.


The respondent's decision of 18th June 2014


    7. In her decision of 18th June  2014,  the  respondent  refers  to  the
       appellant's immigration history and his convictions in December  2011
       and February 2014.  The circumstances of the offences are  considered
       at paragraphs [11] to [14] of the decision.  At  paragraph  [11]  the
       respondent states:


             "The Secretary of State regards as particularly serious  those
             offences involving drugs.  Also  taken  into  account  is  the
             sentencing Court's view of the seriousness of the offence,  as
             reflected in the sentence imposed, as well as  the  effect  of
             that type of crime on the wider community. The type of offence
             and its seriousness, together with the  need  to  protect  the
             public from  serious  crime  and  its  effects  are  important
             factors when considering whether deportation is in the  public
             interest.  In  addition  to  these   factors   your   personal
             circumstances together with the circumstances of your  offence
             have been carefully looked at."


    8. The respondent refers to the presumption in favour of deportation set
       out in paragraph 396 of the Immigration Rules at  paragraph  [15]  of
       her decision and at paragraphs [16] to [39] of the decision considers
       the appellant's Article 8 rights by reference to paragraphs 398,  399
       and 399A of the rules.  The respondent concludes at paragraph [42] of
       her decision that it would not be contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's
       obligations under the ECHR to deport the appellant from the  UK.   At
       paragraphs [21] to [23] of her decision, the respondent states:


             "21. You were convicted of possessing  a  class  A  controlled
             drug (Crack Cocaine) and for possessing a class  C  controlled
             drug (Cannabis/ Cannabis resin) for which you  were  sentenced
             to  8  months'  imprisonment  for  count  1   and   2   months
             imprisonment for count 2 to run concurrently. You also had  to
             pay �100 victim surcharge and the forfeiture  and  destruction
             of Crack Cocaine and Cannabis in your possession was  ordered.
             The Immigration Rules state that, where a person's deportation
             is conducive to the public good because in  the  view  of  the
             Secretary of State their offending has caused serious harm, in
             assessing a  claim  that  deportation  would  be  contrary  to
             Article 8,  the  Secretary  of  State  will  consider  whether
             paragraph 399 or 399A applies.


             22.  If neither  applies,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
             circumstances that a person's right to family  and/or  private
             life or other reasons would outweigh the  public  interest  in
             seeing a person deported.


             23.  It is considered that paragraph 398(c)  applies  in  your
             case because in between the period of 20 December 2011 and  20
             February 2014 you had committed 4 offences and been  convicted
             of 2 drug offences.  Your  crimes  are  considered  to  be  of
             serious harm to the public and as such  it  would  be  in  the
             public's interest to see you deported.


The evidence


    9. The appellant relies upon the evidence set out  in  the  consolidated
       bundle that has been served on his behalf and which runs to 72 pages.
        I have read the material contained  in  that  bundle  and  have  had
       regard to the documents relied upon by the appellant in  reaching  my
       decision.


   10. The appellant has made three witness  statements.   I  summarise  the
       evidence set out.  The appellant came to the UK as a visitor  on  1st
       August 1998.  He  had  previously  trained  to  be  a  welder  and  a
       mechanical engineer but did not have any  formal  qualifications.  In
       January 1999 he enrolled on a course and was granted leave to  remain
       in the United Kingdom until  30  December  1999  as  a  student.  The
       appellant approached a solicitor in November  1999  with  a  view  to
       extending his leave to remain.   The solicitor assured the  appellant
       that he would be submitting an application for an  extension  of  the
       appellant's visa with the  appellant's  passport.   Between  November
       1999 and 2005, the  appellant  repeatedly  chased  his  solicitor  to
       establish whether there had been any progress  with  his  application
       but in 2005 when he went to see his solicitor, he was shocked to find
       that the solicitors were no longer at that address.    He  has  tried
       ever since to find the new location of their  offices,  but  has  not
       been able to do so.


   11. In 2005, the appellant was attacked by a gang who beat him badly  and
       he was robbed of his wallet and money. He suffered an injury  to  his
       eye requiring an operation at Kings College Hospital.    In  December
       2008, the appellant was set upon by the same gang whilst working as a
       volunteer in a Community Centre. On that  occasion,  he  was  stabbed
       through the heart and was again treated at  Kings  College  Hospital.
       Following that incident, the appellant has lived in fear of his  life
       and started to take drugs to help him cope with the pain and  stress.
       He became addicted to the drugs he was  taking,  and  was  buying  in
       large quantities because he wanted to end his life and was afraid  of
       the gang. The appellant states that  although  he  was  convicted  of
       possession with intent to supply, he never intended  to  supply,  and
       the drugs were for his own personal use.   He states  that  in  2013,
       because of depression he had a relapse, and started using drugs again
       leading to his second conviction.


   12. The appellant states  that  following  his  release  from  prison  in
       January 2014 he returned to stay and sleep at the former address that
       he shared with his partner, [ST].   She refused to allow him to enter
       the house, and arrangements were then made for him to stay and  sleep
       at another address. The appellant assumed  that  the  respondent  was
       aware of that new address but unfortunately a questionnaire was  sent
       to the appellant's former address.


   13. The appellant sets out his family life in the UK.   The appellant has
       two sons and two daughters and the evidence of his relationship  with
       each of them is briefly set out in his first witness statement  dated
       30th June 2015.  I have carefully read what is said by the  appellant
       at paragraphs [27] to [35] of that statement.  For present  purposes,
       suffice it to say that the appellant's children are now  12,  10,  5,
       and 2 years of age and they are all British Citizens.   I shall refer
       to the  children  by  their  first  initial.   The  appellant  has  a
       daughter, "A" aged 10 living with her  mother,  [SS]  and  her  great
       grandmother.  The appellant has a son and daughter aged 5 and  2  who
       have been taken into care by social services.  The  appellant  has  a
       son, "G" now aged 12.


   14. In his witness statement, the appellant claims that he has asked [SW]
       (I assume this is A's mother) to attend his hearing to  confirm  that
       the appellant played a large part in his daughter's life, but he does
       not think that she is now willing to assist him.  Similarly,  he  has
       been in touch with [SB] and although she has expressed  an  eagerness
       to assist the appellant with his immigration  appeal,  the  appellant
       has found her difficult to reach and she has let him down.


   15. The appellant considers himself to be someone of good character apart
       from when he turned to drugs.   He explains that he  has  been  doing
       voluntary work since 2005.   He explains that he has also  learned  a
       lot about drugs and has in place, tools  to  use,  if  the  situation
       should arise again so that he can remain clean not just for  himself,
       but also his children. He states that he has attended  rehabilitation
       courses and regrets having taken  drugs  and  feels  very  sorry  and
       ashamed that he turned to drugs.


   16. In his most recent statement of 8th January 2016, the appellant again
       confirms that he started taking drugs after he was stabbed in 2008 as
       a way of managing the pain.   He sets out  his  evidence  as  to  the
       background to his two arrests and convictions at  paragraphs  [3]  to
       [13] of that statement.   He acknowledges that he has broken the  law
       by taking drugs and acknowledges that drugs cause  harm  to  society.
       The appellant does not believe that his offending has caused "serious
       harm".


   17. The appellant then sets out his evidence of a relationship with [PC],
       with whom he now lives.  He confirms that he sees his daughter A  who
       is now 10 years of age.  He states that because  A's  grandmother  is
       old, the appellant collects A from school each evening and takes  her
       home and makes her dinner.  He states that he is also trying  to  get
       access to some of his other children who have been taken into care.


   18. The appellant was called to give evidence.   He adopted  his  witness
       statement of 8th January 2016 and confirmed that the contents of that
       statement are  true  and  correct.   In  his  evidence-in-chief,  the
       appellant was asked about his application for contact.  He  confirmed
       that he had been to see social services and has contacted a solicitor
       specialising in family law. He understands that two of  his  children
       (his daughter aged 5 and his son aged 2) were taken into care, and he
       has been told that the two children have now been adopted. He  stated
       "I am trying to get my children back", but did not know  whether  any
       application had been made to the court. He stated that his  solicitor
       is  dealing  with  the  matter.  He  confirmed  that  he   instructed
       solicitors to  deal  with  the  matter  when  he  was  released  from
       detention.  He was asked to clarify whether the children had in  fact
       been adopted, or are in foster care.  The appellant said that he  has
       been told by the social  worker  that  the  two  children  have  been
       adopted.  The appellant confirmed that his oldest son,  G,  now  aged
       12, lives with his mother in Leeds and that he  has  been  unable  to
       travel to Leeds to see him because of the curfew.   He last  saw  his
       eldest son in June 2014.


   19. In cross-examination,  the  appellant  confirmed  that  there  is  no
       evidence before the Tribunal from A's mother  about  the  appellant's
       relationship with his daughter and the role  and  that  he  currently
       plays in her life. He  confirmed  that  during  the  school  term,  A
       returns home each day to her mother and  great  grandmother.   During
       weekends and school holiday's she will stay with the appellant.   The
       appellant collects her from school on Friday and she remains with him
       until Sunday evening.  During the school week, a  driver  collects  A
       from home in the morning, and takes her to school.  The appellant  is
       unable to do so, because of the restrictions imposed by  the  curfew.
       The appellant stated that prior to his imprisonment  and  the  curfew
       subsequently imposed, he would take A to school in the morning.


   20. Included in  the  appellant's  consolidated  bundle  is  an  unsigned
       statement from [PC], dated 5th January 2016.   She confirms that  she
       has been in a relationship with the appellant,  on  and  off,  for  6
       years.   She's simply states that she has read the statement  of  the
       appellant and confirms that he goes to collect A  from  school  every
       day and that he "sometimes brings her to my  home  at  the  weekend".
       [PC] did not attend the hearing and was therefore unable  to  confirm
       that the content of her statement is true. Her  statement  that  that
       the appellant "... sometimes brings her to my  home  at  the  weekend
       ..." is at odds with the appellant's claim  that  A  stays  with  the
       appellant at weekends and during the school holidays.   Her  evidence
       could not be tested by way of cross-examination and I can attach very
       little weight to it in the circumstances.


   21. I was provided with a letter from [ ] School dated 3rd February 2016.
        The letter confirms that the appellant "... collects and brings A to
       school regularly and attends all the school events and functions i.e.
       assemblies and parents' evenings and paying  for  visits,  trips  and
       dinners ...". The reference to the appellant taking A  to  school  is
       curious because the appellant's own evidence is  that  he  previously
       took A to school in the mornings but is unable to do so now,  because
       of the restrictions imposed upon him by the curfew.


   22. I have also carefully read the letters in support from:


          a. Luke  Hutchinson,  Detainee  Custody  Officer  at  Brook  House
             Immigration Removal Centre;


          b. Brian Harrison, General Manager of Aramark Ltd;


          c. Wendy Kite, Registered Nurse from South London and Maudsley NHS
             Foundation Trust;


          d. Mr A Balogun, Secretary of Campaign for Truth & Justice;


          e. M N Raouf;


          f. Raob Malkin of Spires;


Submissions


   23. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke submits that paragraph  398(c)
       of the Immigration  Rules  applies  in  this  case.   That  is,  "the
       deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the public good
       and in the public interest because in the view of  the  Secretary  of
       State, their offending has caused serious harm ...".  He submits that
       it is the view of the Secretary of State  that  is  important.     He
       submits that the respondent has set out her view in her  decision  of
       18th June 2014 that the respondent regards as  particularly  serious,
       those offences involving drugs.  He submits  that  the  view  of  the
       Secretary of State as expressed in her decision letter is consistent:


          a. With the recognition in Schedule 1 Part  1(1)  of  the  Serious
             Crime Act 2007 of an offence under s5(3) Misuse  of  Drugs  Act
             1971 (possession of controlled drug with intent to supply) as a
             "Serious Offence".   Mr  Clarke  submits  that  what  underpins
             offences such as possession of controlled drug with  intent  to
             supply as a serious offence under the Act, is  the  recognition
             of the harm that drugs do to society.


          b. Chapter 13 Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  "criminality
             guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases" (Version 5.0 28th July  2014)
             that:


               2. It is at the discretion of the Secretary of State whether
                  or not she considers an offence to  have  caused  serious
                  harm.


               3. "An offence  that  has  caused  serious  harm"  means  an
                  offence that has caused serious physical or psychological
                  harm to a victim or victims, or that has  contributed  to
                  widespread  problem  that  causes  serious  harm   to   a
                  community or to society in general.


               4. The foreign criminal does not have to have been convicted
                  in relation to any serious harm which followed  from  his
                  offence. For example, he may fit within this provision if
                  he is convicted of a lesser offence because it cannot  be
                  proved beyond reasonable doubt that he was  guilty  of  a
                  separate offence in relation to the  serious  harm  which
                  resulted from his actions.


               5.  Where a  person  has  been  convicted  of  one  or  more
                  violent, drugs  or  sex  offences,  he  will  usually  be
                  considered to have been convicted of an offence that  has
                  caused serious harm.


   24. Mr Clarke submits that once it is established that it is the view  of
       the Secretary of State that  the  appellant's  offending  has  caused
       serious harm, I must consider whether paragraphs 399 or  399A  apply.
       He accepts that the appellant has  a  parental  relationship  with  a
       child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK  and  is  a  British
       citizen. He submits however  that  the  only  relationship  that  the
       appellant has with any of his children, is the relationship  that  he
       has with his daughter A.   He submits that it is not enough  for  the
       appellant to establish that he has a genuine and subsisting  parental
       relationship with A and that more is required. He submits that  taken
       at its highest, the evidence is that A lives  with  her  grandmother.
       He submits that there is no evidence before the Tribunal  as  to  the
       impact that deportation of the appellant, would  have  upon  A.    He
       submits that the evidence of the  appellant  and  the  school  simply
       establishes that the appellant plays a limited role in A's  life  but
       that is far from saying that it would be unduly harsh for A to remain
       in the UK without the appellant. Her primary carers  are  after  all,
       her mother and great grandmother and the deportation of the appellant
       will not impact upon the arrangements for her day to day  care.    He
       submits that the three requirements of paragraph 399A  are  not  met.
       The appellant has not been lawfully in the UK for most  of  his  life
       and there is no evidence before the Tribunal that there would be very
       significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Jamaica.


   25. Mr Seelhoff relied upon the matters set out in his skeleton argument.
        He  submits  that  I  must  first  assess  whether  the  appellant's
       offending has caused serious harm.  He submits that the  drafting  of
       the Immigration Rules as a whole suggests that offences that  attract
       prisons sentences of less than a year will not normally  be  regarded
       as "causing serious harm", and that  it  is  for  the  respondent  to
       establish that the appellant's offending has caused serious harm.  Mr
       Seelhoff submits  that  if  it  was  Parliament's  intention  that  a
       particular category of  offence  would  be  sufficient  to  establish
       serious  harm,  then  the  rules  themselves  would   specify   those
       categories of offence which are considered to cause serious  harm  or
       would incorporate statutory lists of serious offences  such  as  that
       set out in Schedule 1 Serious Crime Act 2007, or that  referenced  in
       section 72(4)(a) of the 2002 Act.


   26. Mr Seelhoff submits that the respondent's guidance is flawed.  It has
       not been laid before Parliament  and  it  cannot  be  right  for  the
       respondent to simply proceed upon the premise  that  violent,  sexual
       and drugs offences will always be regarded as causing  serious  harm.
       He submits that were this parliament's intent, the rules  would  have
       specified that such offences would always be grounds for deportation.
        Furthermore, whilst the respondent may have an  apparent  discretion
       to decide whether an offence has caused serious harm, that assessment
       must be objectively well founded by reference to a range  of  factors
       including the specific circumstances of  the  offence,  any  specific
       harm caused by the offence, the category and number of offences,  the
       length of sentence and the reasons for a particularly long  or  short
       sentence.   Mr  Seelhoff  refers  to  the  circumstances  behind  the
       conviction in December 2011 and whilst acknowledging  that  drug  use
       causes harm to society, he submits that on the appellant's  evidence,
       the primary victim was the appellant himself.  As for the  subsequent
       conviction in August 2013, Mr Seelhoff submits that there  is  simply
       insufficient evidence to establish  that  the  appellant's  offending
       caused serious harm.


   27. As to any  assessment  of  proportionality  thereafter,  Mr  Seelhoff
       submits that the appellant has a number of children living in the  UK
       and in Jamaica.  He has  daily  contact  with  his  daughter  A.   He
       submits that it would be unduly harsh for A to move to Jamaica  given
       that she has never lived there and her mother and her  primary  carer
       (her great grandmother), live in the UK.   He  submits  that  on  the
       evidence, A's great grandmother is  dependent  on  the  appellant  to
       arrange  for  A  to  get  to  and  from  school  and  that   in   the
       circumstances, it is clearly in A's best interests for the  appellant
       to remain in the UK, as he is the most involved, of her two parents.


   28. Mr Seelhoff refers me to the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  OLO
       and others (para 398 - "Foreign Criminal") [2016]  UKUT  00056  (IAC)
       and submits that in the event that the  respondent  cannot  establish
       that the appellant's offending caused serious harm, the appellant  is
       not a "Foreign Criminal" for the purposes of s117 of the 2002 Act.


Findings and Conclusion


   29. The burden of proof is on the appellant to establish his  case  on  a
       balance of probabilities.


   30. The claimant has four children in the UK by  three  different  women.
       All four of the children are British citizens.  There is  a  distinct
       paucity of evidence before me regarding  the  relationship  that  the
       appellant has with three of his children in the UK.  I find:


          a.  The  appellant  does  not  have  a  genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship with his eldest son G who is now 12 years of  age.
             The appellant's own evidence is G  lives  with  his  mother  in
             Leeds, and that he last saw his eldest son in June 2014.


          b.  The  appellant  does  not  have  a  genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship with his  daughter  "S"  and  his  son  "E".   The
             appellant's own evidence in relation to those two  children  is
             that they have been taken into the  care  of  social  services.
             His evidence seems to go even further in that be believes  that
             the children have now been placed for, and may well  have  been
             adopted.  The appellant's evidence before me was  that  he  has
             instructed solicitors with a view to establishing contact  with
             his children.  There is no evidence  before  me  of  any  steps
             having been taken by the appellant's  solicitors  to  establish
             contact and I find that he neither has  contact,  nor  does  he
             play a role in the children's lives. If he is right  in  saying
             that the children have been adopted, he will play  no  role  at
             all in their lives in the future.


   31.  There  is  some  limited  evidence  before  me  of  the  appellant's
       relationship with A, who is now  10  years  old.   I  find  that  the
       appellant does have a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his
       daughter A.  The appellant is clearly not the primary carer for A who
       lives with her great grandmother.   There  is  very  little  evidence
       before me as to the role that the appellant play's in A's life and  I
       accept the submission made by Mr Clarke that there is no evidence  at
       all before me of the impact that the deportation of the appellant may
       have upon A.  I  accept  however  that  the  appellant  supports  A's
       primary carer with the arrangements for her  collection  from  school
       during term time.  I also accept that the appellant has A  stay  with
       him and his  partner  some  weekends,  and  at  times  during  school
       holidays.  I find that the appellant play some, albeit  limited  role
       in the care of A.


   32. It is uncontroversial that the respondent has taken her  decision  to
       deport  the  appellant,  relying  upon  paragraph   398(c)   of   the
       Immigration Rules.  I  begin  my  consideration  of  this  appeal  by
       considering whether the material facts alleged by the respondent  are
       made out.  That is, whether the respondent has established  that  the
       deportation of the appellant from the UK is conducive to  the  public
       good and in the public interest because, in the view of the Secretary
       of State, his offending has caused serious harm.


   33. The use of the words "in the view  of  the  Secretary  of  State"  in
       paragraph 398(c) are in my judgement important.  The requirements  of
       the rule are clearly met if the Secretary of  State  takes  the  view
       that the deportation of the appellant from the UK is conducive to the
       public good because, his offending has caused serious harm.


   34. In Mahad (And Others) v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16,  Lord
       Brown, stated at [10]:


           "...Essentially it comes to  this.  The  Rules  are  not  to  be
           construed with all the strictness applicable to the construction
           of a statute or a statutory instrument  but,  instead,  sensibly
           according to the natural and ordinary meaning of the words used,
           recognising that they are statements of the Secretary of State's
           administrative policy. The respondent's counsel readily accepted
           that what she meant in her written case by the proposition  "the
           question of interpretation is ... what the  Secretary  of  State
           intended his policy to be" was  that  the  court's  task  is  to
           discover from the words used in the Rules what the Secretary  of
           State must be taken to have intended. After all,  under  section
           3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971, the Secretary of State has  to
           lay the Rules before Parliament which then has  the  opportunity
           to disapprove them. True, as I observed in  Odelola  (para  33):
           "the question is what the Secretary of State intended. The rules
           are  her  rules."  But  that  intention  is  to   be   discerned
           objectively from the language used, not divined by reference  to
           supposed policy considerations. Still less is the  Secretary  of
           State's  intention  to  be  discovered  from   the   Immigration
           Directorates' Instructions (IDIs) issued intermittently to guide
           immigration officers in their application of the rules. IDIs are
           given pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the  1971  Act
           which provides that:


             "In the exercise of their functions under this Act immigration
             officers shall act in accordance with such instructions (  not
             inconsistent with the immigration rules) as may be given  them
             by the Secretary of State ..." (emphasis added).


   35. In Iqbal (And Others) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  169,  their  Lordships
       highlighted that the exercise of rewriting any provision of the Rules
       under the guise of purposive construction is a  forbidden  one.  Lord
       Justice Vos stated, at [33], that:


             ".....the court cannot and should not construe  the  Secretary
             of State's Rules to mean something different from what,  on  a
             fair objective reading, they actually say. In this  case,  the
             two main construction  points  advanced  respectively  by  Mr.
             Iqbal and Mr. Macdonald urged that result. I would  hope  that
             arguments of this kind will be less prevalent in future..."


   36. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules forms  part  of  a  series  of
       rules introduced  by  the  respondent  that  apply  where  a  foreign
       criminal liable to deportation claims inter alia that his deportation
       would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8
       of the Human Right's Convention.  Paragraph 398(a)  refers  to  those
       that have been convicted of an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
       sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years.  Paragraph
       398(b) refers to those that have been convicted  of  an  offence  for
       which they have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  less
       than 4 years but at least 12 months and paragraph 398(c)  relates  to
       those whose deportation from the UK is conducive to the  public  good
       and in the public interest because, in the view of the  Secretary  of
       State, their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
       persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.  In
       each case, unless paragraphs 399 or 399A apply, the  public  interest
       in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where  there
       are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in
       paragraphs 399 and 399A.


   37. As I have set out, in the respondent's decision it is clear that  the
       respondent does take that view that  the  appellant's  offending  has
       caused serious harm.  The respondent has made an assessment and takes
       that view.  I accept the  submission  made  by  Mr  Clarke  that  the
       assessment carried out by  the  respondent  is  consistent  with  the
       respondent's published guidance  that  an  offence  that  has  caused
       serious harm  encompasses  an  offence  that  has  contributed  to  a
       widespread problem that causes serious harm to  society  in  general.
       The rule expressly refers to the view of the Secretary of  State  and
       it is not open to  me  to  substitute  my  view  as  to  whether  the
       deportation of the appellant from the UK is conducive to  the  public
       good and in the public interest  because  his  offending  has  caused
       serious harm.


   38. I reject  the  submission  by  Mr.  Seelhoff  that  the  respondent's
       guidance is flawed because it has not been  laid  before  parliament.
       It is right that the Supreme Court in R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC  33
       held that  any  requirement  in  immigration  guidance  or  codes  of
       practice which, if not satisfied by the migrant, would result  in  an
       application for leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  being
       refused is tantamount to a "rule" within the meaning of Section  3(2)
       of the 1971 statute. Accordingly, if not laid before  Parliament,  it
       does not have the quality of law.  However Lord Hope at [41] stated:


             "A  contrast  may  be  drawn  between  the   rules   and   the
             instructions (not  inconsistent  with  the  rules)  which  the
             Secretary may give to  immigration  officers  under  paragraph
             1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act. As Sedley LJ  said  in  ZH
             (Bangladesh) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2009] Imm AR 450, para 32, the instructions do not have,  and
             cannot be treated as if they possessed, the force of law.  The
             Act does not require those  instructions  or  documents  which
             give guidance of various kinds to caseworkers, of which  there
             are very many, to be laid before  Parliament.  But  the  rules
             must be. So everything which is in the nature of a rule as  to
             the practice to be followed in the administration of  the  Act
             is subject to this requirement. Resort  to  the  technique  of
             referring to outside documents, which the  Scrutiny  Committee
             can ask to be produced if it wishes to see  them,  is  not  in
             itself objectionable. But  it  will  be  objectionable  if  it
             enables  the  Secretary  of  State  to  avoid  her   statutory
             obligation to lay any changes in the rules before Parliament."


   39. Paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules, expressly provides that it
       is the view of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  is  important.   The
       Immigration Directorates Instructions are not therefore importing any
       further requirement which, if not satisfied, will lead to deportation
       decision being upheld. Adopting the words of Lord  Dyson,  with  whom
       Lord Hope agreed, at [94], Parliament wanted to have  a  say  in  the
       rules which set out the basis on which decisions  were  to  be  made.
       Here, Parliament has left the decision as to whether the  deportation
       of the person from the UK is conducive to the public good and in  the
       public interest because their offending has caused serious  harm,  to
       the view of  the  Secretary  of  State.   The  instructions  are  not
       inconsistent with the rules and give guidance to  caseworkers  as  to
       how the discretion vested in the Secretary of State in the rules laid
       before parliament is to be  exercised  for  consistency  in  decision
       making.


   40. In OLO and others (para 398 - "foreign criminal") [2016] UKUT  00056,
       the Tribunal found that the appellant  could  not  be  defined  as  a
       "foreign  criminal"  under  S.117C  of  the  2002  Act   because   of
       s117D(4)9b).  The appellant's consecutive sentences excluded her from
       the definition of foreign criminal.  Here, the appellant falls  under
       the definition of a "foreign criminal" under s117D(2) because  he  is
       not a British Citizen and he has been  convicted  in  the  UK  of  an
       offence that has caused  serious  harm.   The  appellant  is  thus  a
       foreign criminal for the purposes of the 2002 Act, and given that the
       meaning  of  the  phrase  'foreign  criminal'  is  to  be   construed
       consistently with the definition in the 2002  Act,  in  my  judgement
       paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A apply to him.


   41. In my judgment, the respondent has established that  the  deportation
       of the appellant from the UK is conducive to the public good  and  in
       the public interest because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,
       his offending has caused serious harm.  That however is not  the  end
       of the matter because I must go on to consider whether paragraph  399
       or 399A apply.


   42. I have already found that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
       parental relationship with his daughter A, who is a child  under  the
       age of 18 years who is in the UK,  and  a  British  Citizen.  I  must
       consider whether:


          a. it would be unduly harsh for A to live in Jamaica.; and


          b. it would be unduly harsh for A to remain in the UK without  the
             appellant;


   43. I remind myself that s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
       Act 2009 requires the respondent to make  arrangements  for  ensuring
       that her functions in relation to immigration, asylum or  nationality
       are discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the
       welfare of children who are in the UK.


   44. I also note that the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) -v-  SSHD  [2016]
       EWCA Civ  450  has  recently  confirmed  that  a  Court  or  Tribunal
       considering whether deportation would be  "unduly  harsh"  under  the
       Immigration Rules r.399 and s117C(5) of the 2002 Act must have regard
       to all of the circumstances, including the  deportee's  criminal  and
       immigration  history.  The  more  pressing  the  public  interest  in
       removal,  the  harder  it  will  be  to  show  that  the  effects  of
       deportation would be unduly harsh.


   45. In reaching my decision, I have therefore had in mind the  fact  that
       the appellant has only two convictions. The appellant  was  convicted
       in December 2011 of possession of a  class  A  controlled  drug  with
       intent to supply and possession of a  class  C  controlled  drug  and
       following a guilty plea. The  appellant  claims  that  he  was  badly
       advised at the time but I must proceed upon the basis that he  has  a
       conviction for possession of a class A controlled drug with intent to
       supply.  I note however that he was sentenced to a 24 month Community
       Order and 18 months of drug rehabilitation supervision.   The  second
       conviction in February 2014 was for possessing a class  A  controlled
       drug (Crack Cocaine) and a class B controlled drug (Cannabis/Cannabis
       resin).   The  appellant  was  sentenced  to  a  total  of   8-months
       imprisonment (this equating to the period of time that the  appellant
       had already spent on remand).  Insofar as the appellant's immigration
       history is concerned, I note that he arrived in the  UK  lawfully  on
       1st August 1998, but has remained in the  UK  unlawfully  since  30th
       December 1999.


   46. I accept the submission made by Mr. Seelhoff that it would be  unduly
       harsh for A to move to Jamaica given that she has never lived  there,
       and her mother and her primary carer (her great grandmother), live in
       the UK.  The best interests of A are served by her remaining  in  the
       UK with her primary carers.  There can be no question of  A's  mother
       and great grandmother moving to Jamaica.   It  is  generally  in  the
       interests of children to have both stability and continuity of social
       and educational provision and  the  benefit  of  growing  up  in  the
       cultural norms of the society to which they belong.  A will  continue
       to benefit  from  that  stability  and  continuation  of  social  and
       educational provision, as a British citizen  living  with  her  great
       grandmother and her mother in the UK.


   47. In my judgement, what is at the heart of this appeal is the  question
       of whether it would be unduly harsh to expect A to remain in  the  UK
       without the appellant if he were to be deported.  I have  found  that
       the appellant does not have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
       with his other three children living in the UK.


   48. I have set out in this decision the limited evidence before me  about
       the relationship between the appellant and A and  in  particular  the
       role that he plays in her life.  The role that A's  mother  plays  in
       her life is far from clear but in his statement of  30th  June  2015,
       the appellant states that A lives with  her  mother  [SS]  and  great
       grandmother [ED].  The role that A's mother and her great grandmother
       play in her life as her primary carer's would not be disturbed by the
       deportation of the appellant.  From the limited evidence before me  I
       have found that the appellant supports A's primary  carers  with  the
       arrangements for her collection from school during term time.  I have
       found that the appellant has A stay with him  and  his  partner  some
       weekends, and at times during school holidays.  I have found that the
       appellant play some, albeit limited, role in  the  care  of  A.   The
       appellant does not live in the same household as A and neither of A's
       primary  carers  has  provided  any  evidence  in  support   of   the
       appellant's appeal as to the quality of the relationship between  the
       appellant and his daughter, or indeed  the  impact  that  deportation
       would have upon the day to day arrangements for her care.  I  do  not
       accept that the deportation of the appellant would have a significant
       impact upon the day to day arrangements for the care of A.  There  is
       no evidence before me that  suitable  and  satisfactory  arrangements
       were not in place during the time that the  appellant  was  detained,
       and that there was any impact upon A during that time.  There  is  no
       evidence before me that suitable and satisfactory  arrangement  could
       not be made again.  There is no evidence  before  of  any  particular
       financial provision that the appellant makes towards  A's  care  that
       would be lost if the appellant were deported.  There is  no  evidence
       before me that the appellant's deportation from the UK is  likely  to
       cause harm to A or any detriment in  the  form  of  any  lasting  and
       damaging effect.


   49. I remind myself that the  best  interests  of  the  children  are  of
       substantial importance but are not determinative of the  question  of
       whether it would be "unduly harsh" for  them  to  remain  in  the  UK
       without the person being deported.  In SS (Nigeria) -v-  SSHD  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 550 the Court of Appeal held that a child's interests has to
       be stronger the more pressing the nature of the public interest in  a
       parent's  removal.   Furthermore,  the  Courts   must   respect   the
       legislatures view on the pressing nature of the offence, particularly
       since it reflects policy in the area of moral and political judgment;
       (See Laws LJ at paragraphs 49-50)


   50. The Serious Crime Act 2007 defines an offence under s5(3)  Misuse  of
       Drugs Act 1971 (possession of controlled drug with intent to  supply)
       as a "Serious Offence". As set out in s117C(2) of the 2002  Act,  the
       more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater
       the public interest in deportation of the criminal.  The  respondent,
       not unreasonably, takes that view that a person convicted of  one  or
       more violent, drugs or sex offences, will usually  be  considered  to
       have been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm.


   51.  I  accept  that  offences  involving  drugs,  and  particularly  the
       possession of drugs with intent to supply, are serious because of the
       effect of that type of crime on the wider community.  The Judge  when
       sentencing the appellant in February 2014 commented that the  amounts
       of drugs "are fairly large amounts for personal consumption, personal
       use" but rightly followed the jury's verdict to convict the appellant
       for possessing a class A controlled drug (Crack Cocaine) and a  class
       B controlled drug (Cannabis/Cannabis  resin).   Those  offences  were
       aggravated by the appellant's previous conviction.


   52.  The  words  "unduly  harsh"  do  not  equate   with   uncomfortable,
       inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather,  it  poses  a
       considerably more elevated threshold.  The  addition  of  the  adverb
       "unduly" raises an already elevated standard  still  higher.   Having
       considered all of the evidence before me, including  the  appellant's
       immigration and criminal history, I find that it would not be  unduly
       harsh for Aaliyah to remain in the UK without the appellant.


   53. In my judgement paragraph 399 does not therefore apply.  I  can  deal
       with whether paragraph  399A  applies  in  short  order.   All  three
       requirements set out in paragraph 399A must be met.  I  have  already
       set out the appellant's immigration history and I find  that  he  has
       not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life.   Equally,
       the appellant still has on his own account, family  in  Jamaica.   He
       had lived in Jamaica for many years until his arrival in  the  UK  in
       1998.  There is no evidence before  me  of  any  obstacles  that  the
       appellant would  face  to  his  integration  to  Jamaica,  let  alone
       evidence of very significant obstacles.  I do not accept  that  there
       would be very significant obstacles to his integration into  Jamaica.




   54. In my judgment, paragraphs 399 and 399A  do  not  apply  and  so  the
       public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by  other
       factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and  above
       those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


   55. It is now well established that  insofar  as  the  assessment  of  an
       Article 8 claim is concerned, the  considerations  in  a  deportation
       care are different from those  applicable  to  cases  of  immigration
       control.  In deportation  cases,  the  Immigration  Rules  provide  a
       'complete code'  and  an  assessment  of  proportionality  is  to  be
       conducted through the lens of the Immigration Rules, rather than as a
       free standing exercise.  In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  1192
       the Court of Appeal concluded that the immigration rules relating  to
       deportation provide a "complete code" to Article 8. This was  largely
       because the provisions contained in paragraph 398 of the  immigration
       rules were deemed  to  be  sufficiently  wide  to  encompass  a  full
       proportionality assessment that was compliant with Article 8  of  the
       European Convention.


   56. Where, as here, paragraphs 399 and 399A of the rules do not apply  it
       is only in "exceptional circumstances" that the  public  interest  in
       deportation will be  outweighed  by  other  factors.   To  that  end,
       "exceptional" means something "very compelling"; See  MF (Nigeria) -v-
        SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192,    LC (China) -v- SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
       1310 and AJ (Angola) -v- SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.


   57. No such circumstances are advanced before me.  It  follows  that  the
       appeal is dismissed.


 Notice of Decision


   58. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8
       grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


   59. The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  but  that  was
       discharged in the decision of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor.   No
       application for an anonymity direction was made  before  me,  and  no
       such direction is made.  I have however in this decision referred  to
       the appellant's children by their initials rather  than  setting  out
       their names.


Signed                                  Date: 12th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 12th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





