
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00310/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April, 2016                           |On 15th July, 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Radoslaw Ozgowicz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Markwell of Counsel, instructed by IMD
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to  avoid  confusion  I  refer  to  her  as  being  "the
    claimant".  The respondent was born on 11th June, 1978, is male and  is
    a citizen of Poland who entered the United Kingdom on  19th  September,
    2004.

2.   On 11th November, 2015  the  respondent  was  convicted  at  Portsmouth
    Crown Court of two offences of theft of cosmetics  from  his  employers
    and conspiracy to transfer  and  convert  criminal  property.   He  was
    sentenced on those offences at the same Crown Court on  23rd  February,
    2015 and received a sentence of two years' imprisonment  concurrent  on
    each offence.

3.   On 6th July, 2015 the claimant made a deportation order in  respect  of
    the respondent.  The respondent appealed and his appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell sitting at Hendon on  26th  October,
    2015.   In  his  determination  the  judge  noted  the  provisions   of
    Regulation 21 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 and noted that the appellant claimed to have resided in the United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the
    relevant decision.  The judge also noted that the relevant decision was
    made on 6th July, 2015 and purported to apply MG v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department.  The judge allowed  the  respondent's  appeal,
    but the claimant sought and obtained permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal asserting that the judge had misapplied MG.

4.   In addressing me today Mr Tufan on behalf of the claimant  pointed  out
    that the ten year continuous period of residence must be  counted  back
    from the decision in question, which in this case  is  the  deportation
    decision of 6th July, 2015.  Unfortunately the appellant  had  been  in
    prison from 23rd February, 2015.  He may, however,  still  come  within
    the category entitled to enhanced protection if he can show that he has
    resided in the United  Kingdom  during  the  ten  years  prior  to  the
    imprisonment, depending on an assessment  of  whether  the  integrating
    links  have  been  broken.   Mr  Tufan  suggested  that  that  such  an
    assessment had not been made and that there were insufficient  findings
    for that assessment to be undertaken without hearing further evidence.

5.   For the respondent, Miss Markwell suggested that what the judge did  at
    paragraphs 25 and 26 was to undertake such an assessment.  I  told  her
    that I was unable to accept that he did.  All the judge did was to make
    the evidence from the respondent's former  wife  and  from  his  sister
    which, substantially corroborated the respondent's account of the  date
    of his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    respondent's former wife was only able to  corroborate  his  employment
    from December, 2005, which is when she first met him.  The respondent's
    sister had been living with the respondent in the United Kingdom  on  a
    number of occasions from the time of his  arrival  in  September,  2004
    some years later.  All the witnesses were  consistent  as  regards  the
    times that the respondent had been  out  of  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    returned to Poland on three occasions but the periods of  absence  from
    the United Kingdom could be measured, it was  said,  in  a  handful  of
    weeks.

6.   I confirmed to Miss Markwell that I did not believe that the judge  had
    made sufficient findings of facts in  order  to  be  able  to  properly
    assess the respondent's integration  and  I  have  concluded  that  the
    matter should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  order  that
    further evidence can be obtained so that a  proper  assessment  of  the
    respondent's integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  can  be  made  in
    accordance with MG.

7.   My estimation is that two hours would be sufficient  before  any  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell.   I  am  told  that  the
    respondent does not need an interpreter, but given the consequences for
    him if the decision is not in his  favour,  I  believe  that  a  Polish
    interpreter should be booked.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
15 July 2016
