
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00441/2014
                                                               DA/00442/2014
                                                               DA/00443/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 October 2014                           |On 27 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                            A S (first appellant)
                           A B (second appellant)
                            A B (Third appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms R Harrington, instructed by Gloucester Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. These appeals are subject to an anonymity order made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. The appellants are citizens of Iran who were born  respectively  on  19
    February 1980, 16 September 2006 and 3 July 2009.  The first  appellant
    is the mother of the second and third appellants.

 3. On 18 March 2006, the first  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  with  her
    husband, also an Iranian national, and they applied for asylum.  On  21
    April 2006, the first appellant was convicted of  possessing  a  listed
    false instrument with intent  and  was  sentenced  to  fifteen  months'
    imprisonment.  On 26 July 2006, the first appellant was notified of her
    liability to be deported.  On 30 November 2006, the Secretary of  State
    refused the first appellant's claim for  asylum  after  she  failed  to
    complete and return a SEF.

 4. On 16 September 2006, the second appellant was born in the UK.

 5.  On  29  September  2006,  the  first  appellant  underwent  an  asylum
    interview.  She was subsequently issued with a SEF but  she  failed  to
    complete and return it and on 30  November  2006  her  application  for
    asylum was again refused on non-compliance  grounds.   On  19  December
    2006, she submitted a completed SEF  and  thereafter  between  December
    2007 and June 2011 further supporting evidence  was  submitted  to  the
    Secretary of State.

 6. On 3 July 2009, the third appellant was born in the UK.

 7. On 31 July 2012, a decision was made to deport the first  appellant  on
    the grounds that her deportation was conducive to the public  good  but
    that decision was not served because of her outstanding  asylum  claim.
    On 4 September 2013, she was again notified  of  her  liability  to  be
    deported.  On 26 November 2013, the first appellant underwent a further
    substantive asylum interview.

 8. On 20 February 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum and for leave based upon Art 3 of  the  ECHR.   On  24
    February 2014, a decision was made  to  make  a  deportation  order  by
    virtue of s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The second and  third
    appellants were to be deported as her family members.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Trevaskis and Ms V S Street JP on 20 June 2014.   Before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the first appellant argued  that  she  was  at
    risk of persecution on return to Iran as  a  single  woman  who  was  a
    Christian convert.  She had separated from her husband and she was also
    at risk as a result of an adulterous relationship after which  she  and
    her husband separated in October 2012.  She claimed that  she  did  not
    know where her husband was and she had no contact  with  her  husband's
    family and her father has refused to speak to her since her  adulterous
    relationship and separation from her husband and her mother has accused
    her of bringing shame on the family.

10. In addition, the appellants relied on the Immigration Rules (HC 395  as
    amended) in particular para 399(a) and Art 8 of the ECHR.

11. In a determination promulgated on 25 June 2014, the First-tier Tribunal
    allowed the appellants' appeals under the Immigration  Rules  and  also
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    first appellant met the requirements of  para  399(a),  which  provides
    that:

         "(a) The person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  seven  years  immediately  preceding  the  date   of   the
                  decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the UK; and

                  (b)  there is no other family member who is able  to  care
                      for the child in the UK; ..."

12.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  are  at  para  31-34   of   its
    determination as follows:

         "31.  We  find  that  [the  first  appellant]  has  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with [the second  appellant],
             her daughter, who has lived in the UK for  at  least  7  years
             prior to the date of the immigration decision.

         32.  We find that there is no other family member who  is  able  to
             care for [the second appellant)  in  the  UK;  we  accept  the
             evidence that [the first  appellant]  is  separated  from  her
             husband and does not know where he is.

         33.  We find that it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  [the  second
             appellant] to leave the UK; she was born here  and  has  lived
             her whole life here; she has never been to Iran; she does  not
             have any meaningful family ties in Iran; she  has  established
             private life in the UK for almost 8 years, attending and doing
             well at school.

         34.  Accordingly we find that [the first appellant] should  not  be
             deported."

13. Applying those findings,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  also  allowed  the
    appellants' appeals under Art 8 on the  basis  that  their  deportation
    would be disproportionate.







The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14. On 14 July 2014, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Parkes)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal against the decisions to  allow
    the appeals under the Immigration Rules and under Art 8.

15. Subsequently, on 9 October 2014, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  R  C
    Campbell) also granted the first appellant permission to appeal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to make any findings  and
    to reach a decision in respect of the first appellant's claim under the
    Refugee Convention.

16. Before me, both Ms Harrington (who represented the appellants)  and  Mr
    Richards (who represented the Secretary of  State)  accepted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by failing to deal with the  first
    appellant's asylum claim and  to  that  extent  the  first  appellant's
    appeal should be allowed and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    order that findings and a decision could be made in the asylum claim.

17. As regards the Secretary of State's appeal,  Mr  Richards  focused  his
    submissions on the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning at  paras  31-33  of
    its determination.  Mr Richards submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had given wholly inadequate reasons for finding that it  would  not  be
    reasonable to  expect  the  second  appellant  to  leave  the  UK.   He
    submitted that the appellant was only 7 at the time of decision and her
    focus was almost exclusively within the home.  She would  be  returning
    to Iran with her mother and sister.  He pointed out that  the  evidence
    was that the first appellant  was  teaching  her  children  Farsi.   He
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had simply  failed  to  consider
    the evidence concerning any family in  Iran  and  to  make  appropriate
    findings in relation to that.

18. Ms Harrington, on behalf of the appellant, accepted that the First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning was brief but, she submitted, there  could  be  no
    doubt as to the basis upon which the  appellants  had  succeeded.   She
    submitted that it was implicit in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding
    that the second appellant had no "meaningful family ties in Iran", that
    the First-tier Tribunal had accepted the evidence of  lack  of  contact
    with the families in Iran and  the  limited  contact  with  the  second
    appellant's grandmother.  Ms Harrington submitted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's finding that it would not be reasonable to expect the second
    appellant to leave the UK was a finding properly  open  to  it  on  the
    evidence.  She submitted that the grounds were in effect  arguing  that
    the First-tier Tribunal should  have  given  different  weight  to  the
    various factors and that did not, in her submission, disclose any error
    of law.



Discussion

19. There is no doubt that the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning at paras 31-
    33 is, on any view, brief.  The Tribunal had a duty to give reasons for
    its findings in favour of the appellants  under,  in  particular,  para
    399(a) of the Rules.  Those reasons may be brief  providing  that  they
    deal with the central issues raised in an appeal so that  the  decision
    as a whole makes sense (see Shizad (Sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) and Budhathoki (Reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT
    00341 (IAC)).  In one sense Ms Harrington is correct when  she  submits
    that the Secretary of State knows why the  appellants  succeeded,  i.e.
    the second appellant could not be expected to leave the  UK.   However,
    in my judgment, what follows in para 33 is an inadequate set of reasons
    to sustain that conclusion and fails  to  take  into  account  all  the
    relevant matters.

20. First, it was, of course, relevant that the second appellant  was  born
    in the UK, had lived her whole life in the UK and  had  never  been  to
    Iran.  But, it was also necessary to consider that the second appellant
    was only 8 years old  and  would  be  returning  with  her  mother  and
    sibling.  That factor is not expressly  considered  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning.

21. Secondly, it was relevant to consider what  would  be  the  appellants'
    circumstances in Iran.  That raised matters  which  were  part  of  the
    evidence and, to some extent, related to the first  appellant's  asylum
    claim.  The First-tier Tribunal unfortunately made no findings on  that
    evidence including the attitude of the  first  appellant's  family  and
    that of her husband to her and also what contact  was,  and  would  be,
    possible with the second appellant's grandmother.  I do not  accept  Ms
    Harrington's submission that the First-tier Tribunal must (in para  33)
    be taken to have simply accepted the first appellant's evidence on  all
    these matters.  It was incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal  to  make
    relevant findings on this as part of its reasoning process to reach its
    conclusion that the second appellant had no "meaningful family ties  in
    Iran".  I do not say that such a finding was not open to the First-tier
    Tribunal but its reasons given in para 33 were not adequate to  support
    that finding and disclosed a  failure  to  grapple  with  the  relevant
    evidence and make appropriate findings on that evidence.

22. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in reaching its
    finding in the appellants' favour under the Immigration  Rules,  namely
    para 399(a).

23. Ms Harrington did not contend  that  the  finding  in  the  appellants'
    favour under Art 8 could stand alone.  That is clearly correct as it is
    even more briefly dealt with in paras 35-38 and  is  premised  entirely
    upon the favourable finding under para 399(a).



Decision and Disposal

24. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules and Art 8 involved  the
    making of an error of law.  Those decisions cannot stand  and  are  set
    aside.

25. Further, the First-tier tribunal erred in law by failing  to  make  any
    decision on the first appellant's asylum claim.

26. Given that the appeal is properly to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in order to deal with the first appellant's asylum  claim,  it
    would be appropriate for the First-tier Tribunal also  to  consider  de
    novo the appellants' claims under the Immigration Rules and  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

27. For these reasons, the appeals are remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to be determined de novo by a Tribunal  not  to  include  either  Judge
    Trevaskis or Ms V S Street JP.

                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                                                       Dated


                                                             14 October 2014
