
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00303/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 22nd October 2019                |On: 24th October 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Leonard [M]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Philps, Counsel instructed by Owens Stevens
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Lithuania born in 1975.    On  the  6th
    August 2019 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Thorne) allowed  his  appeal
    against deportation under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016. The Secretary of State now has permission  to  appeal
    against that decision.

 2. The facts of this case are that the Respondent was  for  many  years  a
    habitual drug user in his native Lithuania. Between 1996  and  2011  he
    was convicted on six separate occasions of offences  arising  from  his
    drug use. The first, in 1996 when he was 21, was a robbery. The second,
    also in 1996, was a breach of the peace. In 2003 he  was  convicted  of
    possession of drugs with intent to supply. All of the  remaining,  more
    recent, offences were for possession of  drugs  for  personal  use:  in
    2007, 2009 and 2011.  I am told the drug in question  was  amphetamine,
    categorized in the United Kingdom as a Class B drug.  Although  nothing
    turns on it for the purpose of my decision,  it  is  worth  noting  the
    contrast between the sentence that this offence would  attract  in  the
    United Kingdom and those actually imposed upon the  Respondent  by  the
    Lithuanian authorities.   The Sentencing Council indicate that although
    the statute provides for a maximum sentence of five years, the starting
    point for possession of a  Class  B  drug  would  be  a  fine,  with  a
    sentencing  range  of  anything  between  a  discharge  and  26  weeks'
    imprisonment[1].   For the three offences committed by  the  Respondent
    Lithuanian courts imposed successive sentences on the Respondent  of  7
    years 6 months, 8 years and 9 years in prison.

 3. The Respondent moved to the  United  Kingdom  after  his  release  from
    prison in 2018. Here he has a wife and a  young  baby.  He  has  worked
    since he arrived, as has his Lithuanian wife.   On  the  10th  November
    2018 the Respondent was convicted of driving with  excess  alcohol  and
    sentenced to a community order. It was this conviction  which  prompted
    the Secretary of State to take action to deport him.

 4. When the matter came before Judge Thorne he heard  live  evidence  from
    both the Respondent  and  his  wife.  Having  heard  that  evidence  he
    accepted that the Respondent is no longer a user  of  drugs;  that  the
    incident in which he drove  after  consuming  alcohol  was  a  one-off,
    occurring on the night he was celebrating his discovery that  his  wife
    was expecting their first child, that  the  Respondent  is  now  a  law
    abiding citizen and committed family man. Finding that he posed no risk
    to the public or any of the fundamental  interests  of  society,  Judge
    Thorne allowed his appeal.

 5. The ground upon which permission was granted  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made a "material  misdirection  in  law".  Asked  to  be  more
    specific about what  the  misdirection  might  have  been,  Mr  McVeety
    explained that this was a reasons challenge.  The  Secretary  of  State
    therefore submits that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    flawed for a want of clear reasons. The grounds particularly take issue
    with Judge Thorne's alleged failure to explain why he accepted that the
    Respondent was rehabilitated, and his use of the word 'old' to describe
    his convictions.

    My Findings

 6. It is not an error of law to believe a witness.   Both  the  Respondent
    and his wife gave oral evidence and were cross examined.  Having  heard
    that evidence Judge Thorne  was  tasked  with  determining  whether  he
    believed it or not, and if he did what weight could be attached to  it.
    Weight is classically a matter for  the  judge.  As  it  happens  Judge
    Thorne was prepared to attach significant weight  to  the  evidence  of
    both witnesses.  Mr McVeety accepted that in the absence of perversity,
    this was a matter for him.

 7. As to the 'reasons challenge' I am not satisfied that the Secretary  of
    State can be left in the dark about why Judge Thorne found as  he  did.
    Paragraphs 24-30 set out a number of reasons for the decision. The drug
    convictions were relatively old - the last one  arose  from  events  in
    2011.  There was no evidence that the Respondent has used amphetamines,
    or any other banned narcotic substance, since then.  Whilst recognising
    the seriousness of the offence, Judge Thorne accepted that  the  drink-
    driving arose from an exceptional  circumstances  and  was  a  one-off.
    There have been no other offences in the United Kingdom.  He found that
    the Respondent had embarked on a 'new life' as  a  family  man  in  the
    United Kingdom.   The Respondent and his wife gave consistent  evidence
    about all of that.  The Judge found that the relationships  within  the
    new family unit were a 'protective factor' and there was a low risk  of
    reoffending.

 8. The author of the grounds repeatedly refers to the extraordinary length
    of the sentences imposed on the Respondent  in  the  past,  but  it  is
    perfectly clear from the decision  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    aware of those facts:  they  are  set  out  at  the  beginning  of  the
    determination.   The Secretary of State cannot simply  point  to  those
    convictions, or the sentences, to establish that the Respondent poses a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious risk to society in the United
    Kingdom today. On the facts  presented,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    rationally  entitled  to  conclude  that  that  burden  had  not   been
    discharged.



    Decisions

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law.

10. There is no order for anonymity.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           22nd October 2019
                                                     -----------------------
[1] https://www.sentencingcouncil.org.uk/offences/magistrates-
court/item/possession-of-a-controlled-drug/

