
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/00091/2017
                                                         Extempore judgement

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 October 2017                        |On 19 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     KR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hosein, Counsel instructed by RMS Immigration
Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   I will refer to the Respondent as the Appellant as he  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He is a citizen of Portugal and his date of birth
    is 15 February 1977.  On 30 January 2017 the Secretary of State made  a
    deportation order against the Appellant pursuant to  Regulation  19  of
    the Immigration (EEA Regulations) 2006.  The Appellant appealed and his
    appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Rowlands  in  a
    decision promulgated on 12 May 2017, following a hearing  on  20  April
    2017.  Permission was granted to the Secretary of  State  on  2  August
    2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK in May 2014.  On 18 October  2014  he  was
    cautioned by the police following a common assault. On 2  October  2015
    he was convicted of criminal damage and made subject to  a  restraining
    order  and  ordered  to  pay  a  fine,  compensation  and  costs.   The
    complainant in both instances is his wife. The Appellant  breached  the
    restraining order and on 8 October 2015 was sentenced to twelve  weeks'
    immediate imprisonment.  Within days of his  release  he  breached  the
    restraining order for  a  second  time  and  on  7  December  2016  was
    convicted of harassment (of his wife) and sentenced to  eighteen  weeks
    imprisonment.  The deportation order followed.

3.   The judge heard evidence from the Appellant, two  of  his  brothers-in-
    law, the Appellant's son's friend and in  addition  I  understand  that
    there was a statement from the Appellant's son.   The  judge  concluded
    that the Appellant had not acquired permanent residence  and  this  has
    not been challenged. The judge set out Regulation 21 (5)  at  paragraph
    17;


        "21 (5)   Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public
               policy or public security it shall, in addition to complying
               with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken
               in accordance with the following principles-


                (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality;


                (b)     the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned;


                (c)    the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                    represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
                    threat affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                    society;


                (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                    which relate to considerations of general prevention  do
                    not justify the decision;


                (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                    themselves justify the decision."

4.   The judge made salient findings at paragraphs 18, 19, 20 and 21;

         "18. I have noted his previous convictions which are  all  offences
             against his wife, ranging from criminal damage, to  harassment
             and breaking the Restraining Order.  They are all of a similar
             nature and show a complete disregard for Orders of the  Court.
             I have noted what his in-laws and friends have said about  him
             and have  been  frankly  staggered  at  their  sheer  lack  of
             understanding of the nature of the man.  I am  not  even  sure
             that some of them have the slightest knowledge of what he  has
             done.  He has been described as a  good  husband,  a  charming
             father and husband and a very caring husband.  He  is  clearly
             none of these and I am happy to dismiss the evidence of all of
             the witnesses  who  clearly  have  some  agenda  to  stick  to
             together.  He is  a  very  poor  husband  and  father,  it  is
             evidence that some of the offences occurred when the  children
             were present and also clear that Social Services have concerns
             about him.  I  share  those  concerns  when  he  says  in  his
             statement that he is a law abiding citizen and  cherishes  the
             laws of this country, clearly he does no  such  thing.   I  am
             concerned that he can't recognise that.  I am  also  concerned
             that some of the witness statements  included  in  the  bundle
             have sentences seemingly cut and pasted from other  statements
             and may not properly reflect the views of the maker.  My  view
             is that he is a thoroughly nasty person who has no respect for
             his wife and children.


         19.  Regulation 21(6) says that 'before taking a relevant  decision
             on the grounds of public policy or public security in relation
             to a person  who  is  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
             decision maker must take into account considerations  such  as
             the age, state of health, family and economic situation  of  a
             person, the persons length of residence in the United Kingdom,
             the persons social and cultural integration  into  the  United
             Kingdom and the extent of the person's links with his  country
             of origin.  The  Appellant  is  a  40  year  old  man  who  is
             seemingly in good health and has a wife and  children  in  the
             United Kingdom who have been here for only a short  period  of
             time.  He has spent the vast majority of his  life  either  in
             India or Portugal and I do not believe that he has shown quite
             strong social or cultural integration into the United Kingdom.


         20.  Having reached the conclusions concerning length of  residence
             and permanent residence in the United Kingdom I have  gone  on
             to consider whether or not his continued presence would amount
             to a sufficiently serious threat in the  interests  of  public
             policy.  He is clearly somebody who I would consider to  be  a
             persistent and regular offender.  I have also  considered  the
             question of rehabilitation following the case of Essa, (R  (on
             the application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber).  So far as rehabilitation  is  concerned  clearly  I
             have no evidence either way of the  availability  of  such  in
             Portugal although I would be surprised if there were  not.   I
             do not believe that this particular Appellant is  someone  who
             will receive some rehabilitation since the length of the order
             is such that he would  not  be  on  licence  on  his  release.
             Bearing in mind what I have said concerning that  point  I  do
             not believe that any decision in this case would prejudice the
             prospects of rehabilitation.  I do not  think  therefore  that
             weighing that risk will make any difference to the decision.


         21.  When looking at the situation in the round it appears  to  me,
             that despite the fact that he is a  persistent  offender  that
             there is a real risk of him  re-offending  but  that  is  only
             towards his wife.  I hope she will forgive me when I  use  the
             word only as it implies that  there  is  nothing  particularly
             wrong in that whereas the truth is  that  it  is  amongst  the
             worst kind of offending but I have to  be  satisfied  that  he
             represents a proportionate and sufficiently serious threat  to
             the public in the United Kingdom.   He  has  never  shown  any
             likelihood of committing offences against  the  public  he  is
             simply a bully towards his wife.  It  may  well  be  that  his
             behaviour is such that he will not have any contact with  her.
             As to contact with his children then that clearly  depends  on
             the Family Courts and Social Services.  As far as I can see at
             the moment there is little chance of him being allowed to  see
             them unsupervised and although the children have all expressed
             a view for him not to be deported I am not sure that it is  in
             their best interests to have contact with him."


5.   Despite having set out Regulation 21(5) the judge  did  not  apply  the
    test set out at 21(5) (c).  The judge should have addressed his mind to
    whether the Appellant's conduct  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society, whereas he considered whether or not the Appellant's continued
    presence would amount to a sufficiently serious threat in the interests
    of  public  policy  (see  paragraph  20)  and  whether  the   Appellant
    represents a proportionate  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
    public in the United Kingdom (see paragraph 21).  The judge found  that
    the Appellant's wife was not the public and therefore  the  requirement
    in Regulation 21 (5) (c) was not satisfied. This is misconceived.

6.   It is difficult to see how the Appellant's conduct  and  propensity  to
    reoffend (as found by the judge) could not represent a genuine, present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society (in this case  protecting  citizens,  specifically
    women from violence or fear of violence). However, I  cannot  rule  out
    that a judge may conclude otherwise. The judge  materially  erred.  The
    decision is set aside and remitted to the FtT for a re-hearing.

7.   I can see no reason at present to go behind the findings of  the  judge
    in relation to permanent residence, the conduct of the  appellant  (and
    propensity to reoffend) and rehabilitation.  However, the matter is  to
    be heard afresh.  I will not tie the hands of the next judge  who  will
    be make findings  on  the  evidence.  When  deciding  the  issue  under
    Regulation 21 (5) (c) the judge will no doubt  have  regard  to  Arranz
    [2017] UKUT 294 in respect of the standard and burden of proof.  If the
    judge concludes that the Respondent has discharged  the  burden,  there
    will  need  to  be  a  proportionality  assessment  having  regard   to
    Regulation 21 (5) and (6).

8.   The matter  is  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing.




Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's application is allowed. The decision of the FtT  to
allow the appeal under the Rules is set aside.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed


Joanna McWilliam


Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 McWilliam
              Date   19 October 2017





