

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00984/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 July 2013                                |On 16 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  The President, the Hon. Mr Justice Blake
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                               ALFONSO CAPITAO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C. Litchfield, counsel instructed by Alpha Rocks,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal against a decision
      of a panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Devittee sitting with Sir Jeffrey James KBE  CMG)  promulgated  on  25
      April 2013.   The panel dismissed his appeal against a decision of the
      respondent made on 7 November 2012 that the appellant was  subject  to
      automatic deportation as a foreign criminal under section  32  (5)  of
      the UK Borders Act 2007.  The  respondent   rejected  the  appellant's
      claim that he was excluded from such deportation on the basis that  as
      it would infringe his right to respect for his private and family life
      under Article 8 of the ECHR, he fell within one of the  exceptions  to
      automatic deportation as a foreign criminal.


   2. At the end of the hearing we informed the parties that the  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal would be dismissed. These are the reasons for doing
      so.


   3. The appellant, who was born on 17  December  1965,  is  a  citizen  of
      Angola. He first arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom,  undocumented,  at
      Heathrow Airport in November  1994  and  claimed  asylum.  His  appeal
      against refusal of that application was dismissed in  September  1997.
      The appellant has subsequently stated that  he  had  left  the  United
      Kingdom and returned to Angola and re entered the  United  Kingdom  in
      June 2000, on the basis of a forged passport.

   4. A few weeks after June 2000 he was arrested as an illegal entrant  and
      claimed asylum for a second  time.  His  appeal  against  the  removal
      decision that accompanied refusal of that claim was dismissed in April
      2001. He was, however, granted exceptional leave to remain for 1 year,
      on account of country conditions as they then were in Angola.

   5. A year later, in April 2002, the appellant was  granted  a  further  3
      years exceptional leave to remain and in May 2003 his son was born  to
      a lady named Vivi Lombo, who had been recognised as a refugee from the
      Congo in April 2002. This relationship produced a daughter  also,  who
      was born in March 2008. Both children are British.

   6. In December 2006 while he was maintaining  his  relationship  with  Ms
      Lombo, the appellant fathered a child C  by  another  woman,  Ms  Bebe
      Sasa. C was born in September 2007.

   7. The appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain on  29  September
      2005, despite the fact that on 15 April 2005 he  was  sentenced  to  a
      suspended sentence of imprisonment of 6 months for an offence of using
      a false instrument. There followed three further occasions upon  which
      the appellant  was  sentenced  to  suspended  or  immediate  terms  of
      imprisonment.  In September 2006 for two offences of  obtaining  money
      by deception and handling stolen goods he was sentenced  to  9  months
      imprisonment suspended for 2 years, that sentence being  activated  in
      June  2008  to  run  consecutively  with  a  sentence  of   9   months
      imprisonment   imposed   for   further   offences   involving    false
      identification documents.

   8. On 16 January 2009 he was  detained  under  the  Immigration  Acts  on
      completion of his sentence.  He  was  informed  of  his  liability  to
      deportation. On 19 February 2009 he was granted bail  while  his  case
      was investigated. He failed to report on 16 December 2009  and  became
      an absconder. He next came to light in 2012. He  was  convicted  on  I
      March 2012 of a further offence of possession of a false document  and
      failing to surrender  and sentenced to 14 months imprisonment.  On  12
      April 2012 he was asked for information about his family ties and this
      led  to  two  letters  being  sent  to  Vivi  Lombo  and  Bebe   Salsa
      respectively. Only Bebe Salse replied, in which she  stated  that  the
      appellant had 'a high level relation with his daughter C he has access
      to visit his daughter every weekend.'

   9. Following these inquires the Home Office indicated  that  it  accepted
      that the appellant had a genuine  relationship  with  C  but  did  not
      accept the same for his other two children.

  10. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal. They found there  was  a
      risk of the appellant re offending. The panel found that the nature of
      the appellant's relationship with Ms Lombo and her  children  was  not
      such as to be protected by  article  8  of  the  ECHR.  He  had  never
      cohabited with her and  they  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  of
      having maintained regular contact with his children by  Ms  Lombo.  In
      respect of the appellant's daughter, C, the panel noted the concession
      made by the respondent about that relationship  but,  while  accepting
      that  there  existed  between  the  appellant  and  C  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship, the panel made clear and reasoned findings of
      fact to the effect that this was not a strong relationship; he had not
      played a significant role in her upbringing  and  that  the  appellant
      "does not have a strong commitment to it". As, they concluded, it  was
      "most unlikely" that the appellant would play any part in  the  future
      upbringing  of  any  of  his  three  children,  he  could  not  resist
      deportation on that basis.

  11. The panel considered also the appellant's private life  but  explained
      why he could not succeed on that basis, either under  the  immigration
      rules or on their general assessment of his human rights claim outside
      those rules.

  12. The grounds run to 11 closely typed pages in an attempt to identify an
      error of law in the determination  and  in  doing  so  they  challenge
      almost everything that Judge Devitte wrote. Permission was granted  by
      the First tier Judge on the basis that:-

        a. The  panel's  assessment  of  risk  was  not  supported  by  the
           probation report.


        b. The panel's conclusions as to the strength  of  the  appellant's
           ties with C were arguably  inconsistent  with  the  Home  office
           acceptance of the genuine relationship.

  13.  We did not have the benefit  of  a  skeleton  argument  refining  the
      grounds of appeal but we heard at length from Ms Litchfield,  who  had
      appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and drafted  the  grounds.  We
      shall deal with the challenges raised in the order that she  addressed
      them before us.

  14. Ms Litchfield began her submissions by arguing that the panel erred in
      failing to apply the principles in  Maslov  v  Austria  (no.  1638/03)
      [2008] ECHR 546.  The panel did not refer to Maslov, but there was  no
      need for them to do so. This was not the class of case that the Maslov
      guidance was directed at.  The appellant spent the first 28  years  of
      his life in Angola and so on arrival was not  a  child  but  a  mature
      adult; he had not lived in the United Kingdom most of his life

  15. When pressed on this, Ms Litchfield explained that what she meant  was
      that the panel failed to apply the principles in Boultif v Switzerland
      (No. 54273/00) [2001] ECHR 479 and that she  had  referred  to  Maslov
      only because those principles were set out in that judgment.

  16. When asked what, in terms of the factors identified  in  Boultif,  the
      panel had failed to deal with or address, Ms Litchfield said  that  no
      account had been taken of the fact that the appellant had been granted
      first exceptional leave to remain and then indefinite leave to remain.
      That is plainly not a  sustainable  complaint  since  the  immigration
      history including the grant of such leave to the appellant is referred
      to specifically in the determination.

  17. Next, Ms Litchfield submitted that the panel had erred in  failing  to
      have sufficient regard to the appellant's ties, or lack of them,  with
      Angola. The difficulty with that submission is that it is founded,  as
      was the case in the grounds, on the importance of comparative ties  in
      the context of the guidance given in Maslov principles, which  is  not
      applicable in this case. The panel were plainly aware of the time  the
      appellant had  been  away  from  Angola  because  there  are  repeated
      references to that in  the  determination.  This  appellant  lived  in
      Angola for the first 28 years of his life and so his  formative  years
      were spent in that country. Unlike a child who has grown  up  in  this
      country, he will retain recollections of those formative years as well
      as a substantial period of time living in that country as an adult.

  18. Ms Litchfield then submitted that the panel had failed to carry out an
      adequate assessment of the best interests of the children involved  in
      this appeal, and in particular the best interests of  the  appellant's
      daughter, C.

  19. Ms  Litchfield  further  argues  that  the  panel  made  contradictory
      findings of fact in respect of the appellant's relationship with C and
      that  they  impermissibly  went  behind  a  concession  made  by   the
      respondent as to the genuine nature of that relationship. We  disagree
      and the submission involves a  misreading  of  both  the  Home  Office
      decision and the panel's determination.

  20. The panel did not go behind any concession made by the respondent.  At
      paragraph 32(a) of the respondent's decision letter she said this:

           "It is accepted  that  you  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship with [C]..."


      But that was qualified by what was said at paragraph 33  when  dealing
      with  a  response  from  C's  mother  to  an  enquiry  about   contact
      arrangements (with emphasis added):


           "... it is accepted that, in view of the reply letter, a limited
           amount of contact may still exist between you and your  daughter
           [C]..."


      Thus there was an issue to be settled by the panel, having  heard  the
      evidence offered by the appellant, about the extent to which there was
      any continuing contact with C. Ms  Lombo  did  not  give  evidence  or
      provide  a  statement,  and  the  appellant  provided  no  documentary
      evidence of visits to the Newcastle area where C  was  living  at  the
      material time.

  21.  The panel, having heard evidence from the appellant  rejected  nearly
      all that he said about his relationship with all  three  children.  In
      respect of C they noted that she lived with her  mother  in  Newcastle
      while the appellant, when not in prison, lived in London. They did not
      accept his evidence to have  made  visits  to  Newcastle,  noting  his
      apparent lack of resources and failure to produce any evidence at  all
      of having made any such visits. Thus,  accepting  the  basic  fact  of
      family life between the appellant and his  biological  children,  they
      assessed, as they were entitled to on the evidence, that the nature of
      that family life was such as to provide no assistance to the appellant
      in his attempt to resist deportation.


  22.  Developing those submissions, Ms Litchfield complained that there had
      been an inadequate assessment of the best interests  of  the  children
      and the impact upon them, and upon C in particular, of the appellant's
      deportation. In the light of the panel's findings about the quality of
      his relationship with the other children, that were not and could  not
      have been challenged in this appeal, we are  in  fact  concerned  only
      with the assessment of C's best interests.

  23. Again we find both the grounds of appeal and the submissions developed
      before us lacking in substance. First, contrary to what  is  asserted,
      the panel plainly did not limit consideration of C's best interests to
      the approach taken in Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules, but looked
      at  the  matter  more  widely  in  the  context  of  the   Article   8
      jurisprudence.

  24. It is obvious that C's best interest required her to remain  with  her
      mother and primary carer.  The question is whether deportation of  her
      father would be a source of serious detriment to C's welfare and if so
      whether such detriment was justified by other considerations of public
      policy including his offending and the risk to the  public  of  future
      offending.  Having found that the appellant did not  have  significant
      contact with C and had not played an important role in her upbringing,
      there was no evidential basis on which his deportation was  likely  to
      cause serious detriment. The submission that once it is  accepted  (on
      the basis of limited evidence) that there was a genuine  relationship,
      it follows that there is always serious  detriment  to  the  child  is
      obviously a false one. We note the complete absence  of  any  evidence
      about C and her welfare that might have advanced the appellant's  case
      in this respect.

  25. The next complaint pursued before us by Ms  Litchfield  was  that  the
      panel erred in their conclusion that there was a risk of the appellant
      re-offending because they had  misinterpreted  the  Probation  Service
      Offender Management Information Report. But that  complaint  is  based
      upon a misunderstanding of the report. Ms Litchfield is correct to say
      that, at page 7 of that report, a reconviction  risk  is  said  to  be
      "low", but that is in respect of the risk  of  violent  offending  and
      nobody has suggested that the appellant represents other  than  a  low
      risk of committing violent crime. No assessment  was  carried  out  in
      respect of the likelihood of general re-offending. Therefore, all that
      was before the panel was that this was an appellant who had  committed
      repeated  offences  of  dishonesty  and  unlawful  use   of   identity
      documents, sufficiently serious to cross the custody  threshold;  that
      he had offended during the currency of  a  suspended  sentence  for  a
      similar offence; that he had failed  to  surrender  to  bail  and  had
      absconded in an attempt to avoid the consequences of having  committed
      those offences and that he had no plans as to  how  he  would  support
      himself financially following his release from prison.  On  the  basis
      of that evidence the panel was clearly entitled to conclude  that  the
      appellant had  behaved  in  a  manner  that  revealed  'a  pattern  of
      dishonest conduct' and that  'we  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant
      carries at the very least, a medium  to  high  risk  of  reoffending.'
      Indeed that was the only sensible conclusion on the evidence taken  as
      a whole.


  26.  The final point taken by Ms Litchfield was that the  panel  erred  in
      failing to deal with evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's  medical
      condition. The appellant's  representatives  submitted  138  pages  of
      evidence, mainly attendance notes made by medical staff at  the  place
      of the appellant's detention. It is notable that multiple copies  have
      been included in the paginated bundle  of  some  of  these  documents,
      sometimes four or five. The grounds assert that this material:


            ... demonstrates that the Appellant currently  suffers  with  a
           prostrate disorder, depression, hernia  and  takes  prescription
           drugs for this.... The Appellant has been  diagnosed  with  PTSD
           and has suffered from  self  harm  in  the  past  for  which  he
           received  mental  health  treatment  in  the  community  from  a
           psychiatric nurse."


      Ms Lichfield said in the grounds that there was  evidence  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal that:


           "...  medical  treatment  for  the  Appellant's  mental   health
           conditions are not treatable  (sic)  in  Angola  due  to  mental
           health not being part of the primary health  care  system...  he
           receives treatment in the UK for his  medical  conditions.  This
           treatment will stop if he is deported, and thus  is  a  relevant
           consideration under the Maslov criteria."

  27. Although Ms Litchfield is correct to say that the panel did  not  deal
      with the medical evidence in considering the balance of factors in the
      proportionality analysis, and it might have been  preferable  for  the
      sake of completeness if they had done so, no  arguable  point  of  law
      results.


  28. No suggestion is made that the appellant could resist  deportation  on
      grounds alone  of  ill  health  or  an  inability  to  access  medical
      treatment in Angola, so that the argument is that these issues  should
      inform the proportionality assessment of his article 8 claim. Nor does
      the  evidence  support  a  suggestion  that  medical   treatment   for
      conditions  other  than  mental  health  difficulties  will   not   be
      available.


  29. The  evidence  of  his  mental  health  difficulties  is  not  without
      difficulty. The appellant claimed to have given a history of self harm
      but  the notes report that there are no current issues of self harm or
      suicide (64 of appellant's bundle)  and  in  giving  the  account  the
      appellant has been described as a "vague historian"  (ibid).  In  late
      November 2012 he told a medical officer that  he  was  more  concerned
      with his physical welfare than his mental state (page  91  appellant's
      bundle). On 9 January 2013 a therapist who had offered  to  treat  the
      appellant while in prison recorded (at  page  96  of  the  appellant's
      bundle):


           "The Client failed to attend his appointment. I  made  enquiries
           with officers who confirmed he had received the relevant notice.
           After the appointed time an officer informed me that the  client
           was reading in the library at the time of the appointment. Given
           this and the client previous failure to engage I do  not  intend
           to pursue this man as he seems to be displaying a complete  lack
           of motivation or desire to engage."


  30. Although there has been mention in the extensive medical notes of PTSD
      there is no formal diagnosis of such a condition by  a  consultant  or
      other appropriately qualified medical practitioner.


  31. The position  with  the  appellant's  physical  heath  may  have  been
      overstated. On 21 January 2013 the outcome of  investigations  by  the
      Prostrate  Cancer  Risk  Management  Programme  into  the  appellant's
      "prostrate problem" was recorded (page 97 of the appellant's  bundle).
      The Prostrate-specific antigen level was  found  to  be  significantly
      below that at which guidance indicated action was needed, leading to a
      conclusion:


           "Prostrate-Specific antigen  level  report  Normal.  No  Further
           Action."


      This investigation followed an examination at Kings  College  Hospital
      in August 2012 when the urology Registrar found:


           "... his prostrate  moderately  enlarged  and  with  an  overall
           benign impression."


  32. These medical notes record also that the appellant underwent a  hernia
      repair, but that was as long ago as 2005.


  33.  There is nothing in the medical evidence  capable  of  affecting  the
      balance of factors in this appeal. It  follows  that  nothing  at  all
      turns upon the complaint that the panel failed to set out all of  this
      in the determination because it added nothing of  any  consequence  to
      the claim being assessed.


  34. Drawing all this together we find no merit in any  of  the  challenges
      advanced. The panel of the First-tier Tribunal gave cogent reasons for
      reaching conclusions that were open to them on the  evidence  and  the
      determination discloses no error of law.

  35. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.












                               Signed






                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date 12 July 2013
