
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: DA/00340/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |               Decision & Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 14th December 2015                  |               On 12th January 2016     |
|                                       |                                        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          LUIS ENRIQUE REYES GARZON
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State; however I shall  refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant is a  citizen
    of Colombia who  was  born  on  21st  May  1967.   His  appeal  against
    deportation was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal on 8th July 2015.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed against this decision  on  the  grounds
    that the First-tier Tribunal [the panel] had misdirected themselves  in
    law in finding that there were very compelling circumstances. The  fact
    that the Appellant had  family  in  the  UK  did  not  amount  to  very
    compelling  circumstances.   The  Appellant's  relationship  with   his
    partner  was  not  a   durable   one.    Therefore,   the   Appellant's
    circumstances  could  not  be  said  to  amount  to   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above the Immigration Rules.

3.   Secondly, the judge failed to address the three discrete components  in
    the public interest and deportation in OH (Serbia) v Secretary of State
    [2008] EWCA Civ 694:
         (a)  the risk of reoffending by the person concerned;
         (b)  the need to deter foreign criminals  from  committing  serious
             crimes  by  leading  them  to  understand  that  whatever  the
             consequences one consequence of them may well be  deportation;
             and
         (c)   the  role  of  deportation  as  an  expression  of  society's
             revulsion at serious crimes and in building public  confidence
             in the treatment of foreign citizens who have committed serous
             crime.

3.   There were no findings on these issues. The starting point was that  it
    was in the public interest to deport the  Appellant  and  the  Tribunal
    appeared to have approached the case  from  a  neutral  starting  point
    instead of one heavily weighed in favour of deportation.

4.   When assessing the Appellant's case under the principles of Maslov  and
    Uner the Tribunal failed to factor into their assessment their findings
    at paragraph 117 regarding the Appellant's connections to Colombia. The
    Appellant had demonstrated a propensity to reoffend in  the  escalation
    of serious offences since 1987.  The  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  in
    failing to consider  the  public  interest  when  fully  assessing  the
    Appellant's very compelling circumstances.

5.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on  the
    basis that it was not possible to ascertain from [118]  to  [125]  what
    the very compelling circumstances were and the panel appeared  to  have
    simply relied on the  Appellant's  family  life  in  the  UK  and  some
    evidence that he had changed his lifestyle.  It was also arguable  that
    the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  public  interest   in
    deportation.


The Appellant's immigration history and criminal convictions

6.   The Appellant arrived in the UK on 30th  October  1978  and  was  given
    leave to remain on 12th July 1979.  On 28th May  1980  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to enter the UK.  On 17th August  1987  the  Appellant
    was sentenced to three years' imprisonment at Southwark Crown Court for
    possession of controlled drugs with intent to supply.

7.    Between  1987  and  September  2010  the  Appellant   received   eight
    convictions for eleven offences  which  comprised  offences  against  a
    person, public disorder and offences relating to the police courts  and
    prisons.

8.   The Appellant was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  28th  June
    2006.  On 17th September 2010 the  Appellant  was  convicted  at  Inner
    London Crown Court of wounding with intent to do grievous  bodily  harm
    and was sentenced to  45  months'  imprisonment.   He  did  not  appeal
    against the sentence or conviction. On 6th February 2014 the  Appellant
    was served with a deportation order and reasons for his deportation and
    the Appellant appealed against that decision.

9.   The circumstances of the offence were  that  the  Appellant  was  found
    guilty of wounding with intent  to  cause  grievous  bodily  harm.  The
    offence took place in the Appellant's own home and the  victim  was  an
    uninvited guest.

10.  From the sentencing remarks of the  judge  it  would  appear  that  the
    victim stayed a few hours before the offence occurred and behaved in  a
    provocative manner.  When the offence occurred the victim was about  to
    leave the flat and it was at that point that  the  Appellant  assaulted
    him with a glass. The Appellant's defence of self-defence was  rejected
    because the Appellant went far beyond what  was  necessary  to  protect
    himself from further attack.  The injuries to the victim  were  serious
    and he had a scar on his cheek which he would carry for the rest of his
    life.


The Panel's findings

11.  In allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules the panel  made  the
    following findings:
         [111] "From the evidence before us we find that it is  likely  that
         the Appellant had been involved with criminal activity in the  past
         for which he was not arrested or charged."
         [116] "We find that the Appellant's parents see their granddaughter
         on a regular basis but the Appellant does not see her so regularly.
         We find that there was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
         Appellant has genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
         British national child. The Appellant's daughter is clearly able to
         travel to Colombia because she is currently on an extended  holiday
         in Colombia.  Indeed it appears that she would have spent at  least
         five months in Colombia if not longer by  the  time  she  returned.
         She will be able to maintain a level of contact with the  Appellant
         if he is returned to Colombia and there was  insufficient  evidence
         before us to  suggest  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
         Appellant's daughter to remain in the UK without the Appellant."


12.  At [117] it was accepted that the Appellant had lived lawfully  in  the
    UK for most of his  life  and  that  he  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated  into  life  in  the  UK.  However,  after  considering  the
    Appellant's extended family in Colombia and other relevant factors, the
    panel found that there were no  'very  significant  obstacles'  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration into Colombia. Therefore, the Appellant could
    not satisfy paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration  Rules  and  the
    panel  turned  to  considering  whether  there  were  very   compelling
    circumstances over  and  above  the  exceptions  in  Section  117C  and
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.

13.  The panel set out their findings at [119] to  [125].  They  found  that
    the Appellant's  partner  was  credible,  but  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show that they were in a durable  relationship.  The  panel
    found that the evidence of cohabitation was  somewhat  limited  because
    the address given on the Appellant's employment in 2015  was  different
    to his partner's address and from the  address  given  on  the  witness
    statements.

14.  The panel found at [122] that the Appellant had strong family  ties  in
    the UK and much weaker family ties in Colombia:
         "His only family in Colombia was his mother's sister  and  extended
         family in the form of family  members  of  his  sister-in-law.  The
         Appellant's relationship with his parents and  brother  in  the  UK
         would not be sufficient in themselves to avoid deportation, but are
         indicative of his ties to the UK and his lack of ties to Colombia."

15.  At [123] the panel stated:
         "The paragraph 399A exception appears to have  its  origin  in  the
         Maslov principle, but  it  has  been  given  a  very  significantly
         harsher  twist  in  the  final  requirement  of  'very  significant
         obstacles to integration'. There could, therefore, be said to be an
         important gap between the private life exception in the Immigration
         Rules and statute on the one hand and the Maslov  approach  on  the
         other. If the Maslov approach is introduced in the  proportionality
         test envisaged at paragraph 44 of MF (Nigeria) then the  fact  that
         the Appellant has not lived in Colombia from the age of 11 and  has
         spent over 30 years in the UK meaning that he has been  settled  in
         the UK for most of his life would amount to significant  additional
         circumstances over and above the private life exception."

16.  At [124] the panel concluded:
         "The evidence of reform and rehabilitation is also  of  importance.
         This is also a matter not mentioned in  the  exceptions.  It  is  a
         significant factor in the Uner and Maslov criteria.  The  Appellant
         has not committed any further offences since his conviction in 2010
         and has not come to the attention  of  police  intelligence  during
         this time.  There is evidence that he  has  completed  courses  and
         that he has shown some insight into his offending.  There  is  also
         evidence that he  has  moved  away  from  his  previous  lifestyle.
         Whilst the likelihood of reoffending does not carry much weight  in
         assessing the public interest it is still of some significance."


17.  At [125] the panel stated:
         "We have read Chege and we note what is said at paragraph 26  about
         the  meaning  of  'compelling',  namely  having  a   powerful   and
         irresistible  effect,  and  being  convincing.  We  also  note  the
         observation that the word 'very' indicates the very high threshold.
         In deportation cases great weight must of course be  given  to  the
         public interest in deporting foreign national  criminals.  However,
         there may be circumstances where the public interest is  outweighed
         by the Appellant's particular circumstances. We find  in  light  of
         our  finding  above  that  that  in  this  Appellant's   particular
         circumstances the very compelling circumstances test is met."


Submissions

18.  Miss Savage relied on the grounds of appeal and  submitted  that  there
    were  no  'very  compelling   circumstances'   sufficient   to   resist
    deportation under paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules. The judge had
    concluded at [111] that the Appellant was likely to  blame  others  for
    his involvement and his criminal conduct.

19.  The Appellant had no regular contact with his daughter and  no  genuine
    parental relationship. The panel  considered  the  Appellant's  private
    life  and  concluded  that  there  were  no  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration in Colombia. Therefore the exceptions in 399 and 399A did
    not apply.

20.  However, the panel concluded that there were  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those identified in the Immigration Rules.  The  panel's
    findings at [118] to [125]  did  not  identify  what  those  compelling
    circumstances were or support such a finding. The Appellant's length of
    residence  was  considered  at  [117]  but  this  did  not  affect  his
    reintegration.

21.  The panel's conclusion  at  [119]  that  the  Appellant's  mindset  had
    changed since his imprisonment conflicted with the  findings  at  [111]
    and was also contradicted by  the  findings  at  [126].  Although,  the
    Appellant had not come to the attention of the police for five years he
    had been in detention until  2012  and  had  been  well  aware  of  his
    deportation on release.

22.  The circumstances set out at [118] to [125] did  not  constitute  'very
    compelling   circumstances'   particularly   since   the    Appellant's
    relationship with his family would not constitute family life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8. The case of Maslov  was  entirely  different  to
    this case. In this case the Appellant was a  48  year  old  man  not  a
    juvenile offender, notwithstanding the  Appellant  had  received  youth
    custody for his first offence. Further,  there  was  only  one  violent
    offence in Maslov where in this case the Appellant  had  a  history  of
    violent offending.


23.  The panel concluded that the Appellant  had  weaker  ties  in  Colombia
    than he did in the  UK.  This  was  a  factor  taken  into  account  in
    paragraph 399A [117]. The panel had  failed  to  identify  factors  not
    considered under paragraph 399 or 399A and had not  applied  the  'very
    compelling test' in paragraph 399A. The panel had  failed  to  identify
    circumstances capable of meeting that test  because  those  which  were
    referred to in the decision had already been considered  under  399  or
    399A.

24.  Miss Savage submitted that the public  interest  was  relevant  to  the
    assessment of 'very compelling circumstances' and the panel had  failed
    to take it into account.  The public interest in this case must prevail
    and the appeal should have been dismissed. Had the judge  assessed  the
    Immigration Rules properly the panel would have come  to  the  opposite
    decision.

25.  Mr Lee submitted that the grounds amounted to a  perversity  challenge.
    It could not said that the correct test had not been  applied  or  that
    relevant factors had not been taken into account. The panel  identified
    the issues at [67], namely whether  the  Appellant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship and, secondly, the role of  Maslov  in  determining  'very
    compelling circumstances'. The panel relied on the relevant  Rules  and
    case law which they set out extensively.  They  concluded  that  Maslov
    fell to be applied as Strasbourg jurisprudence was still relevant to an
    assessment under the Immigration Rules.

26.  At [103] it was clear that the panel were aware of  the  strong  public
    interest in deporting the  Appellant  and  that  the  only  reason  for
    considering 'very compelling circumstances' was in  order  to  identify
    whether they outweighed the strong public interest. The threshold in  a
    perversity challenge was a  high  one.  If  the  panel  had  identified
    something  amounting  to  'very  compelling  circumstances'  then   the
    decision was open to them.

27.  Applying Maslov, this Appellant was a  settled  migrant  and  therefore
    there had to be very serious reasons  justifying  his  expulsion.   The
    panel applied this  at  [123]  and  the  Appellant's  sheer  length  of
    residence   could   amount   to    very    compelling    circumstances,
    notwithstanding the fact that the Appellant did  not  have  significant
    obstacles to integration in  Colombia.  The  panel  were  applying  the
    jurisprudence in accordance with MF.

28.  The panel set out at [123] the  reasons  why  they  considered  certain
    factors were not covered by the  Immigration  Rules.  The  evidence  of
    reform and rehabilitation was  an  additional  circumstance  which  the
    panel could take into account. It was also clear from  [125]  that  the
    panel has attached great weight to the public interest. The only reason
    to interfere with  the  decision  was  if  the  Appellant's  length  of
    residence and his reform and rehabilitation could not amount  to  'very
    compelling circumstances' outside the Immigration Rules.


29.  The panel had looked cumulatively at all the factors and had  carefully
    weighed all the evidence. They had applied the correct test and it  was
    difficult to see how the decision could be challenged given the panel's
    careful consideration of the circumstances and the relevant case law.

30.  The panel had clearly identified in the  decision  at  [118]  to  [124]
    what amounted to compelling circumstances. Length of residence was  not
    subsumed in paragraph 399 and  399A  because  it  was  limited  by  the
    requirement  that  the  Appellant   show   significant   obstacles   to
    integration. Paragraph 399A was not compatible  with  Maslov,  applying
    MF, and there was no consideration of the  total  length  of  residence
    under 399A.

31.  In response, Miss Savage submitted that the panel  had  misapplied  the
    Immigration Rules. Length of residence and  reform  and  rehabilitation
    did not  amount  to  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    considered under paragraph 399 and 399A.   The  factors  relied  on  in
    [118] were not factors  over  and  above  those  considered  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The Tribunal had not applied the case law set out in
    substance, particularly that at [108], and the  factors  identified  in
    [118] onwards were not compelling in the sense that they had a powerful
    and irresistible effect or they were convincing.  Thirty  seven  years'
    residence could not amount to compelling circumstances on the facts  of
    this case.


Discussion and Conclusion

32.  Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules was not inconsistent  with  the
    decision in Maslov which found that where a settled migrant has been in
    the UK lawfully since childhood then very serious reasons were required
    to justify expulsion.  I am of the  view  that  these  serious  reasons
    exist and are set out at [110] and [111] of the decision.

33.  There was no error of law in the panel's application of paragraphs  399
    and 399A of the Immigration Rules. The Appellant could not show that he
    had a subsisting parental relationship with his daughter or that he was
    in a durable relationship with his EEA  partner.   In  addition,  there
    were no significant obstacles to his integration in Colombia. There was
    no challenge to the panel's finding on these points.

34.  The panel found that the  Appellant's  lawful  residence  of  37  years
    [123]  and  the  evidence  of  reform  and  rehabilitation  [124]  were
    sufficient to show 'very compelling circumstances' over and  above  the
    private life exception in the Immigration Rules.  The panel found  that
    the Appellant had shown some insight into his offending behaviour,  but
    acknowledged that the risk of re-offending would not carry much  weight
    in assessing the public interest.

35.  I find that the panel had identified factors not considered  under  the
    Immigration Rules, namely, 37 years lawful residence  and  evidence  of
    reform and rehabilitation. Length of residence was not only relevant to
    re-integration.  These  factors  could  amount   to   very   compelling
    circumstances.

36.  I find that the panel did not start from a neutral standpoint and  they
    were well aware of the significant weight to be attached to the  public
    interest. They concluded that the Appellant had been in  the  UK  since
    the age of 11 and had been settled in the UK for most of his life. They
    properly directed themselves following Chege  (Section 117D - Article 8
    approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC) [125]  and  their  finding  that  the
    Appellant's particular circumstances were  very  compelling  such  that
    they outweighed the public interest was open to them  on  the  evidence
    before them.

37.  The panel applied the correct test and took into account  all  relevant
    factors applying relevant case law  and  the  Immigration  Rules.  They
    acknowledged the weight to be  attached  to  the  public  interest  and
    having identified very compelling circumstances,  concluded  that  they
    outweighed the public interest. Whilst a different panel may have  come
    to a different conclusion, it could not be  said  that  the  conclusion
    reached by this panel was not open to them on the evidence.

38.  Looking at  the  factors  set  out  at  [118]  to  [124],  the  panel's
    conclusion that these were sufficient to outweigh the public  interest,
    in that they were powerful, irresistible and convincing,  was  open  to
    them on the evidence. I find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the
    panel's conclusion that the particular circumstances of the Appellant's
    case were 'very compelling.' There was no error of law in the  decision
    to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


Notice of Decision


The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 8th January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



