
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
DA/00548/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined on the papers                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|                                         | On 19 March 2019                  |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                           VITOR HUGO DE OLIVEIRA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision dated 1 June 2018, I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set aside:

    1.   The appellant, Vitor Hugo De Oliveira, was born on 4 June 1986 and
    is a male citizen of Portugal.  He entered the United Kingdom in  2009.
    A deportation order was made in respect of the  appellant  on  13  July
    2015.  The index event was a  conviction  of  the  appellant  on  seven
    counts of theft, possession of an article with  a  blade  in  a  public
    place and five  breaches  of  a  suspended  prison  sentence.   He  was
    sentenced to nine months' imprisonment.  The appellant appealed against
    the decision to deport him to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Farrelly)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 25 May 2017, dismissed the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

    2.   I find that the First-tier decision should be set aside.   I  have
    reached that decision for the following reasons.  First,  I  find  that
    the judge erred by failing to make any  proper  finding  regarding  the
    conduct of the appellant and, in particular, whether  he  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society

    (see Regulation 20(5)(c)).  I agree with Mr McTaggart, who appeared for
    the appellant before the Upper Tribunal, that it is only in  the  light
    of a clear finding under Regulation 20(5)(c) that it  becomes  possible
    to decide whether the Secretary of State's decision  was  proportionate
    by reference to the considerations identified  in  Regulation  21(5-6).
    Judge Farrelly set out at [20] Regulation 21  but  [21]  whilst  noting
    [21] that the appellant had "committed serious and repeated  offences",
    and  observing  that  there  appeared  to  be  "limited   evidence   of
    rehabilitation", failed to  determine  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    represented a threat as at the date of the hearing.  Mr Duffy, for  the
    Secretary of State, argued that Judge Farrelly had said enough at  [21]
    for a reader of the decision to conclude that the judge had found  that
    the appellant represented a threat.  I do not consider that it  is  for
    the Upper Tribunal to complete work which the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    required to undertake but has failed to complete; it  is  not  for  the
    Upper Tribunal to take steps to "rescue" a  decision  of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge so as to prevent it falling into error.   The  'missing'
    finding in this instance was of  crucial  importance  because,  without
    making it, there existed no basis for  the  remainder  of  the  judge's
    analysis.

    3.   I consider that this is an appeal which can remain  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal where the decision  can  be  remade.   I  therefore  make  the
    following directions:

    A    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    25 May 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.

    B    Both parties shall, within 21 days of receiving these  directions,
    send to the Upper Tribunal at Field House, Upper Tribunal Judge Lane  [
          ] and to each other copies of any  written  evidence  upon  which
    they respectively seek to rely concerning the remaking of the decision.



    C    Within 14 days of receiving the appellant's updated evidence,  the
    Secretary of State shall write to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  to  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Lane to indicate whether he wishes to cross-examine  the
    appellant or any other witness.  In the event that cross-examination is
    necessary, a resumed hearing will be convened.  If cross-examination is
    not required then the following direction shall take effect.

    D    No later than 2 July 2018, both parties shall file  at  the  Upper
    Tribunal and send to Upper Tribunal Judge Lane and to each other copies
    of any written representations upon which they may respectively seek to
    rely.  Thereafter and without a further hearing, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lane will remake the decision.

 2. Following the making  of  the  above  directions,  I  received  written
    submissions under cover  of  a  letter  dated  2  July  2018  from  the
    appellant's solicitors. I received no communication  at  all  from  the
    Secretary of State. I have, therefore, not convened a  resumed  hearing
    but now determine the appeal on the basis of the written submissions.

 3. Both parties accept that the appellant is entitled to lowest  level  of
    protection as an EU national:

    Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public security and public
    health

    27.(1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA  decision
    taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health.

    ...

    5) The public policy and public security  requirements  of  the  United
    Kingdom  include  restricting  rights  otherwise  conferred  by   these
    Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of  society,
    and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or
    public security it must also be taken in accordance with the  following
    principles-




    (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

    (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
    the person concerned;

    (c) the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct  of
    the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent;

    (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or  which  relate
    to considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision;

    (e) a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
    justify the decision;

    (f) the decision may be taken on  preventative  grounds,  even  in  the
    absence of a previous criminal conviction,  provided  the  grounds  are
    specific to the person.

    (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of  public  policy
    and public security in relation to a person ("P") who  is  resident  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must   take   account   of
    considerations such as the age, state of health,  family  and  economic
    situation of P, P's length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  P's
    social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent
    of P's links with P's country of origin.

 4. The appellant's solicitors have informed  me  that  the  appellant  has
    again been imprisoned for a  criminal  offence.  On  his  behalf,  they
    submit that the appellant's convictions  were  drug-related.  There  is
    been no ACE assessment. The appellant claims that he has the support of
    family members in Portadown but what that support consists  of  is  not
    clear; I have no written evidence in support from those family  members
    and they have not  offered  oral  testimony  at  any  of  the  Tribunal
    hearings. The solicitors submit that the appellant is now likely to  be
    heroin-free given his incarceration  but  no  evidence  is  adduced  to
    support that claim. Given the prevalence of drug-taking in  prisons  it
    cannot be assumed that the  appellant  must  now  be  drug-free  simply
    because he is in prison.

 5. I have considered the appellant's age. I have little  if  any  evidence
    regarding his state of health  other  than  being  aware  of  his  drug
    addiction. I am aware that he has been in the United Kingdom since 2009
    but there is little, if  any,  evidence  of  his  social  and  cultural
    integration. He claims to have support from adult family  members  they
    have done nothing to assist him in this  appeal.  I  have  no  evidence
    regarding his links with Portugal. He has been imprisoned for a  series
    of drugs offences but also violent behaviour including  the  possession
    of a knife. Having regard to all of the rather limited evidence,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant  does  represent  a  genuine  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, namely the preservation of law and  order.  Even  following
    the proceedings taken by the Secretary of  State  to  deport  him,  the
    appellant has committed further offences for which has been imprisoned.
    All the evidence  points  towards  a  disregard  for  society  in  this
    jurisdiction and a complete failure to attempt let  alone  achieve  any
    meaningful integration with that society. The  appellant  has  shown  a
    propensity to continue offending even when doing so plainly jeopardises
    his continued residence here. It is conduct which strongly indicates  a
    genuine and present threat  to  others  in  society.  Accordingly,  his
    appeal is dismissed.




Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

