
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
DA/00259/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 25th January 2018                  |           On 29th January 2018       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             MAGOMEDS HIZRIJEVS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber (instructed by Turner & Miller
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petterson (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
      permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons  of  Judge  Grimmett
      following a hearing at Birmingham on 1st August 2017.  In  a  Decision
      and Reasons promulgated on 29th August 2017 the appeal  was  dismissed
      on all grounds.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Latvia.  The Secretary of State  made  a
      decision to deport him under the EEA Regulations following a string of
      motoring offences which had latterly resulted in custodial sentences.

   3. The ground relied upon by Mr Khubber was that the Judge had erred when
      assessing whether the Appellant had acquired  permanent  residence  in
      the UK, which he argued that he had.  Had she assessed that  correctly
      then the test to be met before he could be deported  was  considerably
      higher.

   4. The Appellant came to the UK in February 2010 aged 16.  He was  21  on
      28th  October  2014.   He  would  have  achieved  5  years  continuous
      residence by February 2015.  As a direct descendant under the  age  of
      21 he was a family member of his mother until he turned  21.   It  was
      accepted that this mother has always been exercising Treaty Rights.

   5. The Judge found that she was not satisfied that he  was  dependant  on
      his mother from October 2014 until February 2015  on  the  basis  that
      there was no evidence who  paid  the  household  bills.   That  was  a
      finding based on only part of the evidence and  failed  to  take  into
      account that the Appellant remained living with his mother during that
      time and was not working.  Had she considered that she may have  found
      he was a dependant relative and thus acquired permanent residence.

   6. Miss Petterson agreed that there was an error of law and that  it  was
      material because a completely different test arises for a person  with
      permanent residence.  The Decision and Reasons must therefore  be  set
      aside in its entirety and redecided.

   7. That  is  not  to  say  that  the  Appellant  had  acquired  permanent
      residence.  That is a matter that  will  have  to  be  decided,  on  a
      correct consideration of all relevant evidence.

   8. Given that no findings are preserved it is appropriate  to  remit  the
      matter for a full rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  Decision
and Reasons is set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for a full rehearing on all issues by a Judge, other  than  Judge  Grimmett,
at the Bradford hearing centre.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 25th January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
