
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00313/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2018                       | On 21 March 2018                     |
|                                         |                                      |


                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD BOYD
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                miss anna [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Duffy, Home Officer Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Y. Vanderman, Counsel instructed by The Aire
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes promulgated  on  17  October  2017  in  which  he
    allowed the appeal of Miss [A].  We shall refer to  Miss  [A]  as  'the
    appellant' as she was in the First-tier Tribunal.


 2. The appeal was governed by the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016, and those required a two-fold approach to be adopted.
     First, the Judge was to consider what was the appropriate test as  far
    as this appellant was concerned and whether or not she had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence such that she could  only  be  removed  on
    serious grounds of public  policy  or  public  security.   Second,  her
    conduct must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  Both  of
    those elements had to be established.  The Judge found that they were.


 3. Paragraphs 8 and 9 of the determination  contain  a  finding  that  the
    appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence:


         "Although the appellant entered the UK in 2007 it  appears  towards
         the end of that year and as noted it is not claimed  that  she  had
         resided in the United Kingdom for ten years before  being  sent  to
         prison.  The evidence of her having worked in the United Kingdom is
         limited.  This  is  explained  by  her  having  lost  much  of  the
         paperwork following her fleeing an abusive relationship.  There  is
         evidence for that in the appellant's bundle from victim support  at
         page 79 and the following pages.  That said, she  left that partner
         in 2013 and  could  have  approached  her  previous  employers  for
         supporting letters if  not  copies  of  wage  slips  and  the  like
         although I appreciate it is only since her conviction that this has
         become an issue  and  her  funds  have  been  limited  as  she  has
         indicated.


         The account that the Appellant has given about her work history  in
         the UK has been consistent throughout the various letters  and  her
         witness  statement.   The  documentation  that   relates   to   the
         Appellant's working in the UK is in the Appellant's bundle at pages
         56 to 77.  Whilst not a seamless continuity the  records  cover  at
         least part of every year since 2008.  ...  Her  working  for  Titan
         Telecom is supported by documents and the evidence of  her  friend.
         I find that the Appellant has shown that she has  exercised  treaty
         rights in the UK for more than 5 years and so is  entitled  to  the
         higher level of protection afforded by the EEA Regulations 2016."


 4. That is challenged in the grounds of appeal by the Secretary  of  State
    where it is said that the appellant was required  to  demonstrate  that
    she has been a qualified person for a continuous five year period since
    Bulgaria acceded the European Union in 2007.  In our judgement that was
    a finding of fact that was open  to  the  Judge  by  reference  to  the
    documentation that was found at pages 56  to  77.   It  is  impossible,
    normally, for an individual to produce proof of working that  is  truly
    continuous working.  Instead what is normally required is a mixture  of
    documentary evidence, the evidence of the appellant,  her  friends  and
    relatives and other evidence relating to presence in the United Kingdom
    which shows a pattern of  her  having  been  exercising  Treaty  rights
    throughout that period.  Clearly if there had been  evidence  that  she
    had been in receipt of state benefits, that would  have  countered  any
    such suggestion.  There was none.  Instead there was a fragmentary,  or
    as the Judge described, 'not seamless' production  of  material.   That
    was the basis upon which the Judge determined that she had  established
    that requirement.


 5. However, the grounds in our judgement are limited to a challenge to the
    question of whether she had a permanent right of residence.


 6. It certainly appears that paragraphs 1 to 4 of the grounds are directly
    related to the question of  whether  she  has  the  enhanced  level  of
    protection as a result of her having  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence and then we notice that the concluding words of  paragraph  6
    also revert to alleging that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was deficient insofar as the appellant had failed to  prove  that
    she was exercising Treaty rights as a qualified person for a continuous
    five year period.  On that basis it is  only  the  permanent  right  of
    residence point which is challenged.


 7. This fails however to take into account whether or  not  the  appellant
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat.   The
    Judge dealt with this partly in paragraph 16 where  he  refers  to  the
    fact that it is not alleged that the appellant failed  to  comply  with
    the terms of her release or that she committed further  offences.   The
    conviction remained a one-off and, although the facts behind it  reveal
    a longer period of offending, there has been  no  repeat.   Accordingly
    the conclusion that the Judge ultimately reached to the effect that she
    does not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    was one that was open to him and which is not challenged in the grounds
    of appeal.


 8. In those circumstances it is our view that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of challenge must fail and the Judge reached a  decision  which
    was open to him to make on the material that was before him.


DECISION

          i) The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.
         ii) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of
             Miss [A] shall stand.




Date: 21st March 2018

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
