
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00109/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 27th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            miss yana chubenkova
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bobb of Counsel instructed by Aylish Alexander
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant is a citizen of Bulgaria born on 13th May 1986.  She  came
    to the United Kingdom on 9th January 2008.  Her criminal record  begins
    in July 2012.  She was initially cautioned for harassment and then went
    on to have further convictions for breaching a  non-molestation  order,
    battery, failure to surrender to custody and disorderly behaviour.  She
    was administratively removed  to  Bulgaria  on  21st  July  2013.   She
    returned to the UK however and was convicted of more criminal  offences
    including assault occasioning actual bodily harm, assault and breach of
    non-molestation orders and sentenced to a total  of  seventeen  months'
    imprisonment on 22nd August 2014.

 2. The claimant was served with notice of  liability  to  deport  on  15th
    December 2014 and the decision to make a  deportation  order  including
    certification under Section 24AA of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 was made on 23rd January 2015.  There was a  further  Home  Office
    letter sent responding to  representations  on  3rd  March  2015.   She
    lodged an appeal against the decision to deport on 7  April  2015;  and
    judicial review proceedings regarding her certification  under  Section
    24AA of the EEA Regulations were commenced on 10th April 2015.  On  1st
    July 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hodgkinson  promulgated  a
    decision allowing the claimant's appeal  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 (henceforth the 2006  Regulations),  however  on  28th
    August 2015 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Warr  granted  permission  for  the
    Secretary of State to appeal that decision.

 3. The matter comes before me to decide whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law.

Submissions - Grounds

 4. In summary the Secretary of State's grounds contend that the  reasoning
    at paragraphs 42, 43, 45 and 46  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the appellant does not present  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of society  is
    not sufficient, and does not  have  adequate  regard  to  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal.  The reason for this is it is said that there is a
    lack of consideration of the OASys Report  which  states  the  claimant
    poses a  high  risk  to  known  adults.   There  is  also  said  to  be
    contradictory findings in the course of the decision about whether  the
    appellant accepts responsibility for  her  criminal  behaviour;  it  is
    argued that it is logically questionable whether her  booked  programme
    of rehabilitation is a good indicator as to whether she poses a  future
    threat in the light of the fact it was arranged by her parents;  it  is
    also said to be an error for the First-tier Tribunal to have considered
    a positive factor that the claimant currently has no contact  with  her
    previous victims as this is not of central relevance when she  is  said
    to pose a risk to all known adults and not simply these victims.

 5. Mr Kandola added  a  further  submission  orally  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  had  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  material  evidence
    affecting the  risk  assessment  as  the  OASys  Report  had  not  been
    considered in full.  The claimant's problems were  clearly  not  simply
    derived from her alcoholism but also from other matters  regarding  her
    anger management and problem solving abilities.  The Betel UK Programme
    which she intends to enter if allowed to remain in the UK would address
    her alcoholism but there was no evidence before the Tribunal that  this
    programme would have assisted her in other necessary ways.

 6. Mr Bobb, representing the claimant, submitted that if the OASys  Report
    was read as a whole then it was clear alcohol was underlying her  other
    problems and that  the  Betel  UK  project  would  indeed  address  any
    additional or related problems as the programme was a  community  based
    one  in  which  underlying   issues   beyond   addiction   were   given
    consideration and support.  It was also clear the claimant had  herself
    emailed Betel UK and shown a commitment to  going  there  even  if  her
    parents had initiated the contact.  The involvement of her parents  was
    not a sign of the claimant's lack of commitment given that she  was  in
    prison and did not have access to sending emails freely at the point of
    initiation of contact with Betel.  It was relevant  that  the  claimant
    had severed her contact with  known  adults  who  had  previously  been
    victims, and lawful that this evidence was taken into account, as  this
    was relevant to the OASys analysis of her offending behaviour  and  the
    risks of re-offending which must start with all  current  known  adults
    who have been victims.

Conclusions

 7. The First-tier Tribunal considered the OASys Report  in  full  and  the
    findings section of the decision sets out an accurate  summary  of  the
    key points of that report at paragraphs 38 and 39 of the decision.  The
    First-tier Tribunal was clearly aware that the report had found she was
    in complete denial about her own culpability and focused on blaming her
    partners.  The First-tier Tribunal  was  also  aware  that  the  report
    states that at the time it was written that the appellant posed a  high
    risk to known adults whilst being a low risk to others and assessed her
    risk of reconviction as being a medium one.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal also  sets  out  an  accurate  summary  of  the
    situation  with  regards  the  possible  eighteen  months'  residential
    placement  with  Betel  UK   Organisation   which   addresses   alcohol
    dependency.   It  is  clear  that  there  are  quite  probably  similar
    programmes in Bulgaria from  paragraph  43  of  the  decision  and  the
    arrangement with Betel UK was set up with the help  of  the  claimant's
    parents, with contact first being established in October  2014  by  the
    claimant's mother as is set out at paragraph 14 of the decision.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is made in the  awareness  that  the
    evidence of the Tribunal was that the claimant took some responsibility
    for her offending although she still places some significant  blame  on
    her former partners - see paragraph 46 of the decision of the Tribunal.



10. Whilst the OASys Report does, as Mr Kandola points out, raise issues of
    the appellant's  anger  management  and  problem-solving  the  evidence
    provided by the claimant to the First-tier Tribunal regarding Betel  UK
    is that they also deal with problems regarding character,  work  skills
    and responsibility.  It is clear that the  programme  involves  working
    and living in a community whilst being  monitored  at  all  times.   It
    cannot be said that the finding of the First-tier Tribunal  that  Betel
    UK would address and reduce the risk of offending is not rational  when
    regard is had to the evidence before them.

11. It cannot therefore be argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    accurately and fairly appreciate the evidence before them.  It is  also
    clear that the First-tier Tribunal asked the  correct  legal  question:
    whether  the  appellant  currently  poses  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society as set out at Regulation 21(5)(c) of  the  2006  Regulations
    and also appreciated that the appellant had not attained any  permanent
    right of residence in the UK.

12. The Tribunal  finds  at  paragraph  46  in  its  conclusions  that  the
    appellant does not pose a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat as it accepts evidence that the offending of the  appellant  has
    been driven in part at least by alcohol (which is also accepted by  the
    Secretary of State) and that she will be going immediately from custody
    to the Betel Programme (the credibility of which was not in doubt - see
    paragraph 40 of the decision).   The  Betel  Programme  will  take  the
    appellant physically away from known adults and address  her  behaviour
    relating to alcohol,  thus  building  on  her  current  abstinence  and
    undertake a structured work programme over a period of eighteen  months
    (see paragraph 41 of  the  decision).   This  combined  with  the  oral
    evidence, indicating an acceptance of at least some responsibility  for
    offending,  was  found  to  mean  that  the  test  for  deportation  at
    Regulation 21(5)(c) of the 2006 Regulations was not met.

13. I conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not
    irrational, did not fail to take into  account  material  evidence  and
    cannot be said to be insufficiently reasoned.

Notice of Decision

(1)  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law on a point of law.

(2)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal is  upheld.



No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed   Date 26th October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

