
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00816/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 3rd October 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |on 18th November 2013        |


                                   Before

        THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY, PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Richard Dean Roberts

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    No appearance, no legal representation
For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

[1]  This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal made on 5 August 2013. The Secretary of State, in a
    decision dated 14 April 2013, determined that Dean Roberts, who is  the
    Respondent to this appeal, should be deported.  This decision was  made
    on the ground that deportation would be conducive to the  public  good,
    under Section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971.  The First-tier  Tribunal,
    in its written determination dated 5 August 2013, allowed  his  appeal.
    The Secretary of  State  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal.

[2]  In very brief compass, the salient facts  are  that  Mr  Roberts  is  a
    Jamaican national who is now aged 24 years.  When he entered the United
    Kingdom originally he did so lawfully at the age of 16,  in  2005.   He
    was accompanied by his sister and  both  proceeded  to  live  with  his
    mother.  In substance, he has had continuous residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom since then.  Since entry, he has generated a  criminal  record.
    Of particular significance are the  convictions  which  he  accumulated
    during the period June 2012 to January 2013.  He was the subject of six
    convictions during this period.  In the main, these  were  offences  of
    harassment and breaches of restraining orders.  With the  exception  of
    an associated offence of a minor assault, these were targeted and inter-
    related offences.   They concerned a female person with whom Mr Roberts
    had had a tempestuous relationship for some time.   His  offending  was
    cumulative and escalating in nature.  It culminated in  the  imposition
    of a commensurate sentence of ten months' imprisonment at Harrow  Crown
    Court on 29 January 2013.  This was  the  first,  and  only,  custodial
    sentence to which Mr Roberts has been subjected.  It was this  sentence
    which provided the impetus for the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    deport Mr Roberts from the United Kingdom.

[3]  In her appeal the Secretary of State contends that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by two distinct  errors  of  law.   The
    first asserted error is that a material misdirection was  committed  by
    the Tribunal namely that the Tribunal erred in  applying  a  two  stage
    test in the Article 8 assessment.

[4]  The relevant provisions of paragraphs 396 and 398  of  the  Immigration
    Rules are the following:

         396. A deportation order will not be made if the person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Where
         deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is outweighed (our emphasis).

     Paragraph 398 continues (in material part):

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention
         and -


          a) The deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             at least 4 years; [or]


          b) The deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

          c) The deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of  State,
             their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law .....

         The Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

[5]   We  consider  that  on  any  fair  and  reasonable  reading   of   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal the judge was cognisant of the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules.   Furthermore,  they  are
    set out fully in paragraph 8 of the Determination.   The  Tribunal  was
    plainly alert to  the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
    criminals.  In paragraphs 23 and 24 it directed itself impeccably.

[6]  Properly analysed, the crucial issue in this case was  proportionality.
    This required the judge to decide how much weight, if any, to attribute
    to a range of factors, in a manner harmonious with paragraph 398 of the
    Rules and recognising the strong public interest in play.  Although  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 had not been decided at the  date
    of the Determination under appeal, it is evident  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal recognised the strong public interest  in  deportation.  While
    the Tribunal applied the two stage exercise which is now not considered
    appropriate, we are satisfied that, as in MF (Nigeria),  this  did  not
    invalidate the outcome. In particular, we consider that the  First-tier
    Tribunal made its assessment of proportionality in a manner  harmonious
    with the exceptional circumstances requirement prescribed in  paragraph
    398 of the Immigration Rules.  In this context we refer particularly to
    paragraphs [39] - [41] and [50] of MF.

[7]  It is appropriate to emphasise that the First-tier  Tribunal  expressly
    acknowledged [in paragraph 31] that this is  a  finely  balanced  case.
    This is an uncontroversial assessment,  which  one  would  expect  most
    tribunals to have  made.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion,  in
    reasoned and sustainable terms, was that this is  an  exceptional  case
    and that it would be disproportionate to proceed with  the  deportation
    of the Respondent. We can identify  no  material  misdirection  in  its
    decision.  For the reasons elaborated, we conclude that the first error
    of law advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State has no foundation.

[8]  We turn to consider the second ground of appeal.  We draw attention  to
    how this is formulated in the Notice of Appeal:

         "Failure to give reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
         certain material matters".

         This ground is elaborated in  the  three  paragraphs  of  substance
    which follow in the Notice.  The resolution by  this  Tribunal  of  the
    second ground of  appeal  requires  a  fair,  reasonable  and  intimate
    analysis  of  what  is   contained   in   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination.  In conducting this exercise we  are  required  to  have
    regard to all the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and  we  have
    duly done so.

[9]  In our view, this ground of appeal  is,  properly  analysed,  a  thinly
    disguised challenge to the merits of the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  One of its prominent themes is  that  of  disagreement.   It
    expresses disagreement with  the  Tribunal's  assessment  that  certain
    factors were deserving of greater weight than  others  and  that  these
    factors cumulatively and ultimately, by a narrow margin as the Tribunal
    emphasised, outweighed the legitimate aim pursued by the  Secretary  of
    State.

[10] We consider the main question for  this  Tribunal,  in  resolving  this
    ground of appeal, to be whether there was sufficient  evidence,  direct
    or inferential, to underpin  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  and
    conclusions.   We  are  satisfied  that  there  was.   There   was   no
    impermissible speculation.   Nor  is  there  any  clearly  demonstrated
    factual error of substance. The Tribunal's reasoning, in our  judgment,
    satisfies the basic legal standards which are engaged in  the  exercise
    of compilation of any judicial decision,  namely  the  requirements  of
    coherence, intelligibility and objective sustainability.  His  disposes
    of the first two elements of this discrete ground of appeal.

[11] The third limb  of  the  second  ground  of  appeal  raises  the  issue
    concerning  the  risk  posed  by  Mr  Roberts  in  consequence  of  his
    offending.  We consider that this was a matter pre-eminently  requiring
    evaluative judgment on the part of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is
    appropriate to remind ourselves that in considering this element of the
    second ground we must disregard what this Tribunal might  have  decided
    had it been conducting the same exercise  as  that  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This must be disregarded because it is  legally  irrelevant.
    We are satisfied that there is  no  disharmony  between  the  available
    evidence and the Tribunal's consideration of this issue  or  its  final
    proportionality assessment.

[12]   Ultimately, the task for this Tribunal is to consider whether any  of
    the asserted errors of law  in  their  various  manifestations  in  the
    grounds of appeal has been  demonstrated.  We  conclude  that  no  such
    infirmity is established.   There are two grounds  of  appeal  in  this
    case.  We are satisfied that neither of these  grounds  of  appeal  has
    been established.  Neither of the basic errors of law asserted  by  the
    Secretary of State has been demonstrated.  It  is  appropriate  to  re-
    emphasise  that  there  are  many  borderline  cases  in  this   field.
    Borderline cases  present  particularly  challenging  difficulties  for
    judges, especially at first instance.  This judge in this instance  has
    undertaken the necessary exercise with commendable care and  attention.
    While the decision reached might not  necessarily  have  been  made  by
    every First-tier judge, the converse applies fully.  This is  the  very
    essence of responsible and independent judicial  decision  making.   In
    the United Kingdom legal system it is  open  to  one  duly  constituted
    court or tribunal to lawfully make a decision which might not have been
    made by another.   The  rule  of  law  accommodates  this  truism.  The
    relevant legal standards have been applied to  this  judgment,  and  we
    conclude that it passes muster.

Decision

[13] Accordingly we are satisfied that there is no error of law such  as  to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

     The appeal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

Footnote

[14] For the record,  we  add  that  after  the  hearing  had  concluded  it
    appeared that the notification of  hearing  had  been  directed  to  an
    erroneous address: this might explain the Respondent's  non-attendance.
    Given our decision we do not consider it necessary to relist the matter
    for further hearing.











Signed:   [pic]
The Hon Mr Justice McCloskey,
President of the Upper Tribunal

Dated:  08 November 2013


