

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00465/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd September  2013                       |On 24th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                 MR c j b o
                                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Nwator (Leslie Charles Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr G Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  14th  July  1987.  He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Stokes and Dr Ravenscroft) promulgated on 31st May 2013
    dismissing his appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    deport him.

2.    The  Appellant  applied  twice,  unsuccessfully,  in  2008  for  entry
    clearance to the UK as  a  student.  He  then,  using  a  false  French
    passport, came to the UK at the end of  2008.  He  thereafter  took  no
    action to regularise his position in the UK.

3.   In 2009 he met his partner and they shortly thereafter started to  live
    together. He was then at the beginning of 2011, charged with possession
    with intent to supply Class A drugs and identity documents with intent.
    While on remand he claimed asylum. On 15th August 2011 he was convicted
    and sentenced in February 2012 to a term of imprisonment of three years
    and six months.

4.   The Appellant's partner became pregnant shortly before his  arrest  and
    gave birth to their daughter in November 2011.  On  completion  of  his
    sentence the Appellant was detained in immigration detention  until  he
    was granted bail on 10th January 2013. Since then he  has  been  living
    with his partner and their daughter. His partner attends university and
    he cares for their daughter on a full-time basis.

5.   Although of Nigerian origin the Appellant's partner's  parents  are  in
    the UK.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under the  ECHR  finding  deportation  proportionate  in  the
    circumstances.

7.   The grounds  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  and  as
    expanded upon before me can be summarised briefly. It  is  argued  that
    the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  give  appropriate  consideration  or
    weight to the best interests of the Appellant's daughter.

8.   I do not find the grounds to be made out  and  do  not  find  that  the
    Tribunal made an error of law.

9.    The Tribunal set out the oral evidence before it from  the  Appellant,
    his partner and his partner's  mother  and  also  referred  to  various
    documents and  witness  statements  that  it  took  into  account.  Its
    findings  of  fact  and  credibility  start  at  paragraph  35  of  the
    determination and at paragraph  36  the  Tribunal  noted  a  number  of
    inconsistencies in the evidence which affected the  Appellant  and  his
    witnesses'  credibility.   It  found  at  paragraph  38  that,   having
    considered the evidence in the round  and  the  supporting  documentary
    evidence,  all  the  witnesses'  credibility   was   damaged   by   the
    inconsistencies it had listed. In particular it found that  the  couple
    had  not  been  living  together  as  long  as  they  claimed.  It  was
    unimpressed  by  the  Appellant's  apparent  attempt  to  minimise  his
    culpability in his crime.

10.  The Tribunal did  however  accept  the  Appellant's  paternity  of  his
    daughter and accepted that his partner and the baby had visited him  in
    prison.

11.  The Tribunal also noted that the Appellant had  entered  the  UK  using
    false documents having twice had visas refused and had done nothing  to
    regularise his position once he had arrived. They noted the gravity  of
    his offence and that he was convicted after trial.

12.  At paragraph 44 the Tribunal noted that the  Appellant's  daughter  was
    at the date of hearing 19 months old that she  and  the  Appellant  had
    lived together for only four months. The Tribunal found that whether or
    not the child had visited the Appellant in prison, at her age she would
    not have any recollection of him as her father until he moved  in  with
    her and her mother. It accepted the relationship is a genuine  parental
    relationship but given that it was of  such  short  acquaintance  found
    that it could not yet be described as subsisting.  It  noted  that  the
    child is a British citizen who has spent her life thus far in  the  UK.
    She is at an age where her life revolves around her family  and  during
    most of her life she  has  lived  with  her  mother  and  her  maternal
    grandmother. Her grandmother has cared for  her  when  her  mother  was
    visiting the Appellant in prison and she therefore has strong emotional
    ties to her grandmother. The Tribunal accepted the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant partner's family is a  close  family  and  did  not  find  it
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK to live in Nigeria  with
    her father.

13.  The Tribunal noted the genuine relationship between the  Appellant  and
    his partner and that it had existed for some four years but also  noted
    that it had been commenced and conducted at all times when  he  had  no
    status in the UK, a fact that was known to his partner.

14.  The Tribunal referred itself to the article 8 case law  as  it  relates
    to children  and  family  life  and  also  so  far  as  it  relates  to
    deportation. It referred at paragraph 52 to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4
    and Omotunde (best interests - Zambrano applied)  Jamaica  [2011]  UKUT
    00247 and at paragraph 53 acknowledged that in general a  child's  best
    interests are served by it being brought up by  both  its  parents.  It
    found that it was in the child's best interest at her age to remain  in
    the UK with her mother and with her mother's family  with  whom  strong
    ties have been established since her birth.  The  Tribunal  noted  that
    there was no evidence that the child had suffered emotionally from  the
    Appellant's absence when  in  prison  and  given  the  brevity  of  her
    relationship with him noted that whilst  deportation  would  sever  his
    relationship  with  his  daughter  there  was  no  evidence  that   her
    relationship with him is  so  established  and  deep  rooted  that  his
    absence would adversely affect her well-being.

15.  The Tribunal's overall findings are summarised at paragraph 54  and  at
    54 (ix) it notes that it has considered the primary importance  of  the
    child's well-being and the duty to  safeguard  her  welfare  and  found
    those to be best served by her remaining in the UK with her mother  and
    maternal family.

16.  It cannot be said that the child's best interests have not  been  taken
    into account nor can it be said that they  have  not  been  taken  into
    account as a primary consideration. The Tribunal  weighed up all of the
    evidence including the Appellant's immigration history and the  gravity
    of the offence that he committed, the fact that his  relationship  with
    his partner was built up at a time when he should not have been in  the
    UK and that the child's best interests did not  require  his  continued
    presence in the UK.  Even  if  it  did  the  Tribunal  found  it  would
    nevertheless be proportionate to deport him. I can discern no error  of
    law in the Tribunal's reasoning. The relationship with the child was so
    brief and his offence so serious that there is no  reasonable  prospect
    of any other outcome been achieved.

17.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  having  made  no  error  of  law   in   its
    determination, its decision shall stand and the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                 Dated 23rd September 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
