
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00579/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Decision given orally immediately after     |On 09 July 2019                |
|hearing                                     |                               |
|On 24 June 2019                             |                               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                 Michal [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Poland who claims to have come to the UK
    in November 2007 to  look  for  work.   When  he  had  found  work  and
    accommodation his wife and daughter joined him.  The couple had another
    child in 2009.

 2. Although there is an issue as to  whether  or  not  the  appellant  was
    working regularly since being in the UK it is common  ground  that  his
    wife has been working here because she has been employed  by  Burberrys
    since she has been in this country.

 3. Regrettably the appellant having had  an  accident  started  committing
    offences to the extent that in a period of about eighteen months he was
    convicted of some fourteen or so offences, being  one  offence  against
    the  person,   two   thefts   offences,   one   offence   relating   to
    police/courts/prisons, one drug offence, eight "miscellaneous offences"
    including various driving offences and one other offence described as a
    "nonrecording" offence.  His offences included an offence of battery on
    a bailiff who was trying to do  his  job  by  taking  possession  of  a
    vehicle which the appellant had driven when he had no insurance  to  do
    so.

 4. Following these convictions the respondent made a  decision  to  deport
    the appellant, having previously notified the  appellant  that  it  was
    intended to make a deportation order against him on grounds  of  public
    policy in accordance with Regulation 23(6)(b) and Regulation 27 of  the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016,  and   having   considered   the
    appellant's  representations  received  in  response  setting  out  the
    reasons why he should not be  deported.   The  decision  was  dated  31
    August 2018 and runs to some eighteen pages.

 5. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer  sitting  at  Bradford  on  12
    November 2018, but in a decision and reasons promulgated  sixteen  days
    later on 28 November 2018 the appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 6. Judge Saffer considered that the appellant had not established that  he
    had lived in the UK exercising treaty rights for a period of over  five
    years and also was not  satisfied  that  he  had  established  that  he
    currently had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  wife  or
    his children.  One of the factors that influenced him in this  decision
    (see paragraph 28) was that he had decided "to remove himself from them
    through the course of conduct and criminality he chose".  He also noted
    that his wife had given evidence that she would stay in the UK  without
    the appellant despite the fact that she had family support  in  Poland,
    could work there and that the children spoke some Polish.  Judge Saffer
    considered this indicated that the relationship was not "as genuine  or
    subsisting as they claim".

 7. The appellant appealed against this decision and was granted permission
    to bring this appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge I D Boyes.

 8. When this appeal was first listed, there was no  appearance  either  by
    the appellant or by any representative on his behalf  and  it  was  not
    clear that he had been served with notice of the hearing.  Although the
    notice of hearing had been sent to  the  solicitors  who  were  on  the
    record, it was not clear whether or not they had in  fact  received  it
    and so directions were given that those solicitors  should  inform  the
    court whether or not they were still instructed and if not whether  any
    other firm was instructed and that in either event the firm  must  give
    an address for the appellant.  The solicitors  were  also  directed  to
    notify the Tribunal as to whether or not they had received notification
    of the previous  hearing and if they had why no one had been present.

 9. The response of the solicitors is dated  24  May  2014  and  they  have
    asserted  that  the  Tribunal  had  previously  been  notified  of  the
    appellant's Polish address as he had been moved to Poland and currently
    resided there.  They also claimed that the firm had not  been  informed
    of the hearing date.  The firm had relocated to a new address in Hanger
    Lane, which it was suggested was a reason why  they  had  not  received
    notification of the hearing.  The firm apologised for failing to inform
    the Tribunal they were no longer instructed due to a lack of funds.

10. Subsequently  the  appellant  was  served  with  notification  of  this
    hearing, to his Polish address.  He had indeed been removed pursuant to
    Regulation 33 of the 2016 EEA Regulations, and it does not appear  that
    he has made any application to be allowed to re-enter the UK  in  order
    to be present at this hearing pursuant to Regulation 41; it would  have
    been open to him to make such an application.

11. All the appellant has done is to write  to  the  Tribunal  a  one  page
    letter saying that his solicitors demanded more money from him which he
    could not afford which is why they were no longer representing him  and
    that his family have suffered "disastrous consequences" as a result  of
    his removal.  However there is  no  further  evidence  adduced  on  his
    behalf and no member of his family has turned up to the  hearing  today
    either.

12. At the hearing at the outset Mr  Kotas  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    accepted that the judge had made an error of law in deciding  that  the
    appellant had not had a right to permanent residence  at  the  relevant
    time.  In my judgment, Mr Kotas was correct so to concede.

13. Although it was open to the judge to find that he the appellant had not
    acquired a right of  permanent  residence  by  himself  working  for  a
    continuous period of five years while in the UK, the  judge  failed  to
    have regard to the derivative right of residence  which  the  appellant
    had acquired by reason of his marriage  to  his  wife,  also  a  Polish
    national who it is accepted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  had  been
    exercising treaty rights in this country.

14. By Regulation 14(2) (which provision  is  in  similar  albeit  slightly
    differently worded terms in both the 2006 EEA Regulations and the  2016
    EEA Regulations),

         "A person ... who is a family member of a qualified person residing
         in the United Kingdom under paragraph (1) or  of  an  EEA  national
         with a right of permanent residence under Regulation 15 is entitled
         to remain in the United Kingdom for so long as [he or she]  remains
         a family member of that person or EEA national".

15. Accordingly, as the appellant's wife  was  residing  in  the  UK  as  a
    qualified person (under paragraph 14(1)) the  appellant  while  he  was
    married to her (and regardless of  whether  or  not  the  marriage  was
    towards its latter end even subsisting) had a right of residence  under
    the EEA Regulations.  By Regulation 15(1)(a) the appellant  would  then
    be entitled to a right of permanent residence because he  was  "an  EEA
    national who has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years".

16. Accordingly the appellant  had  on  any  view  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence through his wife.

17. It follows that insofar as the judge's  decision  was  founded  upon  a
    mistaken belief that he was not entitled to  permanent  residence,  the
    judge was wrong and that was an error of law.

18. The issue at this stage however is whether this was a  material  error.
    The judge having made his findings and in particular (at paragraph  30)
    that he had "failed to establish that he  has  integrated  socially  or
    culturally in society here given his failure to establish how  long  he
    has been here and his lifestyle criminality choice"  also  went  on  to
    consider what the position would be if he had  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence.  As to this, the judge's findings are set  out  at
    paragraph 31 as follows:

         "31. I want to make it clear that had he been able to establish  he
             had five years' lawful residence, I would still have dismissed
             the appeal for  the  following  reasons.   There  are  serious
             grounds of public policy and public security in this case  due
             to the range of his criminality and his deliberate  breach  of
             court orders and attack on a bailiff (which was the conviction
             for battery).  He presents a genuine, present and sufficiently
             serious threat  to  society  given  his  lifestyle  choice  of
             criminality  and  continued  dishonesty  shown  to  me.    The
             decision  is  proportionate  and  based  exclusively  on   his
             personal conduct".

19. The relevance of whether or not the appellant has established permanent
    residence is that if he has, then pursuant to Regulation 21(3)  of  the
    2006 Regulations (again identical in all material respect  to  what  is
    now repeated under Regulation 27(3) of the 2016 Regulations) a decision
    to deport this appellant on public policy or  public  security  grounds
    can only be taken "on serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public
    security".

20. It is clear that the judge had regard to  this  test  when  giving  his
    reasons for finding that there were "serious grounds of  public  policy
    and public security in this case".  Accordingly, although I have  found
    that the judge  was  wrong  in  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established a right of permanent residence in this  country,  this  was
    immaterial as the judge gave sustainable reasons  why  he  would  still
    have found that the decision to deport was justified.

21. Insofar as in line with the decision  in  FV  (Italy)  it  is  open  in
    certain circumstances for a person with ten years' continuous residence
    before being imprisoned to claim that a "relevant decision" could  only
    be taken on imperative grounds of public security, (see now  Reg  27(4)
    of the 2016 Regulations), given the judge's finding that the  appellant
    had failed to establish that he had integrated socially  or  culturally
    into society here  for  the  reasons  given  at  paragraph  30  of  his
    decision, there is no basis upon which on the facts of this  case  such
    an argument could succeed.

22. This appellant is  a  person  whose  criminal  record  is  sufficiently
    serious that the judge's decision that there were  serious  grounds  of
    public policy and public security justifying his deportation because he
    presented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to society
    was sustainable.

23. The  judge  in  his  final  paragraph  considered  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's deportation on the lives of his wife and their children but
    considered that they could maintain contact  if  they  so  chose,  both
    through modern means of communication and/or by visiting him in  Poland
    and noted that that had apparently been  the  case  since  about  April
    2010.  This decision on proportionality was also  a  decision  open  to
    him.

24. Accordingly, it follows that although there was an error in the judge's
    decision as  indicated  above,  this  was  not  a  material  error  and
    accordingly the judge's decision does not need to be remade.



Decision

There being no material error  of  law  in  Judge  Saffer's  decision,  this
appeal is dismissed and Judge Saffer's decision is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 4 July 2019




