
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00030/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2018                         |On 9 November 2018              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KE
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Mannan, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent.

       1. We have made an anonymity order because this  decision  refers  to
          the circumstances of  children,  who  have  been  the  subject  of
          family proceedings.


       2. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision of  the
          First-tier Tribunal ('FTT')  dated  30  July  2018,  in  which  it
          allowed the respondent's appeal against the SSHD's decision  dated
          11  January  2016  to  deport  him  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
          (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ('the 2006 Regs').

Background

       3. The respondent is a citizen of Nigeria.  He arrived in the  UK  as
          a student in 2004 but overstayed his visa.  He married  a  citizen
          of Latvia (and therefore an EEA citizen) in  July  2007  and  they
          have two children.


       4. The respondent was granted an EEA residence card on 21 July  2014.
           On 11 March 2015 he was sentenced to 16 months  imprisonment  for
          actual bodily harm against his wife.  In light  of  this  offence,
          the respondent  was  served  with  notice  of  deportation  on  11
          January 2016.

FTT

       5. The FTT described the background events that  led  the  appeal  in
          considerable detail  by  describing  in  comprehensive  terms  the
          sentencing judge's remarks,  the  respondent's  witness  statement
          dated 25 August 2016 and his wife's  witness  statement  dated  28
          April 2016.  The wife's  statement  is  said  to  have  been  made
          within family proceedings.  There has been  no  confirmation  that
          the family court provided permission for this to be  disclosed  in
          the FTT.


       6. In summary, the respondent was  convicted  of  the  index  offence
          after a trial, at which his wife gave evidence against  him.   The
          index offence took place after  a  history  of  the  police  being
          called to the home by the wife on many occasions  from  2007.   At
          the time of their 2016 statements,  the  respondent  was  pursuing
          contact proceedings to  see  his  children.   There  had  been  no
          contact between the respondent and his wife or children since  the
          index offence.  His wife's 2016 statement makes it clear that  she
          opposed in robust terms, the respondent's application for  contact
          and her statement sets  out  in  graphic  detail  her  account  of
          sustained abuse toward her on the part of the respondent  for  the
          duration of their marriage.


       7. At the hearing before the FTT on  16  July  2018,  the  respondent
          attended with his wife and  submitted  updated  statements.   Each
          statement is brief and extends to no more than half a page.   They
          both contain very similar wording  to  the  effect  that  all  the
          problems have been  resolved  and  the  family  have  been  living
          together happily as a family unit.   The  respondent  also  relied
          upon an undated letter from  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court  confirming
          that the restraining order imposed on 29 April 2015 was lifted  on
          2 July 2018.  The FTT's record of proceedings makes it clear  that
          the family unit began  living  together  a  week  before  the  FTT
          hearing on 17 July 2018.  The FTT  was  nonetheless  satisfied  by
          the wife's "categorical assurance" that she had not  been  coerced
          or induced into reversing her position.

       8. The FTT observed at [17] that the evidential picture  dramatically
          changed.  Prior to the  hearing  itself,  the  respondent  had  "a
          hopeless case" as he was subject to a restraining  order  and  the
          family court proceedings were making no progress. At  the  hearing
          itself the respondent produced  "the  three  biggest  metaphorical
          rabbits out of a hat": his updated statement, his  wife's  updated
          statement and "above all" her attendance.   The FTT accepted  that
          there had been family reconciliation and made findings of fact  at
          [21] to [23].  However these follow the FTT's self-direction  that
          "this is a ten-year imperative ground case".

       9. The FTT concluded "with a heavy heart,  and  with  no  hope  of  a
          happy outcome" that given, inter alia, the  reunification  of  the
          family unit and the probation officer's  downgrading  of  risk  to
          low, the appeal "must succeed" despite  the  family's  unpromising
          history.  The FTT therefore allowed the appeal.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

      10. The SSHD appealed to the Upper Tribunal ('UT') on the basis  that:




                    i) The respondent  had  not  acquired  10  years  lawful
                       residence, and as such the FTT applied the wrong test
                       - imperative grounds of public security  ('imperative
                       grounds'), rather than serious grounds.


                   ii) The FTT failed to direct itself to  the  entirety  of
                       the respondent's concerning behaviour toward his wife
                       or take into  account  the  absence  of  evidence  of
                       rehabilitation.


      11. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  FTT  Judge  Davies.   The
          reasons for this are unhelpful as they are mistakenly  based  upon
          this being a non-EEA deportation case.

      12. Pursuant to directions  the  SSHD  filed  and  served  a  skeleton
          argument in which he submitted, inter  alia,  that  as  a  non-EEA
          citizen, the  respondent  was  unable  to  benefit  from  enhanced
          protection on imperative grounds.  In a skeleton argument  drafted
          by the respondent's solicitors, it was submitted that the FTT  was
          entitled to treat this as an imperative grounds case,  and  having
          done so, made findings of fact open to it.

      13. At the beginning of the hearing  we  attempted  to  discern  which
          items of documentary evidence were available to  the  FTT.   Given
          the FTT's observations at [4], it  is  regrettable  that  for  the
          purposes of this appeal neither party made any attempt  to  submit
          a paginated bundle of evidence available to the  FTT.   Mr  Mannan
          accepted that the  only  evidence  available  from  the  probation
          service was summarised at [14].  Mr Bramble checked his  file  and
          confirmed that the FTT was provided with a  copy  of  the  court's
          letter confirming  the  lifting  of  the  restraining  order.   Mr
          Mannan and Mr Bramble were unable to assist us  with  whether  the
          family court had  given  permission  for  documents  such  as  the
          wife's 2016 witness statement to be submitted to the FTT.

      14. Mr Bramble relied upon the SSHD's skeleton  argument  and  grounds
          of appeal.  Mr Mannan relied upon the skeleton  argument  prepared
          by his solicitors.

      15.  After  hearing  from  both  representatives,  we   reserved   our
          decision.

Error of law discussion

      16. Mr Mannan  was  unable  to  cite  any  authority  to  support  his
          submission that imperative grounds could be said  to  apply  to  a
          non-EEA  citizen  such  as  the  respondent  in  this  case.    As
          regulation 21 of the 2006  Regs  makes  clear  imperative  grounds
          only apply  "in  respect  of  an  EEA  national"  whereas  serious
          grounds apply "in respect of a person with a  permanent  right  of
          residence".   The FTT erred in law in finding that the  imperative
          grounds test  applied  when  as  a  non-EEA  citizen  the  serious
          grounds test applied to the respondent.


      17. LG and CC  (EEA  Regs:  residence;  imprisonment;  removal)  Italy
          [2009] UKAIT 00024 clarifies that a clear distinction is  required
          to be  drawn  between  the  three  levels  of  protection  against
          removal introduced in the 2006 Regs, each level being intended  to
          be more stringent and narrower than the immediately lower  test  -
          see also 6.179 of the Ninth  Edition  of  Macdonald's  Immigration
          Law and Practice, the wording of  regulation  21  itself  together
          with Article 28 of the Citizens Directive.

      18. The FTT's findings of fact and conclusion that  the  appeal  "must
          succeed" are inevitably predicated upon the FTT's erroneous  self-
          direction at [17]  and  [18]  that  that  the  imperative  grounds
          apply.   We accept Mr Bramble's submission  that  having  directed
          itself to the wrong legal test, which is discernibly different  to
          the serious grounds test, the FTT's findings are infected by  this
          error and unsafe.  The language used by the FTT demonstrates  that
          a clearly reluctant conclusion was reached,  driven  at  least  in
          part by the application of a threshold that the SSHD had to  meet,
          which was set too high.

      19. Even if we are wrong about this,  the  respondent  was  unable  to
          demonstrate a continuous period of  10  years  residence  for  the
          purposes of the 2006 Regs - see B  v  Land  Badem-Wurttemberg  and
          SSHD v Vomero (Directive 2004/38/EC), Joined Cases C-316/16 and C-
          424/16.  In this case it would be necessary  to  count  back  from
          the deportation order dated 18 January 2016.  The  respondent  may
          have been in the UK in January 2006 but he  was  here  unlawfully,
          having overstayed a student visa granted for 12  months  in  2004.
          Further  and  notwithstanding  some  encouraging  remarks  by  the
          probation service, the respondent's integrative links appear  weak
          given his imprisonment, behaviour toward his family  and  extended
          lack of contact with his family.

      20. In addition, as pointed out in the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  FTT
          referred to a probation service assessment  of  risk  from  August
          2016 said to point to the respondent being a medium risk  of  harm
          to his ex-partner and any  future  partners  but  a  low  risk  of
          reoffending within two years.  The FTT was clearly  influenced  by
          this evidence - see [24] of the decision.  We  invited  Mr  Mannan
          to take us to the evidence that supported this conclusion  but  he
          was unable to do so.  He submitted that there was no reason to  go
          behind this finding of fact.  We are very concerned that  the  FTT
          did not have any up to date assessment of risk in support  of  the
          claim that the wife was genuinely committed  to  the  relationship
          given the particular  circumstances:  the  evidence  it  did  have
          described a medium risk of harm; but the most  recent  independent
          risk assessment was almost two years old by the time  of  the  FTT
          hearing; the letter confirming  the  lifting  of  the  restraining
          order gives no reasons for this at all; there was  a  longstanding
          pattern of abuse beyond the  index  offence  followed  by  a  long
          period of separation  and  only  an  extremely  recent  and  short
          period of living together of one week.

Final points

      21. We raised  the  possibility  with  the  representatives  that  the
          reunification of the family might be described as a  "new  matter"
          requiring the consent of the SSHD given the  complete  absence  of
          contact as at the date of the deportation  decision.   Mr  Bramble
          however submitted that if  consent  was  necessary  it  was  given
          implicitly  as  the  witnesses  were  cross-examined   at   length
          regarding their reunification.

Remedy

      22. We have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision, and have decided  that
          this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  There will  need
          to be fresh findings of fact in light of the appropriate  test  to
          be applied for an EEA family member with permanent residence.


      23. In addition, the party wishing to  rely  upon  evidence  from  the
          family proceedings shall need permission from the family court  to
          do so.  Any evidence should be properly placed in an  indexed  and
          paginated bundle.  The FTT may also wish to give  further  careful
          consideration to what extent the respondent seeks to rely  on  any
          "new matter".

Decision

      24. The FTT decision contains a material  error  of  law  and  is  set
          aside.  The appeal is remitted to the same FTT.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
31 October 2018

