
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00916/2013
                                                               DA/00917/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 17th December 2018                |On 2nd May 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                   MJ & DO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Salam, Salam & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellants  in  this  determination  identified  as  MJ  and  DO.  This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings

      1. The first appellant is a Nigerian Citizen born on  28th  May  1983.
         She is the mother of the second appellant who was born in the UK on
         7 November 2005. He is a Nigerian citizen through  his  mother.  MJ
         claims  she  arrived  in  the  UK  in  June  2004;  there   is   no
         corroborative evidence of her entry. In June 2005 she attempted  to
         leave the UK to travel to Canada using a false  passport.  She  was
         charged with document  offences,  convicted  and  sentenced  to  12
         months' imprisonment. The trial judge recommended she be  deported.
         In December 2005 she claimed asylum. That application was  refused,
         and her appeal was dismissed in April 2006. On  26th  January  2007
         the respondent took a decision to deport her.  Her  appeal  against
         that decision was dismissed  and  she  was  refused  permission  to
         appeal to the Court of Appeal. She became appeal  rights  exhausted
         at the end of June 2007. A deportation order was signed against  MJ
         dated 6th August 2007. She did not leave the UK and absconded.

      2. In June 2011 she sought leave to remain in the UK  with  her  child
         who at that time was 5 years old. That application was  treated  by
         the respondent as an application to revoke the deportation. It  was
         refused on 24th April 2013. On  the  same  date  the  SSHD  took  a
         decision to make a deportation order against the child,  DO,  as  a
         family member of a person who is liable to deportation. Both MJ and
         DO appealed and their appeals  were  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal in a decision promulgated on  8th  July  2013.  They  were
         granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  in  a
         decision  promulgated  on  19  December  2013  their  appeals  were
         dismissed by UTJ Lane. They sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the
         Court of Appeal and, because  of  MJ's  claim  that  she  had  been
         trafficked and that the claim had been inadequately dealt with, the
         paper application was adjourned to an oral  hearing.  At  the  oral
         hearing it was acknowledged that there was nothing in  that  point,
         but a fresh issue was raised in connection with DO and the lack  of
         consideration of his best  interests.  By  consent,  the  Court  of
         Appeal allowed the appeals and remitted them to  be  determined  by
         the Upper Tribunal on that issue alone. The appeals came before  me
         and, at a case management hearing on 10th September  2018,  I  made
         directions for the future conduct of the appeals.

      3.  On  17th   December   2018   I   heard   submissions   from   both
         representatives.

      4. This case proceeded on the basis that there was a material error of
         law in so far as there had been no or inadequate  determination  of
         the circumstances of the child by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
         appeal against the decision to refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation
         order made against MJ and in his appeal  against  the  decision  to
         make a deportation order.  I  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision accordingly.

      5. There was some discussion before me as to which were  the  relevant
         Immigration Rules under which  the  appeal  before  me  was  to  be
         decided: the Rules in force at the date of the hearing  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal namely 27th June  2013[1]  (that  decision  was
         promulgated on 8th July 2013 as referred to above) or the Rules  in
         force on the date I heard the appeal[2]?

      6. Mr Salam submitted that the relevant Rules were those in  force  on
         27th June 2013 for both appeals. After some consideration Mr Bates,
         agreed (with some hesitation) with  this  submission.  I  concurred
         with this submission before the parties, but noted that I  had  not
         been provided with relevant caselaw. Both  parties  agreed  that  I
         could  consider  the  relevant  case  law  and  would  insert  such
         references as were relevant in my decision.

      7. As discussed  with  the  parties,  I  subsequently  considered  the
         relevant case law which was  not  before  me  on  the  day  of  the
         hearing; I had some doubt that Mr Salam's submission  was  correct.
         In particular I noted that the implementation  paragraph  of  HC532
         (which amended the 'deportation' Rules  to  substitute  the  phrase
         'unduly harsh' for 'not be reasonable') states that this  amendment
         shall "take effect on 28 July 2014 and apply to all ECHR Article  8
         claims from foreign criminals which are decided on  or  after  that
         date."

      8. There is  also  the  issue  of  the  possible  different  framework
         applicable to both appeals - the appeal of DO is an appeal  against
         a decision to make a deportation order; the  appeal  of  MJ  is  an
         appeal against a decision to refuse to revoke a deportation  order.
         The statutory framework has changed since those decisions were made
         such that an appeal would not lie against either of those decisions
         if they were taken after 28th July 2014.

      9. Case law relevant to which Rules are applicable to each decision as
         it is in appeal before me includes:

             KD (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 418;

             Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402;

             Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74;

             YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

     10. I considered I would be assisted by submissions by both parties  as
         to the relevant statutory and Immigration  Rules  framework  within
         which I am required to determine this appeal.

     11. I therefore  directed  both  parties  to  file  and  serve  written
         submissions  on  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  and   Statutory
         framework that each of these appeals is to be determined in by  4pm
         Wednesday 6th February 2018. I received  written  submissions  from
         both representatives.

     12. In his written submissions, Mr Salam stated that at the end of  the
         hearing I allowed the appeal, with the agreement of Mr Bates.  This
         is not correct. It may be that Mr Salam misunderstood what  I  said
         which was that there was an error of law in  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal, as identified by the  Court  of  Appeal,  such
         that the decision was to be set aside to be remade  but  restricted
         to the issue of the impact of the child in the proceedings. It  was
         clear that, with the agreement of the parties, I could consider the
         issue of which Rules were applicable given that neither  party  had
         provided relevant case law.




         Which Rules

     13. The Secretary of State submitted that the relevant Rules were those
         in force at the date of the remaking of  the  appeal  decision.  Mr
         Salam submitted that the relevant Rules were those in force on  the
         date  of  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke   the
         deportation order and the making of the deportation order.

     14. Mr Salam submits that the 'decision' in question is the date of the
         Secretary of State's decision.   Although he seeks  to  distinguish
         the case law referred to above, he is incorrect. As  stated  in  YM
         the Tribunal is required  to  determine  whether  the  decision  to
         deport (and by extension the decision not to revoke  a  deportation
         order) is a breach of Article 8. That decision is to  be  taken  on
         the basis of the facts in existence at the  date  of  the  Tribunal
         hearing. If Mr Salam were correct, nothing that has happened  since
         the Secretary of State's decision could be  taken  in  to  account.
         That would include the increased age of the  child  (or  any  other
         children born to an appellant). The circumstances in  play  at  the
         date of the SSHD's decision could mean  that  individuals  who  had
         resided in the UK for some considerable time after  their  criminal
         offence and the extent of their family and private life  would  not
         be relevant.

     15. There has been no clear statement by the Secretary  of  State  that
         the implementation of the Immigration Rules does  not  have  effect
         for decisions made by him prior to the amendment to the  Rules.  As
         said in YM, it follows that the Rules in force at the date  of  the
         SSHD's decision are the relevant Rules for that decision; the Rules
         in force at the date of the Tribunal's decision  are  the  relevant
         Rules for that decision. It follows that the relevant Rules for the
         purpose of my decision are those in force in December - see also MF
         (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

     16. The Immigration Rules under which I am required to take a  decision
         on the remaking of the appeal are thus those in  force  as  of  the
         date of the hearing.

     17. Mr Salam in his written submissions requested  that  if  the  legal
         framework were under the Rules in force on the date of the hearing,
         then the hearing  should  be  reconvened  for  further  submissions
         because none had been made on the higher threshold. The  respondent
         did not seek the reconvening of the hearing. I decline to reconvene
         the hearing.

         Statutory framework

     18.  The  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  whilst  the  statutory
         framework for appeals lodged against decisions made in  2013,  "the
         basis upon which the appeals were lodged  and  are  to  be  decided
         remains materially the  same,  namely  whether  the  decision  made
         constitutes a breach of Article 8."

     19. Mr Salam did not address the issue of the statutory framework.

     20. I am satisfied that  the  matters  to  be  taken  into  account  in
         determining the two  appeals  are  to  all  practical  intents  and
         purposes the same and are governed by the Rules; this  includes  an
         assessment of the best interests of the child.

         These appeals

     21. The Secretary of State, in the decisions, accepted that  the  child
         DO had been born in the UK and had lived in the UK all his life. Mr
         Salam informed me that an application had been made for  the  child
         to be registered as a British Citizen, but it had been rejected  on
         the grounds of lack of evidence of residence. I  was  not  provided
         with any documents relating to this. Mr Salam informed me that  the
         decision to refuse to register the child had not been challenged.

     22. Mr Bates accepted that given the decisions by  the  respondent  the
         subject of this appeal did not dispute  that  the  child  had  been
         resident in the UK since birth, it was reasonable for me to proceed
         on the basis that such was the case. DO  does  not,  however,  have
         lawful leave to remain in the UK despite being in the UK  for  more
         than 13 years.

     23. Revocation of a deportation order will not normally  be  authorised
         unless there has been a material change in circumstances since  the
         order was made or fresh information has  come  to  light.  In  this
         appeal, MJ's child is now aged over 13 and has lived in the UK  all
         his life.  The  child  was  born  after  the  appellant's  criminal
         offence. Since that criminal offence, MJ has made an  unmeritorious
         asylum claim and has absconded. She  lost  her  deportation  appeal
         when the child was only 2 years old but failed to leave the UK. She
         gained permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal on a claim  that
         she had been trafficked which was no longer relied upon but, before
         the Court of Appeal, the circumstances and age of  her  child  were
         prayed in aid and thus the appeal came before me.

     24.  In  both  these  appeals  the  underlying  issue  is  whether  the
         deportation of the appellants would result in a breach of Article 8
         ECHR.

     25. Section 117C[3] lies within Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002. In brief, section 117A explains when  Part  5A
         applies. In deciding whether an interference with a person's  right
         to respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
         8(2) of the ECHR, courts and tribunals  must  have  regard  to  the
         "general" considerations listed  in  section  117B  and,  in  cases
         concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals  (as  defined  in
         section 117D),  to  the  considerations  listed  in  section  117C.
         Section 117B provides that the maintenance of effective immigration
         controls is in the public interest. As well  as  defining  "foreign
         criminal", section 117D contains definitions of "qualifying  child"
         and "qualifying partner". DO is a qualifying child.  He  is  not  a
         foreign criminal.

     26. Mr Salam accepted that if it were not for the child, MJ  would  not
         succeed  in  her  appeal.  These  appeals  can  be  approached   by
         considering the child's appeal first or by considering the mother's
         appeal first. In writing a decision one  has  to  come  before  the
         other, but in reaching my decision  I  have  not  considered  their
         appeals in isolation. This is particularly the case given that  the
         child bears no blame or fault for his mother's criminality  or  her
         decision to abscond or fail to leave the UK. I also note,  although
         I place very little weight upon it, that  there  have  been  delays
         within the Court and Tribunal system which have led to a  delay  in
         these appeals being heard. Whichever appeal  is  considered  first,
         there are issues from each that impact upon the other.

         DO

     27.  The  deportation  of  DO  cannot  be  seen  in  isolation  to  the
         deportation of his mother. There is no question that if his  mother
         did not go, he would not have to go. Even though I  am  considering
         his appeal first in this decision, I have reached my conclusions on
         the basis that, absent anything that would prevent MJ  going  other
         than him, then  his  mother  would  be  deported  -  a  real  world
         scenario.

     28. DO is now 13 years old. He knows no other country but the UK; he is
         attending school and has reached the age where he has developed his
         own sphere of friends and he has a significant private life outside
         the family unit of him and his mother. He speaks no language  other
         than English. He has no relatives, other than his  mother,  in  the
         UK. Although he can be expected  to  have  some  knowledge  of  his
         heritage and the culture of his mother, this will,  simply  because
         of the time that has passed since she came to  the  UK,  have  been
         'watered down'. He is now a 'Manchester' child.  If his mother were
         to leave the UK, there is no identifiable adult who would be  able,
         never mind willing, to care for him in the UK. He would  fall  into
         the care system. It is trite that, were his mother not  subject  to
         the potential of deportation, he himself would not be  the  subject
         of a decision to deport. An application for leave to  remain  would
         be decided by the respondent and a decision on  whether  he  should
         remain in the UK would be taken on the basis of s117B 2002 Act  and
         paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. In  terms  of  paragraph
         276ADE, he has been in the UK all his life, is under the age of  18
         and the question arises whether it would be reasonable for  him  to
         leave the UK. It must be borne in mind that his mother  is  subject
         to a deportation order and as such he would be leaving the UK  with
         her, his only relative; he would retain this very important  family
         unit and it is plainly in his best interest to be with his  mother.
         On the other hand, he is of an age where, as referred  to  earlier,
         he is no longer dependant totally on his mother for his home  life.
         He is at secondary school and the disruption to his  private  life,
         even though with his mother, would be  extensive,  significant  and
         would  be  greatly  unsettling.  Nevertheless,  it  would  not   be
         reasonable for him to remain in the UK without his mother. For this
         reason, it is necessary to consider the position of his mother.

     29. There is no provision, at least my attention was not drawn to  any,
         that relates to children in the situation  of  DO.  It  cannot  be,
         looking purely at DO, that he  is  subject  to  s117C,  but  he  is
         subject to a decision to deport.  I  have,  by  analogy  considered
         whether he  falls  within  Exception  1  (s117C(4)).  He  has  been
         resident in the UK for the whole of his life; he is not lawfully in
         the UK. He is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
         Kingdom. Although he would be returning to Nigeria with his mother,
         he would be entering a school system and a society  with  which  he
         has no knowledge other than that which his mother has told him  and
         even that is considerably out of date. This is  not  a  case  of  a
         young child whose reference points are those of his parent; this is
         an adolescent who is already entering into his own world. The  fact
         that his mother has behaved in the way in which  she  has,  is  not
         relevant save that if the criteria in Exception 1 did  have  to  be
         met there would have  to  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
         integration  in  Nigeria.  For  a  child  of  his  age   with   his
         experiences, although he would be  going  with  his  mother,  I  am
         satisfied that overall, there would be very  significant  obstacles
         to his integration into a new school system, a new  culture  and  a
         new society.

     30. In terms of Exception 2 (S117C(5)), it is not disputed that MJ  has
         a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child.  The
         question of whether Exception 2 is met is whether MJ's  deportation
         would be unduly harsh on DO. DO would, for the reasons given above,
         have to leave the UK with his mother, through no fault of his  own.
         The evidence before me which was not contested was that they  would
         be returning to a country where there  was  no  family  to  provide
         assistance, even in the short term. The child would be  entering  a
         society, culture and education system of which he has no  knowledge
         or experience.

     31. The test of unduly harsh is a high  test.  It  must  be  more  than
         severe and is higher than very significant obstacles.  There  is  a
         dual aspect to the test: would it be unduly harsh for DO to live in
         the UK without his mother; would it be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to
         leave the UK with his mother. That his mother ought to be  deported
         is incontrovertible - her  criminality  is  such  that  the  public
         interest requires her deportation  even  though  the  offence  took
         place a considerable time ago and was before her  child  was  born.
         The fact that she has managed to evade removal for such  a  lengthy
         period does not, in her case, render the  public  interest  in  her
         removal any the less. But it  does  not  impact  upon  the  "unduly
         harsh" test - see KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53,  AB  and  AO  [2019]
         EWCA Civ 661, JG [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC).

     32. But if his mother is deported, DO would be left  alone  in  the  UK
         save for the safety net of the care system. He was born  after  her
         criminal act. This is not a  case  where  there  would  be  someone
         available to  take  care  of  him  -  because  although  he  is  an
         adolescent he remains a child. It cannot be other than unduly harsh
         to separate DO from his mother and to leave him, as an  adolescent,
         in the care system.

     33. That is not the only issue: is it unduly  harsh  to,  in  practice,
         require DO to accompany his  mother  on  her  deportation.  I  have
         already found that he would face very significant obstacles to  his
         integration (not reintegration) into Nigeria.  That is not the same
         as unduly harsh. Unduly harsh is more than 'bleak' or 'severe'.  It
         is more  than  very  significant  obstacles  which  relate  to  the
         obstacles the child would face. Unduly harsh in this  context  must
         mean the full effect on DO - emotionally, practically, financially,
         culturally, educationally and economically. In the circumstances of
         a child brought up by a mother who for some time was an  absconder,
         who has lived all his life in the UK and is now over 13 years  old,
         going to a country where he and his mother  know  no-one  and  from
         where his mother left almost 20 years ago, can only be unduly harsh
         even though he is travelling with her. It does not  need,  in  this
         case, a social worker's report or psychologist report to be able to
         draw such a conclusion. To require the departure of DO from the  UK
         would  be  a  significant,   unjustifiable   and   disproportionate
         interference with his Article 8 rights.

         MJ

     34. MJ does not meet the criteria in Exception  1.  She  has  not  been
         lawfully resident in the UK for most of her life.

     35. She has a genuine and subsisting relationship with her child DO. If
         she were to be deported without her son, the impact on  him  would,
         as I have set out above, be unduly harsh. To, in practice,  require
         him to leave the UK with her would be unduly harsh for the  reasons
         I have set out above. Apart from this he would, in effect, be being
         punished for his mother's criminality  which  occurred  before  his
         birth.

         Conclusion

     36. Drawing all this together I find that

          a) It would be unreasonable for DO to leave the UK;

          b) It would be unduly harsh on DO for him to leave  the  UK  with
             his mother;

          c) It would be unduly harsh for DO to remain in  the  UK  without
             his mother.

     37. It follows therefore that the appeal  by  DO  is  allowed  and  the
         appeal by MJ is allowed.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



     Date 24th April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
    [1] Paragraph 276ADE, paragraph 398 399 and 399A as of 27th June 2013
    [2] Paragraph 276ADE, paragraphs A398, 398, 399 and 399A as of 17th
    December 2018
    [3] 117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
    foreign criminals
    (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
    (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
    (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest
    requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
    (4)  Exception 1 applies where-
        (a)   C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
        C's life,
        (b)   C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
        and
        (c)   there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
        into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
    (5)   Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
    (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public  interest
    requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.
    (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken  into
    account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
    foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason  for  the  decision
    was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted."

