
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00240/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |                                     |
|10th September 2020                  |On 15th September 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             LLOYD JUNIOR MORGAN
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. FtT Judge N M Paul allowed Mr Morgan's appeal against  the  refusal
         of his human rights  claim  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 11th December 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
         by FtT Judge Grant Hutchison on 15th January 2020.  Directions  for
         the further conduct of the appeal were sent on 2nd April  and  30th
         July 2020 and, in the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision
         was made for the question of whether there was an error of law  and
         if so whether the decision of the FtT judge should be set aside  to
         be determined on the papers.

      2. Both parties complied with the directions; both parties  agreed  to
         the issue of error of law being determined on the papers. The  SSHD
         relied upon the grounds  of  appeal  and  Mr  Morgan,  through  his
         representatives relied upon the Rule 24 response.

      3. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
         and the respondent  together  with  the  papers  before  me[1]  are
         sufficient to enable me to be able to take a  decision  on  whether
         there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  FtT  and  if  so
         whether the decision should be set aside, on the papers and without
         hearing oral submissions.

         Background

      4. Mr Morgan, a Jamaican citizen was  issued  with  an  EEA  permanent
         residence card on 5th February 2010. The  index  offence  is  dated
         13th April 2012 when Mr  Morgan  was  convicted  of  wounding  with
         intent to do grievous bodily harm and conspiracy  to  rob.  He  was
         sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment on 16th April 2019.

         FtT decision

      5. The FtT set out  the  evidence  and  correct  legal  framework.  He
         addressed the Offender Management Report and the OASys report, gave
         special attention to the fact that Mr Morgan had only been  out  of
         custody for 12 months and is  on  licence  until  2024.  The  judge
         considered Mr  Morgan's'  family  circumstances  and  expressed  an
         opinion on his character and the impact that detention had on him.

         Grounds of appeal.

      6. The SSHD relied upon three grounds of appeal.

         Ground 1

      7. The SSHD submitted  that  the  judge's  reliance  on  the  Offender
         Managers report (which was based upon  the  OASys  report)  without
         taking into consideration the lack of expressed responsibility  for
         his crime, his continued attempt to minimise his involvement in the
         robbery, the use of a weapon and the serious injuries to the victim
         amounted to an error of law in determining the  proportionality  of
         the decision.

      8. This submission by the SSHD has been taken out of  the  context  of
         the decision as a whole. The judge has placed weight upon the OASys
         report but, as he is required, he undertook a  full  assessment  of
         all of the evidence that was before him in reaching his conclusion.



      9. The judge sets out the evidence and gives detailed reasons  why  he
         considers and places the weight he does on the evidence.  He  heard
         oral evidence. Although the SSHD may not agree  with  the  decision
         reached by the judge it was a decision that was open to  the  judge
         on the evidence and his reasoned analysis  of  that  evidence.  The
         judge has not erred in law in his  proportionality  assessment,  as
         submitted by the SSHD.

         Ground 2

     10. The SSHD submits the judge failed to consider  the  seriousness  of
         the consequences of re-offending and that the  seriousness  of  the
         offence itself is indicative that the potential consequences of re-
         offending are serious.

     11.  Plainly  if  Mr  Morgan  were  to  re-offend  then  the  potential
         consequences of  that  re-offending  are  serious.  The  judge  was
         plainly aware that Mr Morgan had been convicted of a 'most  serious
         offence'. But the judge considered the possibility of  re-offending
         and the one very serious event he had been involved  with  and  the
         sustainable reasoned finding by the judge of Mr Morgan's  committed
         wish to avoid being in such a situation again, avoiding a bad  peer
         group and being tempted by pack of money were all  matters  he  was
         able to  take  into  account.  The  judge  did  this  and  provided
         sustainable and adequate reasons for his conclusions. There  is  no
         error  of  law  by  the  judge.  Merely   because   the   potential
         consequences  are  serious  does  not  mean  that  such  should  be
         considered in isolation; it is a factor and a factor considered  in
         the round by the judge.

         Ground 3

     12. The SSHD submits the judge  has  failed  to  consider  the  binding
         jurisprudence to the effect that the existence of a  propensity  to
         commit further crime and/or that past conduct may alone  constitute
         the necessary threat to the public policy requirement.

     13. The judge considered Mr  Morgan's  circumstances  at  the  date  of
         hearing and at the date of the offence. The circumstances that gave
         rise to a conviction may well be evidence of personal conduct  that
         constitutes a present threat but in this case the  judge  carefully
         considered the circumstances then, the circumstances on the date of
         hearing not merely in terms of Mr Morgan's expressed wishes but  in
         the context of the whole of the evidence.

     14. The findings by the judge were detailed and  sustainably  reasoned.
         There is no error of law.

         Conclusion

     15. The three grounds  relied  upon  by  the  SSHD  are  in  essence  a
         disagreement with the final decision of the FtT judge who carefully
         considered and  analysed  the  evidence  before  him  in  order  to
         determine whether Mr Morgan presented  as  a  genuine  present  and
         sufficiently serious threat. The finding reached by the  judge  was
         open to the judge and was adequately reasoned and took  account  of
         all of the evidence before him.

     16. There is no error of law by the FtT judge such that the decision is
         to be set aside to be remade.




    Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision; the decision of the FtT judge allowing
    the appeal stands.


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker Date: 10th September 2020
-----------------------
[1] (a)the respondent's bundle; (b) the bundle filed on behalf of the
appellant and skeleton argument; (c) the decision of FtT Judge Paul; (d)
The application for permission to appeal; and (e) the grant of permission
to appeal.

