

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00540/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 22 December 2014                  |On 29 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                               MD JAIFUR NOOR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Alexander of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  born  on  12  April  1990,
       although a significant issue in this appeal is that he arrived in the
       United Kingdom in July 1990 when aged just 3 months old, having  been
       brought by his mother who was joining her husband who was settled  in
       this country. Both the appellant  and  his  mother  were  soon  after
       granted indefinite leave to remain and he has  not  left  the  United
       Kingdom, even for a holiday, since then.


    2. On 30 October 2012 the appellant was convicted before the Luton Crown
       court of offences of possession of  a  firearm  and  ammunition.  The
       firearm  was  "packaged  up",  to  borrow  the  phrase  used  by  the
       sentencing judge, with ammunition  and  a  silencer.  Forensic  tests
       demonstrated that the firearm had been  fired.  Those  offences  were
       committed while the appellant was subject to a suspended sentence  of
       imprisonment for an offence of dishonesty. He was sentenced  to  five
       years' imprisonment.


    3.  Given  his  immigration  status,  that  conviction  meant  that  the
       appellant became a foreign criminal for the purposes of s.32  of  the
       UK Borders Act 2007, whose deportation is deemed to be  conducive  to
       the public good. S.32(5) provides that the  respondent  must  make  a
       deportation order unless an  exception  within  s.33  applies,  those
       exceptions include that  deportation  would  breach  the  appellant's
       rights under the ECHR. Although  the  appellant  claimed  that  would
       indeed be the consequence, because of his private  and  family  life,
       the respondent was unable to accept that and so a  deportation  order
       was made.


    4. The appellant has been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan who,  by  a  determination
       promulgated on 28 August  2014,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
       decision to make a deportation order.  The  grounds  upon  which  the
       appellant sought and was granted  permission  may  be  summarised  as
       follows:


       a. The judge failed properly to weigh the  factors  speaking  in  the
          appellant's favour against the public interest in his deportation;


       b. In particular, the judge erred in that he failed to give  adequate
          reasons for finding that the public interest  in  deportation  was
          not outweighed, in this case, by the fact that the  appellant  had
          been in the United Kingdom since he was 3 months old;


       c. In considering  whether  the  appellant  retained  any  ties  with
          Bangladesh, the judge erred in saying that there had  been  family
          visits there when the evidence had been that  the  appellant,  his
          mother and his siblings had  made  no  such  visits.  As  all  the
          evidence pointed to the fact that the appellant had no  ties  with
          Bangladesh the finding to the contrary was not reasonably open  to
          the judge;


       d. The judge made a flawed and inadequate assessment of the article 8
          claim in that he failed to carry out an assessment  of  the  claim
          "over and above the rules and primary legislation", failed to have
          regard to relevant case law that should have informed  and  guided
          that assessment and failed to adequately address the progress made
          by the appellant while in prison serving his sentence.


    5. In opening his submissions, Mr Alexander  has  refined  the  last  of
       those grounds. The challenged pursued is not that  the  judge  should
       have carried out an assessment "over and  above  the  rules  and  the
       primary legislation" but that the assessment carried out within  that
       framework was legally flawed because he did not have regard to any of
       the case law to which he had been referred.


    6. Before examining those grounds and the further  submissions  advanced
       today at the hearing on the appellant's behalf by Mr Alexander, It is
       necessary to discuss the relevant parts of  the  determination  under
       challenge.


    7. The judge first set  out  the  relevant  factual  background  to  the
       appeal. He noted that the offence  which  triggered  the  deportation
       decision  was  not  the  appellant's  first.  He  referred   to   the
       respondent's decision letter which set out a  comprehensive  list  of
       the appellant's previous convictions. These began with his conviction
       in February 2009 for offences  of  criminal  damage.  He  received  a
       community order but was twice subsequently found to  have  failed  to
       comply with the requirements of that order.  Similarly,  although  he
       was disqualified from driving for various driving offences, he  twice
       disregarded the order of the court that he should not  drive  and  in
       February 2011 and May 2011 was convicted of offences of driving while
       disqualified and so, necessarily, driving whilst  uninsured.  In  May
       2011 the appellant received a suspended sentence of imprisonment  for
       making false representations with a view to gain for himself.


    8. The significance of those convictions is that the appellant  had,  by
       his conduct, placed himself in a different position than  applied  to
       his siblings and his mother, all of whom became entitled  to  British
       citizenship. Because  of  his  record  of  offending,  the  appellant
       remained subject to immigration control and  so  liable  to  be  made
       subject to a deportation order should he commit a qualifying offence.


    9. The  judge  then  summarised  the  respondent's  case.  Although  the
       respondent accepted, as plainly was the case, that the appellant  had
       family ties in the United Kingdom, it was not accepted  that  he  had
       family life for the purposes of rights protected by article 8 of  the
       ECHR because these were relationships between  adult  family  members
       that disclosed no aspects of particular dependency beyond the  normal
       emotional ties to be expected. Further, the respondent did not accept
       that the appellant was in a subsisting  relationship  with  Ms  Kholi
       Begum, who the appellant had described as his fianc�e. In respect  of
       private life, again, the respondent accepted that the appellant  had,
       obviously, built a private life here, but said  that  there  were  no
       exceptional circumstances arising from that such as to  outweigh  the
       public interest in his deportation, given the serious nature  of  the
       offences.


   10. In the refusal letter the respondent had said that the appellant  was
       someone who could "understand and speak Bengali language  among  your
       family and extended families" something that the appellant  disputes.
       Pausing there, Mr Alexander accepted in his oral submissions  at  the
       hearing today that the elder members of  the  appellant's  family  do
       indeed speak Bengali and there is a  modest  level  of  communication
       possible between them and the appellant but, he points out,  that  is
       very different from being fluent in a language.  The respondent  said
       also in the decision letter that the appellant had been raised  in  a
       household with other nationals of Bangladesh and it  was  noted  that
       English is widely spoken in Bangladesh. This meant, according to  the
       respondent,  that  there  were   no   insurmountable   obstacles   to
       deportation.


   11. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  from  Ms  Begum
       and had regard to  witness  statements  from  other  family  members,
       including the appellant's parents and siblings.


   12. In oral evidence the appellant said that he had been rehabilitated in
       prison and insisted that he did not speak Bengali nor did he have  an
       extended family in Bangladesh. He spoke of courses he  had  completed
       in prison.


   13. Ms Begum confirmed that the contents of her  witness  statement  were
       correct and that she and the appellant did plan  to  marry.  She  had
       left Bangladesh in 2002 to move to the United  Kingdom  and  had  not
       returned there since.


   14. Having set out the legal framework the judge proceeded  to  make  his
       findings.  He  took  as  his  starting  point  the  comments  of  the
       sentencing judge who said that the appellant has been found to be  in
       possession of "a very serious weapon together with ammunition  and  a
       silencer". He then had regard to the OAsys report and,  at  paragraph
       17 of his determination the judge said:


          "The OAsys assessment of 5th August 2014 states that the appellant
          poses a medium risk to the public but a low risk in the  community
          in all other respects.  It  is  said  that  he  was  to  undertake
          relevant offending  behaviour  work  in  custody  as  set  by  his
          offender supervisor. The report  states  that  the  appellant  has
          seven convictions in relation  to  fifteen  offences  which  would
          indicate "an amount of pro-criminal attitudes"  and  that  he  was
          aware that the man he borrowed money off to buy his van was a drug
          dealer. The appellant said that he was holding the weapon  because
          the man who owns the gun was a drug dealer  from  London  and  the
          appellant was in debt to him as he had borrowed money to buy a van
          to help him start up his own  business.....  The  offence  was  an
          escalation in seriousness due to the potential impact of gun would
          have should it have been used.... Had the gun not been found,  the
          consequences could have been fatal."

   15. The judge observed that the appellant appeared still to be in denial,
       despite his claim to have been rehabilitated, as he continued to take
       issue with some of the facts relating to the offence on the basis  of
       which he was sentenced.


   16. At paragraph 19 of the determination the judge set out his approach:


          "Counsel accepted in his skeleton argument that neither paragraphs
          399 nor 399A of the  Immigration  Rules  apply  to  the  appellant
          because he falls into the first category of paragraph 398,  namely
          a person whose deportation from the UK is conducive to the  public
          good because he has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
          at least four years, in this case  five  years  imprisonment.  The
          appellant is liable to automatic deportation under  section  32(5)
          of the UK Borders Act 2007. The appellants pleads  that  automatic
          deportation would breach his  human  rights  under  article  8  in
          respect of his family and private life that he has established  in
          the UK and therefore the exception under section 33(2)(a) applies.
          However, I am now  bound  to  consider  part  5A  which  has  been
          inserted into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and
          therefore the public interest considerations under article 8 which
          are to be found in section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014...."


       The judge then set out the reasoning that  led  to  his  decision  to
       dismiss the appeal. As this is  the  focus  of  the  challenge  being
       pursued, I will reproduce this part  of  the  determination  in  some
       detail:

          "I therefore look to  see  whether,  notwithstanding  the  primary
          legislation,  the  appellant  can  succeed  under  article  8.   I
          therefore have taken into account section 117C in respect  of  the
          additional considerations in cases involving foreign criminals  in
          which it is said that it is in the  public  interest  for  foreign
          criminals  to  be  deported  and  the  more  serious  the  offence
          committed, the greater is the public interest in such deportation.
          Section 117C(6) applies because the appellant was sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years  and  the  public
          interest requires his deportation unless there are very compelling
          circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
          2. Whilst I accept that under section 117C(4), Exception 1 applies
          because the appellant has been lawfully resident  in  the  UK  for
          most of his life and he is socially and culturally  integrated  in
          the UK, I do  not  find  that  there  would  be  very  significant
          obstacles to the appellant's integration into the country to which
          he is proposed to be deported. The appellant has been  brought  up
          in a traditional Bangladeshi family and although he claims he  did
          not speak Bengali, I find this hard to accept because it would  be
          reasonable to expect the  appellant  to  have  some  knowledge  of
          Bengali which is the language of the older members of his  family,
          including his parents and grandparents. In any event, taking  into
          account section 117C(6), the public interest requires  deportation
          unless there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
          those described in Exception 1. I have looked to see whether  such
          very compelling circumstances exist but I am  not  satisfied  that
          they do exist because although the appellant came to the  UK  when
          he was only 3 months old, he is not a stranger to Bengali  culture
          and customs and it would be reasonable  to  assume  that   he  has
          retained links with Bangladesh. Both  his  parents  were  born  in
          Bangladesh and although they  and  the  appellant's  siblings  are
          British citizens, there have been family visits to Bangladesh  and
          it would be unrealistic to assume that all ties to Bangladesh have
          been severed, even though the appellant may not have  visited  the
          country since his arrival in the UK. I find that the appellant has
          exaggerated his lack of ties to Bangladesh to suit the purposes of
          his appeal."

       The judge then went on to address the relationships  upon  which  the
       appellant's claim was founded:

          "in considering section 117C(5), I am not satisfied that Exception
          2 applies because I do not find that the appellant has  a  genuine
          and subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner,  in  other
          words in Ms Begum's case a  partner  who  is  a  British  citizen,
          because I do not find that the evidence supports  the  appellant's
          claim that she is genuinely his fianc�e. There is little, if  any,
          evidence of meaningful contact. It is extremely surprising that Ms
          Begum said that she had only visited the appellant once in  prison
          and could not say when, the prison was too far away  and  she  did
          not like travelling on the Underground. It is also incredible that
          Ms Begum did not attend the appellant's sentence  at  Luton  Crown
          Court because she did not know about it. She claimed she  was  not
          lying about the relationship in evidence but I do not accept  that
          this is a genuine relationship.... I thus conclude that  there  is
          no family life between the appellant and Ms Begum."

   17. The judge then found that in the absence  of  any  evidence  of  "any
       special dependency, emotional, financial or otherwise", family  life,
       for the purposes of article 8, did not exist  between  the  appellant
       and the members of his immediate family.


   18.  At paragraph  24  of  his  determination  the  judge  set  out  this
       conclusion:


          "Thus, in  carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise  under  section
          117A(3), taking  into  account  the  gravity  of  the  appellant's
          offence and balancing that with the article 8  family  life  claim
          and the appellant's private life, including  the  length  of  time
          that he has been living in the UK, I  find  that  the  appellant's
          deportation is in the public interest and is not outweighed by any
          article 8 considerations."

   19. The first of the grounds upon which that conclusion is challenged  is
       that the judge failed adequately or properly  to  weigh  the  factors
       speaking in the appellant's favour against the  public  interests  in
       his favour and, in particular, failed to provide adequate reasons for
       his  finding  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation  was   not
       outweighed by the fact that the appellant has lived in  this  country
       since he was a 3 month old child.


   20. It cannot, sensibly, be suggested that the judge left out of  account
       the fact of the appellant's residence in this country since  arriving
       as a 3 month old child, since the judge made  specific  reference  to
       that fact at paragraphs 1, 11, 21, 24 and 25 of his determination. By
       any view this was a thread that he weaved thorough the  determination
       from start to finish. It is plain that the judge recognised  that  to
       be a powerful factor speaking in the appellant's  favour,  describing
       it at paragraph 25 of the determination as the strongest point of his
       case. It is plain also that the judge carried out a careful balancing
       exercise, having identified all relevant  factors,  as  he  struck  a
       balance between the competing interests in play. It is clear that the
       judge did give considerable weight to that factor but  that  was  one
       part of the balancing exercise, even if it was an important one.  The
       striking of that balance was for the judge to do.


   21. The point is that, notwithstanding that the judge recognised this  to
       be a matter of cogent significance, in his view it was not, even when
       taken together  with  everything  else  the  appellant  relied  upon,
       sufficient to outweigh the public interest in deportation of a person
       convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  offence  who  continued   to
       represent a risk of harm to the public. Even if that was not the only
       conclusion possible on the facts, I am unable  to  characterise  that
       conclusions as being a perverse one that no  reasonable  judge  could
       arrive at.


   22. Mr Alexander was invited to identify what other factors were left out
       of account but he was unable to point to any specifically. It  cannot
       be said that the judge failed to have  regard  to  the  progress  the
       appellant had made in prison because, again,  he  has  made  specific
       reference to the courses the appellant had  undertaken.  He  was  not
       required to set out in detail a discussion of the individual courses,
       details of which were included in the appellant's bundle.


   23. Mr Alexander accepted that the fact of the appellant  having  arrived
       in the United Kingdom as a 3 month old child could  not  properly  be
       regarded as being a factor determinative of the appeal in his favour.
       He  is  right  to  make  that  acknowledgement.  That  means  that  a
       perversity challenge cannot succeed on that basis. Therefore, if  the
       determination is to be disturbed, the appellant must demonstrate that
       some other  error  has  been  made  by  the  judge  which  makes  his
       assessment legally flawed.


   24. The next ground is that the judge was wrong to  say  that  there  had
       been family visits when assessing whether the appellant had  retained
       any ties with Bangladesh.  It  is  submitted  that  the  judge  erred
       because of a mistake of fact. That was because the  evidence  was  to
       the effect that the appellant, his siblings and his mother  had  made
       no visits to Bangladesh since they moved to the United Kingdom.  This
       ground is, with respect, simply misconceived as it misrepresents what
       the judge was saying. The point being made by the judge was that  the
       appellant's own evidence was that he was a member of a  close  family
       and there had been visits by the family,  if  not  by  the  appellant
       himself.  That  suggested  family  links  with  Bangladesh  that  the
       appellant would have the advantage of should he return to Bangladesh.


   25. The appellant's case in this respect may be thought to be lacking  in
       frankness. While statements from the appellant, his siblings and  his
       mother are at pains to stress the absence of  any  family  visits  to
       Bangladesh,  it  is  striking  that  the  witness  statement  of  the
       appellant's father makes no such assertion. From that it is  entirely
       reasonable for the judge to draw the inference that  the  appellant's
       father has made such visits, even if he and the appellant have chosen
       not to disclose them.


   26. Once it is accepted that there have been family visits, even if  only
       by one member of the family, it can readily be seen  that  the  judge
       was entitled to take the view  that,  as  he  put  it,  it  would  be
       unrealistic to assume that all ties to Bangladesh have been  severed.
       All this led to the finding that the appellant was"not a stranger  to
       Bengali culture and customs".


   27. Building upon that, the judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  been
       brought up within a traditional Bangladeshi family setting and he did
       not accept the appellant's claim to have no ability  at  all  in  the
       Bengali language. The judge pointed out that, in any  event,  English
       was widely spoken in Bangladesh.


   28. For the respondent Mr Walker submitted that the point being  made  by
       the judge could be illustrated by way of an example of something that
       could have, but  did  not  happen.   If  soon  after  arrival  as  an
       unaccompanied migrant (which of course he was not) the appellant  had
       been fostered to an English family with no connection  to  Bangladesh
       then he would have been raised to adulthood with nothing  approaching
       any sort of tie with his country of nationality. But that was not the
       case at all. The applicant  had  been  raised  within  a  Bangladeshi
       family setting, with the older generations speaking Bengali. Thus the
       judge was entitled to find that he was "not  a  stranger  to  Bengali
       culture and customs".


   29. Once again, while other judges may have come to other conclusions,  I
       do not see that this was a  perverse  conclusion  for  the  judge  to
       reach, nor one unsupported by adequate reasoning.


   30. The ground complaining that the judge was requested to determine  the
       article 8 claim "over and above the rules and primary legislation" so
       that he erred in law in failing to do so is also one that is not made
       out and Mr Alexander is right not to pursue that  ground  on  such  a
       basis. The immigration rules,  in  the  deportation  context,  are  a
       complete code when addressing and dealing with an  article  8  claim:
       see MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192
          1. We would, therefore, hold that the new rules  are  a  complete
             code and that the exceptional circumstances to  be  considered
             in  the  balancing  exercise  involve  the  application  of  a
             proportionality   test   as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence. We accordingly respectfully do not  agree  with
             the UT that the decision-maker is not "mandated  or  directed"
             to take all the relevant article 8 criteria into account (para
             38).
          1. Even if we were wrong about that, it  would  be  necessary  to
             apply a proportionality test outside the new rules as was done
             by the UT. Either way, the result should be the same. In these
             circumstances, it  is  a  sterile  question  whether  this  is
             required by the new rules  or  it  is  a  requirement  of  the
             general law. What matters is that it is required to be carried
             out if paras 399 or 399A do not apply.
   31. The addition to the legal framework of 117 of  the  2002  Act  simply
       reinforces that statement of  principle.  That  is  because  s117A(3)
       provides:


          ... "the public interest question" means the question  of  whether
          an interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and
          family life is justified under Article 8(2)."


       This makes clear that the public interest in deportation can  prevail
       only if that is compliant with rights protected by article 8  of  the
       ECHR. In any event, the judge did go on to carry out a quite separate
       assessment informed by the guidance of R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004]  UKHL
       27  and  that  assessment  took  him  to  the  same  conclusion  thus
       reinforcing  the  answer  delivered  by  his  assessment  under   the
       statutory framework.


   32. The final  ground,  and  the  main  thrust  of  Mr  Alexander's  oral
       submissions, raises the complaint  that  the  judge  failed  to  have
       regard to case law relevant to the article 8 assessment to be carried
       out. The grounds refer to Khan  v  United  Kingdom  [2010]  ECHR  27;
       Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 1638/03; Uner v the  Netherlands  [2006]
       ECHR 873 and SS (India) v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ  288.  But,  for  the
       reasons that follow, none of those takes the appellant any further.


   33. It is not an error of law for a judge not to make specific  reference
       to case law, even if he  is  referred  to  it  in  submissions.  What
       matters is not that the judge recites the names of cases but that  he
       applies the correct legal principles. It can be seen that  the  judge
       directed himself in terms of R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  24,  but
       made no specific reference to any of the cases identified above.


   34.  Khan  concerned  a  Pakistani  national  who  successfully  resisted
       deportation. One factor that spoke in his favour was  his  length  of
       residence since arriving in the United Kingdom  as  a  child  aged  3
       years old.  But there were other factors  that  are  absent  in  this
       case. In Khan the appellant had a  British  national  partner  and  a
       child who's right to respect for family life fell to be considered as
       well. Also, in that case  the  appellant  had  committed  no  further
       offences during a significant post release period. A report confirmed
       a low risk of reoffending and members of  his  family  suffered  from
       significant ill-health. None of that can be said to be the  case  for
       this appellant.


   35. It is submitted on the appellant's behalf  that  Maslov  is  relevant
       because the court found that regard had to  be  had  to  the  special
       situation of aliens who have spent most, if not all, their  childhood
       in the host country, were brought up  and  received  their  education
       there. However, it is now established that Maslov is not be taken  as
       requiring any different approach or "laying down a new rule of  law",
       and in any event, it is of relevance that this appellant  was  not  a
       juvenile offender but an adult: see Akpinar v SSHD  [2014]  EWVA  Civ
       937 at paragraph 43 per Stanley Burnton LJ:


          "My conclusion  is  that  there  is  not  a  "clear  and  constant
          jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  court"   (see   R   (Alconbury
          Developments Ltd)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Environment,
          Transport and the  Regions  [2001]  UKHL  23,  [2003]  2  AC  295,
          paragraph 26, and R v Special Adjudicator ex  parte  Ullah  [2004]
          UKHL 26 [2004] 2 AC 323 at paragraph 20) requiring this  Court  to
          treat "very serious reasons", if the phrase  means  "very  serious
          offences", as a precondition of deportation of someone  who  is  a
          "settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major  part  of
          his or her childhood and youth" in this country."

   36. In any event, it is plain from a reading of  the  determination  that
       the judge kept in mind throughout "the special  situation  of  aliens
       who have spent most, if not all, their childhood in the host country,
       were brought up there and received their education there" because  he
       repeatedly referred to those matters.


   37. Mr Alexander relies upon dicta from AJ (Angola) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
       Civ 1636 at paragraph 46, the effect of which is that the  assessment
       of the article 8  claim  is  to  be  carried  out  within  the  legal
       framework of the immigration rules, and that such  assessment  should
       be informed by the guidance found in Maslov. But this  appellant  was
       22 years old when sentenced to imprisonment and so was not a juvenile
       offender and it can be seen from the determination read  as  a  whole
       that the judge has kept in mind throughout all of the Maslov and Uner
       criteria although in doing so he has arrived at  a  conclusion  other
       than that sought by the appellant.


   38. The grounds draw on Uner to support the proposition that when looking
       at whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  family  members   to
       relocate with the appellant, factors to be borne in mind include  the
       best interests and well-being of children  and  solidity  of  social,
       cultural and family ties with the host country  and  the  country  of
       destination. But in this case no such relocation is contemplated, the
       respondent accepting there will be an interruption  with  established
       family and private life relationships but maintaining that would be a
       proportionate outcome.


   39. In referring to SS (India) the grounds introduce into the  discussion
       something that did not loom large in the reasoning of the  judge  but
       which is a very significant factor speaking against  the  appellant's
       case. There are two planks to the public interest argument. The first
       is the need to protect the community from the  acts  of  the  foreign
       criminal. The other is the need to deter  others  from  offending  by
       demonstrating  the  severe  consequences  that  can  follow   serious
       offending for those subject to immigration control.


   40. That has been made clear, consistently,  in  guidance  given  by  the
       superior courts. In N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ Judge LJ (as  he
       then was) said at para 83:
          "83. The "public good" and the "public interest" are wide  ranging
          but undefined concepts. In my judgment (whether expressly referred
          to in any decision letter or not), broad issues of social cohesion
          and public confidence in the administration of the system by which
          control is exercised  over  non-British  citizens  who  enter  and
          remain in the United Kingdom are engaged. They include an  element
          of deterrence, to non-British citizens who are already here,  even
          if they are genuine refugees and to those minded to come, so as to
          ensure  that   they   clearly   understand   that   whatever   the
          circumstances, one of the consequences of serious crime  may  well
          be deportation ..."
       At paragraph 64 May LJ said:


          "Where a person who is not a British citizen commits a  number  of
          very serious crimes, the public interest side of the balance  will
          include importantly, although not exclusively, the  public  policy
          need  to  deter  and  to  express  society's  revulsion   at   the
          seriousness of the criminality."


       So that, in the case under consideration:


          "...I consider that a proper reading of  the  determination  as  a
          whole does not support the submission that  the  adjudicator  took
          properly into account the public interest  considerations.  If  he
          had, it is, in my view, plain that he would not have reversed  the
          Secretary of State's decision as to deportation.".


   41. More recently, in AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634 Pitchford LJ, having
       referred to this dicta said at paragraph 24:
          "Deportation in pursuit of the legitimate aim of preventing  crime
          and disorder is not, therefore, to be seen as  one-dimensional  in
          its effect. It has the effect not only of removing the risk of re-
          offending by the deportee himself, but  also  of  deterring  other
          foreign nationals in a similar position. Furthermore,  deportation
          of foreign criminals preserves public confidence in  a  system  of
          control whose loss would itself tend towards crime and disorder."
   42. The importance of these considerations  was  emphasised  also  in  JO
       (Uganda) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10, per Richards LJ at paragraph 29:


          "...the factors in favour of expulsion are, in my view, capable of
          carrying greater weight in a deportation case than in  a  case  of
          ordinary removal. The maintenance of effective immigration control
          is an important matter, but  the  protection  of  society  against
          serious crime is even more important and  can  properly  be  given
          corresponding greater weight in the balancing exercise..."


   43. The same approach was taken by a  Presidential  panel  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal  in  the  reported  decision  of  Masih  (deportation-public
       interest-basic  principles)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  46  (IAC).   The
       guidance is summarised in the head note as follows:


          "The following basic principles can be derived from the present
          case law concerning the issue of the public interest in relation
          to the deportation of foreign criminals:


          (a)    In a case of automatic deportation, full  account  must  be
             taken of  the  strong  public  interest  in  removing  foreign
             citizens  convicted of serious offences, which lies  not  only
             in the prevention of further  offences  on  the  part  of  the
             individual concerned, but in deterring others from  committing
             them in the first place.

          (b)     Deportation  of  foreign  criminals  expresses   society's
             condemnation of serious criminal activity and promotes  public
             confidence in the  treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
             committed them.

          (c)    The starting-point for assessing the facts of  the  offence
             of which an individual has been committed, and their effect on
             others, and on the public as a whole, must be the  view  taken
             by the sentencing judge. .."



   44. In AJ (Angola)Sales LJ explained  the  significance  of  the  correct
       approach to assessment within the rules of the  article  8  claim  as
       follows:
          1. The fact that the new rules  are  intended  to  operate  as  a
             comprehensive code is significant, because it  means  that  an
             official or a tribunal should seek  to  take  account  of  any
             Convention rights of an appellant through the lens of the  new
             rules themselves, rather  than  looking  to  apply  Convention
             rights for themselves in a free-standing way outside  the  new
             rules. ...
          1. ... The requirement of assessment through the lens of the  new
             rules also seeks to ensure that decisions are made  in  a  way
             that is properly informed by the  considerable  weight  to  be
             given  to  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals, as declared by  Parliament  in  the  2007  Act  and
             reinforced by the Secretary of State (as the relevant Minister
             with responsibility for operation of the immigration  system),
             so as to promote public confidence  in  that  system  in  this
             sensitive area.
   45. Drawing all of this together, I return to a point I have made earlier
       in this determination. As has been recognised repeatedly, it  is  the
       nature of a proportionality balance that more than one outcome may be
       possible on any given set of facts. Indeed, this may be such a  case.
       But that is not the question that I have to address. The issue to  be
       confronted is whether the appellant has demonstrated that  the  judge
       made an error of law such as to require  that  his  decision  be  set
       aside.


   46. For the appellant's challenge to succeed as a perversity challenge it
       must be established that the facts admitted of just  one  conclusion,
       namely that there would be an impermissible  infringement  of  rights
       protected by article 8 of the ECHR so that the  answer  delivered  to
       the ultimate question of para  398  of  HC395  must  be  one  in  the
       appellant's favour. Put another way, it must have been  perverse  for
       Judge Khan to have reached the conclusion he did. For the  reasons  I
       have given that has not been demonstrated.


   47. Mr  Alexander's  principal  challenge,  though,  is  founded  on  the
       submission that the assessment carried out by the judge  was  legally
       deficient because it was not properly informed by guidance  found  in
       the case law discussed above. There are two  difficulties  with  that
       submission. First, it  is  not  evident  that  any  applicable  legal
       principle has been incorrectly applied by the judge and second  given
       the findings of fact made by the judge it is impossible to see how  a
       detailed recitation of extracts from the case law would have led  him
       to any different conclusion. Once it is accepted,  as  I  do  accept,
       that this is not a case that admits of  only  one  possible  outcome,
       then  the  weight  to  be  given  to  factors  considered  within   a
       proportionality balance is a  matter  for  the  judge  who,  in  this
       appeal, has not been shown to have committed legal error in  carrying
       out that task.


   48. For all of  these  reasons  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
       dismissed.


   Summary of decision


   49. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make an error of  law  and  his
       determination will stand.






                             Signed     [pic]


                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                             Date:      22 December 2014


