
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00608/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2018                         |On 9th January 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE COKERILL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Leandre [B]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Layne, Counsel instructed by Victory Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a matter  relating  to  a  Mr  Leandre  [B]  who  is  a  French
    national.  He entered the United Kingdom in 1999 when he  was  aged  8.
    On 14th November 2014 he was convicted  of  perverting  the  course  of
    justice, receiving ten months' imprisonment and on 28th September  2015
    he was convicted of a number of  drug-related  offences  for  which  he
    received a sentence of three years and four months'  imprisonment.   On
    30th November 2016 a decision was made that he be  deported  under  the
    provisions of the EEA Regulations on the basis that  he  constituted  a
    present and immediate threat to public order and  security.  Indeed  he
    was in fact deported on 26th April 2016 but was  allowed  to  re-attend
    the hearing of his appeal against that decision, an appeal  which  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal and before Judge Birk of  that  Tribunal
    on 13th September 2018.  In the decision  promulgated  on  5th  October
    2018 the appeal was allowed, both in respect of the EEA Regulations and
    also in relation to Article 8.

2.   The  Secretary  of  State  sought  to  appeal  against  that  decision,
    essentially on two grounds. The first  was  failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the appellant no longer presented the relevant
    risk; and finding indeed that there was no risk to the public or to the
    community.  The Judge also went on to consider briefly  the  matter  of
    proportionality and that is the  second  ground  of  challenge  by  the
    Secretary of State.  Leave to challenge the decision was granted to the
    Upper Tribunal and thus the matter comes before us today to resolve the
    issues joined as between the parties.

3.   The first issue which arises sharply in  this  context  is  indeed  the
    basis upon which the decision was considered.   The  relevant  decision
    under  Regulation  27  of  The  Immigration  (European  Economic  area)
    regulations is one taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
    security or public health.  There  are  essentially  three  categories.
    There is one at the lowest level of  protection,  namely  that  grounds
    exist on the basis of public policy, public security or public  health.
    Those who have a permanent right of residence can only  be  removed  on
    serious grounds of public policy and public  security,  and  those  who
    have ten years' residence and exercising treaty rights only in relation
    to imperative grounds of public security.

4.   What is manifest to us, and indeed to some extent very fairly  conceded
    on behalf of the appellant today, is that the Judge failed to  identify
    with any clarity precisely on what basis matters fell to be considered.
     Although it is right, as we have indicated,  that  the  appellant  has
    been in the United Kingdom for  a  long  period,  the  question  arises
    whether he or his father exercised treaty rights such as to give them a
    permanent right of residence.  It would seem from the evidence that was
    presented, and indeed from remarks that are recorded from the appellant
    himself, that no such permanent right was established.  It is therefore
    somewhat surprising for the Judge, who  seems  to  have  accepted  that
    fact, to go on in paragraph 25 of the determination  to  say  that  the
    respondent was required only to show  serious  rather  than  imperative
    grounds of public  security.   As  Mr  Kotas  submitted,  that  is  not
    correct.  If he has no permanent  right  to  reside  it  is  the  lower
    standard simply of grounds. Thus there in the  decision  is  already  a
    misunderstanding as to the correct approach to be taken, which  in  our
    view is a significant matter in this appeal.

5.   The assessment of risk is clearly a matter for the  judge,  but  it  is
    submitted that the approach taken by  the  judge  was  defective  in  a
    number of respects. That is a submission which appears to  us  to  have
    force, both as  to  the  structure  and  the  content  of  the  Judge's
    consideration of this central question. The OASys Report was before the
    Judge. The report is rather  curious  in  that  it  does  not  give  an
    assessment of risk which normally would be expected but rather sets out
    a self-assessment of the appellant, particularly at page 84,  where  it
    says "I aim to not be in the same surroundings I was prior to coming to
    prison, and to change my circle of friends". That was  his  hope  which
    clearly would have an impact, if carried out successfully, as  to  risk
    but it was not an impartial finding  and  appears  (as  the  Respondent
    accepted) to have been misread as an impartial assessment by the Judge.
     The assessment essentially of the offence is set out at page 82 in the
    OASys Report.  It speaks of the fact that on 27th October 2015  at  the
    Inner London Sessions the appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  a  number  of
    serious drug matters for which he was sentenced to a substantial period
    of imprisonment.  He was at the time working as a market trader, mainly
    on a stall in Brixton.  He had seemingly done  some  security  work  as
    well.  He had never signed on for benefits, he did not like to rely  on
    his family for money, and he says that his goals were to get away  from
    Brixton and go back to college.  He  stated  that  before  he  came  to
    prison his main source of income was from working, but  he  had  a  gym
    debt.  He grew up with his mum and dad and had a happy  upbringing  and
    started using drugs at the age of 14, introduced by his peers.   It  is
    perhaps somewhat surprising that there was little  in  that  report  to
    assist as to the assessment of risk on an objective basis.

6.   That having been said, there was an e-mail,  which  was  received  from
    the probation officer and that is referred to at paragraph  30  of  the
    judge's decision.  It was  from  a  Mr  Nazir  who  was  the  probation
    officer.  It was dated 24th November 2016 and indicates that, given the
    previous  issues  of  domestic  violence,  weapon  possession  and  the
    offending being gang related, the appellant was considered to be a high
    risk.  The weighting of low risk in the OASys  report  failed  to  take
    into account his offending placed within the context of gang offending.
     For some reason which is not entirely apparent to us, the  Judge  gave
    little weight to that document.  It seems to us that it was, in  common
    sense, a particularly relevant document, given that  it  was  from  the
    probation officer and presumably followed on from the report.  The last
    page of the OASys assessment at page 89 sets out goals  and  objectives
    and sets out times for work and review,  so  it  is  quite  clear  that
    various matters were set for the appellant to  do  after  release.   It
    seems in those circumstances  entirely  reasonable  for  his  probation
    officer to make  comments,  particularly  if  the  risk  had  not  been
    expressly identified. We find  it  to  be  unreasonable  to  reject  so
    quickly something that was potentially of importance in relation to the
    assessment of risk.

7.   In fairness to the Judge  he  identifies  a  number  of  matters  which
    seemingly would go to reducing that risk, but there is a difference, as
    we find, between identifying factors that would  reduce  the  risk  and
    factors  that  negate  it.  For  example,  in  paragraph  34   of   the
    determination, the Judge  accepted  that  the  drug  problem  had  been
    addressed to a limited extent based on his actions of work done on drug
    misuse and his ability to find and retain employment.   That  does  not
    necessarily mean that the extent of the problem  has  gone  away.   The
    appellant offended when he was a market  trader  and  it  is  noted  in
    paragraph 35 of the determination that he intends to go and  stay  with
    his sister, to be again a market trader.

8.   As was highlighted by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  submissions,
    although the Appellant says that he was going to live with  his  sister
    in the Tottenham area, his partner speaks of his going to live  in  the
    Streatham area.   That  may  not  be  a  great  matter,  but  it  is  a
    significant one, which comes to have greater  practical  importance  in
    the context of the Judge's remarks set  out  in  paragraph  35  of  the
    decision:-


         "I find that neither he nor [CR] were credible in their  assertions
         that they might resume their personal  relationship  because  their
         written evidence was silent on this and their oral evidence was non-
         committal and vague.  I find that if the  Appellant  had  plans  to
         move in with Ms [R] and present this as a united  front  that  this
         would have lacked all credibility and be something designed  simply
         to bolster his appeal"

    If that was the view of the Judge that there was a lack of  credibility
    in what the appellant was seeking to  say  that  he  would  do,  it  is
    obvious that should have alerted the judge that  all  was  not  as  was
    presented on behalf of the appellant.

9.   As we have indicated therefore there are difficulties in  the  lack  of
    any critical assessment  of  the  risk  in  the  decision  without  any
    structure or proper basis to assess it.   It  is  a  matter  of  public
    importance that these matters are looked at with care, not only for the
    interest of the appellant, but also in the wider public interest.

10.  So far as the assessment  of  proportionality  is  concerned,  we  have
    serious reservations as  to  whether  that  was  properly  or  sensibly
    carried out.  We illustrate that by reference to paragraph  44  of  the
    determination, in which reliance is made upon a report of  Julia  Avnon
    of 8th August 2017, seeking to suggest that such a report  states  that
    the  continual  separation  from  her  father  will  have  a  seriously
    detrimental effect on the child's wellbeing.  We struggle to find  that
    at all in the report which is before us.   Rather,  we  note  that  the
    daughter scores a well-within  average  range  for  all  criteria.  The
    report indicates that she is a healthy, happy, well-adjusted child  who
    has been nurtured and adequately and appropriately cared for.   She  of
    course will be living with her mother and is doing so rather than  with
    the appellant who resides in France. We can find nothing in the  report
    to indicate the degree of detriment as described.

Notice of Decision

11.  We have  come  to  the  view  that  the  assessment  of  risk  and  the
    assessment of proportionality are both fundamentally flawed.  There  is
    indeed  no  acknowledgement  as  to  the  public  interest  in   either
    assessment. We uphold the challenges made of the decision and find that
    it was one made in a material error  of  law.  For  those  reasons  the
    appeal by the Secretary of State before  us  is  to  be  allowed.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is to  be  set  aside  to  be
    remade.

12.  Having listened to submissions, it seems to us that, as credibility  is
    in issue and evidence will be given, the appeal should go back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. We are mindful of the Senior
    President's practice direction.

13.  Any directions that are necessary will of course be given by the First-
    tier Tribunal.



14.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 20 Dec 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


