
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00677/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2014                            |On 30 January 2014           |
|Prepared 17 January 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCKEE

                                   Between

                MARIUSZ EUGENIUSZ FRACKIEWICZ AKA CIETALOWICZ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Malletts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Poland born on  11  January  1974  appeals,
    with permission against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 21
    March 2013 to make a deportation order  under  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   Regulation
    19(3)(b) which states that the Secretary of State  may  remove  an  EEA
    national from the United Kingdom where it is decided  that  removal  is
    justified on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
    health.

2.   The appellant's appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 11  June
    2013 and allowed.  The Secretary of State appealed and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2  December  2013  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Lord  Boyd  of
    Duncansby, sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal and Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Keki?) set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and they
    ordered that there be further submissions before the Upper Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal.

3.   The decision of the Upper Tribunal setting aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal sets out all relevant issues and the background  to
    the decision and we consider that it is appropriate that we should  set
    that out in full.  We note that the Upper Tribunal, when  referring  to
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, incorrectly  referred  to
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal as  the  decision  letter,
    and that they refer to the   decision to deport as the determination.

4.   Their decision reads as follows:

         "1.  This is the appeal of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department (the Secretary of State) against  the  decision  of
             the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  O'Garro)  sitting  with  Mr  B
             Bompas, (non-legal member) at Hatton Cross  on  11  June  2013
             with the determination promulgated  on  12  July  2013.   That
             decision  upheld  the  appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereafter
             "claimant") against the  determination  of  the  Secretary  of
             State dated 21 March 2013  to  make  a  deportation  order  by
             virtue of Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

         2.   Before proceeding with the substantive  issue  raised  in  the
             appeal by the Secretary of State there is a preliminary matter
             of jurisdiction.  We  were  informed  that  the  claimant  was
             deported to Poland on 13 June 2013 - that is  two  days  after
             the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is  common
             ground  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  unaware  of  the
             impending extradition and it may very well be  that  the  Home
             Office Presenting Office was himself unaware of this.  In  any
             event it was the Secretary of  State's  position  that  having
             been extradited to Poland in order  to  serve  an  outstanding
             prison sentence he had left the United Kingdom.   Accordingly,
             as a preliminary point, Mr Melvin submitted  that  the  appeal
             against the Secretary of State's decision had been effectively
             abandoned.  He referred us to Section 104 of the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  We  pointed  out  that  that
             would leave the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
             place, namely that the decision of the Secretary of  State  to
             deport the claimant is not proportionate and not in accordance
             with the law.  However  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  the  true
             position was that the claimant's appeal against  the  decision
             of the Secretary of State would be  abandoned.  Presumably  it
             would  be  as  if  the   First-tier   tribunal   hearing   and
             determination had never occurred.

         3.   Mr Mold submitted that was not right.  In his  submission  the
             EEA Regulations trump the 2002 Act because of the supremacy of
             Europe Union law.

         4.   This is a  decision  taken  under  the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (SI  No.  1003)  (the  2006
             Regulations). Paragraph 25(4) states: 'A pending appeal is not
             to be treated as abandoned solely because the appellant leaves
             the United Kingdom'.  The appellant in this case is of  course
             the Secretary of State herself rather than the claimant but we
             note in paragraph 25(2) that '... an appeal is to  be  treated
             as pending during the period when notice of  appeal  is  given
             and ending when the appeal in finally determined, withdrawn or
             abandoned'.  In this context  we  regard  the  appeal  by  the
             claimant against a decision of the Secretary of  State  as  an
             ongoing process.  While the claimant was successful before the
             First-tier Tribunal, the appeal against the  decision  of  the
             Secretary of State cannot  be  regarded  as  fully  determined
             unless and until the process is finally at an end. Accordingly
             we consider that we have jurisdiction to determine the  appeal
             by the Secretary of State.

         5.   Having determined that we have jurisdiction we turn now to the
             merits of the appeal itself.

         Background

         6.   The claimant is a  Polish  citizen  who  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom on either 10 or 11 February 2007.   Before  coming  to
             this country he lived in Poland where he had a criminal record
             for offences committed between July 1999  and  December  2004.
             In  2001  he  was  convicted  of   trafficking,   facilitating
             authorised   entry   and   residence   of   persons,   illegal
             destruction/concealment of  a  document  and  selling  another
             person's identity.   He  served  prison  sentences  for  these
             convictions.  In 2004 he was charged  with  robbery.   He  was
             kept on remand for more than two years  before  being  granted
             bail in 2007.  It was at that point that he  left  Poland  for
             the United Kingdom.  He was convicted of this offence  in  his
             absence in 2011 and  sentenced  to  five  years,  six  months'
             imprisonment.

         7.   In 2012 the claimant discovered that he had been convicted  of
             robbery in Poland.  On finding this out he changed  his  name,
             taking his wife's surname and then arranged for  the  issuance
             of false identity documents for his own  use.   On  14  August
             2012 he was arrested in the United Kingdom in connection  with
             his use of false identity documents.  On 28 August 2012 he was
             convicted  at  Canterbury  Crown  Court  on  two   counts   of
             possession of an identity document with  improper  intent  and
             sentenced to sixteen months' imprisonment.  He did not  appeal
             against his conviction or sentence.  On 21 February  2013  the
             claimant was notified of his liability to deportation.

         8.   As the claimant is an EU citizen the issue  of  his  exclusion
             and removal from the United Kingdom  falls  to  be  determined
             under the 2006 Regulations.  These are set out at paragraph 29
             of the decision letter.  Before the First-tier Tribunal it was
             argued that the claimant had been in the United Kingdom for  a
             continuous period of  five  years.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
             rejected that submission noting that as at  the  date  of  his
             conviction he had not completed five years' of legal residence
             (paragraph 46).  Mr Mold did not dispute that the claimant had
             not completed five years' of legal residence.  Accordingly the
             issue for the First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  or  not  the
             claimant's exclusion was justified on the  grounds  of  public
             policy, public security or public health  in  accordance  with
             Regulation 21 (see Regulation 19(1)).

         9.   At paragraph 59 of the determination the  First-tier  Tribunal
             concluded that on the evidence they were  not  satisfied  that
             the appellant's personal  conduct  as  it  is  today  poses  a
             present  threat  to  the  requirements   of   public   policy.
             Accordingly they found that the decision  to  deport  was  not
             proportionate and not in accordance with the law.

         10.  The grounds of appeal against that determination are succinct.
              The first ground is that the decision was perverse because it
             gave no consideration to the fact that between 1999  and  2004
             the appellant was in prison  for  trafficking  and  destroying
             documents, was on bail for robbery  when  he  fled  Poland  in
             2007, was convicted in his absence and sentenced to five and a
             half years in prison and upon finding this out, obtained false
             documents  so  that  he  could  not  be  returned  to  Poland.
             Accordingly it was  perverse  to  find  that,  with  no  other
             evidence cited, the appellant did not pose a present threat.

         11.  The second ground is of failing to give  reasons  or  adequate
             reasons for a material finding.  There  was  no  consideration
             given to the sentence in his absence to five and a half  years
             in prison for his latest conviction or to having already spent
             four and a  half  years  in  prison  for  trafficking.   These
             offences did not play any  part,  it  was  submitted,  in  the
             assessment of the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  future  risk.
             Accordingly there was an inadequate analysis for the  purposes
             of Regulation 21 as to the  claimant's  own  conduct  when  he
             found out about the conviction in Poland.  Nor was  there  any
             consideration that the Sentencing Judge  had  recommended  his
             deportation something which should at least have played a part
             in the overall assessment of present threat to public  policy.



         12.  In oral submissions Mr Melvin referred to paragraphs 18 to  22
             of the Secretary of State's letter of  21  March  2013  giving
             reasons for deportation.   None  of  these  matters  had  been
             addressed by the First-tier Tribunal in  their  determination.
             He accepted that the claimant had been here  for  nearly  five
             years but he was in the UK knowing that he  faced  a  criminal
             trial in Poland.  On finding  out  about  his  conviction  and
             absence  he  had  shown   criminal   intent   to   avoid   the
             consequences.

         13.  For the claimant, Mr Mold submitted that the  decision  letter
             was well-structured and reasoned.  It did not  repeat  itself.
             The First-tier Tribunal had referred to the relevant case  law
             and at paragraph 55 had pulled together the  principles  which
             they  had  gleaned  from  are  these  cases.   They  correctly
             identified that they had to look at the personal  conduct  and
             determine whether or not it constituted a  present  threat  to
             the requirements of public policy.

         Decision

         14.  Having considered the terms of  the  decision  letter  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal, the grounds of appeal and the submissions
             of parties we do not consider that the decision  is  one  that
             crosses the threshold of perversity.  However we are satisfied
             that full or adequate reasons have not been given by the First-
             tier Tribunal for their decision to  allow  the  appeal.   The
             operative parts of the decision letter in which the First-tier
             Tribunal  draw  together  the  evidence  can  be   seen   from
             paragraphs 55 to 59.

         15.  In paragraph  57  the  First-tier  Tribunal  states  that  the
             appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since 2007 and there
             is no evidence that he has committed any  offence  similar  to
             that which he committed in Poland.  In our opinion that is not
             factually accurate.  The offences of which he was convicted in
             this country are two counts of possession/control of  identity
             documents with intent.  The intention was to  avoid  returning
             to Poland in order to serve his sentence.  In our opinion such
             a conviction is analogous with the  conviction  in  Poland  of
             trafficking which involved illegal destruction/concealment  of
             a document and selling another person's identity card.

         16.  The Tribunal states that there is no evidence before them that
             the appellant has a propensity to  re-offend.   In  coming  to
             that conclusion they made no reference to either of  the  very
             serious convictions in Poland which  resulted  in  significant
             periods of imprisonment.  That  conclusion  is  based  on  the
             claimant's statement  that  he  regretted  his  past  criminal
             activities and that was the reason he chose to leave Poland to
             live in the United Kingdom.

         17.  In reaching that conclusion the  First-tier  tribunal  ignored
             relevant material, namely the offences  committed  in  Poland,
             and made a material factual  error  in  considering  that  the
             conviction in the  UK  was  not  analogous  with  any  of  the
             offences in Poland. The tribunal committed an error of law  in
             their assessment of the propensity to  re-offend.  Accordingly
             we allow the appeal.  It falls to be re-made.

         18.  Mr Mold submitted that  in  the  event  of  the  appeal  being
             allowed there should either be a re-hearing before the  First-
             tier Tribunal  or  alternatively  we  may  consider  that  the
             evidence from the claimant was properly set out at page 4; the
             issue would be one of the  applications  of  the  law  to  the
             evidence.  In  that  event  he  would  wish  to  make  further
             submissions.

         19.  It is clearly impractical to  have  a  re-hearing  before  the
             First-tier Tribunal in which the claimant gives  evidence.  He
             is presently in prison in Poland. Nor would it be desirable to
             leave the final determination  of  this  issue  until  he  was
             released from prison.  Having regard to the matters which  are
             set out in the decision letter  we  cannot  see  that  further
             evidence will be required. Accordingly we will  accede  to  Mr
             Mold's alternative solution and that is to list the  case  for
             further submissions before the Upper Tribunal.

         Summary

         20.  We allow the appeal and quash the decision of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.   The  case  will  be  re-listed  before  the  Upper
             Tribunal for submissions."

5.   At the hearing of  the  appeal  before  us  Mr  Mold  referred  to  the
    judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Northern  Ireland  in  Flaneur's
    application [2011] NICA 72 where in paragraphs 15 through to 18 of  the
    judgment Morgan LCJ set out the provisions of Articles 27.1 and 27.2 of
    Directive 2004/38/EC, the relevant provisions in  Regulation  21(5)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and  relevant
    case law of the European Court of Justice regarding the limitations  on
    the ability of Member States  to  deport  persons  who  have  committed
    criminal offences and set out a  summary of the  relevant  guidance  in
    the judgment in Bouchereau [1977] ECR 1999. He wrote: :

         "15. The relevant measures governing  restrictions  on  freedom  of
             movement for EU  nationals  are  now  contained  in  Directive
             2004/38/EC.  Articles 27.1 and 27.2 of the Directive provide:


             '1.  Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member  States
                  may  restrict  the  freedom  of  and  residence  of  Union
                  citizens  and  their  family  members,   irrespective   of
                  nationality, on grounds of public policy, public  security
                  or public health. These grounds shall not  be  invoked  to
                  serve economic ends.


             2.   Measures taken on grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                  security   shall   comply   with    the    principle    of
                  proportionality and shall  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of  the  individual  concerned.  Previous
                  criminal convictions shall not  in  themselves  constitute
                  grounds for taking such measures.


             The personal  conduct  of  the  individual  must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society.  Justifications  that
             are isolated from the particulars of the case or that rely  on
             considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted'.


         16.  That provision is  implemented  by  Regulation  21(5)  of  the
             Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the
             Regulations") which provides:


             '(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
                  policy  or  public  security  it  shall,  in  addition  to
                  complying  with   the   preceding   paragraphs   of   this
                  regulation, be taken  in  accordance  with  the  following
                  principles-


                  (a)   The decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;


                  (b)      The decision must be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;


                  (c)      The personal conduct of the person concerned must
                      represent a genuine present and sufficiently  serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of
                      society;


                  (d)  Matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;


                  (e)  A person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision'.


         17.   The  case  law  of  the  ECJ[1]  established  the   following
             limitations on the ability of Member States to deport  persons
             who have committed a criminal offence.  These  principles  are
             reflected in the terms of the Regulations set out above.  They
             can be summarised as follows:

             (i)   Derogations  from  free  movement  must  be  interpreted
                  restrictively, particularly in the case of citizens of the
                  EU.


             (ii) Such measures must be based exclusively on  the  personal
                  conduct of  the  person  concerned.  Previous  convictions
                  cannot in themselves justify deportation.


             (iii)    There must be a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
                  serious threat to the requirements of public policy.


             (iv)      Such  a  (present)  threat  exists  only  where  the
                  personal conduct 'indicates a specific  risk  of  new  and
                  serious prejudice to the requirements of public policy'[2]
                  which must, as a general rule, be satisfied at the time of
                  the expulsion[3].


             (v)  EU law prevents the deportation  of  an  EU  citizen  for
                  general preventative  reasons  aimed  at  deterring  other
                  foreign nationals.

         18.      In Bouchereau  [1977]  ECR  1999  the  European  Court  of
             Justice said:


                  '27. The terms of Art 3(2) of the Directive, which  states
                      that 'previous  criminal  convictions  shall  not  in
                      themselves constitute grounds for the taking of  such
                      measures'  must  be  understood  as   requiring   the
                      national  authorities  to  carry   out   a   specific
                      appraisal from the point of  view  of  the  interests
                      inherent in protecting  the  requirements  of  public
                      policy, which does not necessarily coincide with  the
                      appraisals which formed the  basis  of  the  criminal
                      conviction.


                  28.  The existence of a previous criminal conviction  can,
                      therefore, only be taken into account insofar as  the
                      circumstances which gave rise to that conviction  are
                      evidence of personal conduct constituting  a  present
                      threat to the requirements of public policy.


                  29.  Although, in general, a finding that  such  a  threat
                      exists  implies  the  existence  in  the   individual
                      concerned of a propensity to act in the same  way  in
                      the future, it is possible that  past  conduct  alone
                      may constitute such a threat to the  requirements  of
                      public policy.


                  30.  It is for the authorities and, where appropriate, for
                      the national Courts, to  consider  that  question  in
                      each individual case in the light of  the  particular
                      legal position of persons subject  to  Community  law
                      and with the fundamental nature of the  principle  of
                      the free movement of persons'."


6.   Mr Mold asserted  that if we decided  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    genuine threat then that was the end of the matter.  However,  even  if
    we decided  that  he  was  a  threat  relevant  factors  regarding  the
    proportionality of removal similar to those in an Article 8  assessment
    should be considered.  It would be necessary to consider   an  offender
    assessment or an  assessment  of  the  appellant's  likelihood  of  re-
    offending.

7.   He argued that while it was the case that the Secretary  of  State  had
    in the letter setting out the reasons for  deportation  relied  on  the
    judge's sentencing remarks these were not made within  the  context  of
    European Union law.

8.   It was the case  that  any  restriction  on  free  movement  should  be
    narrowly construed.  The appellant's offence did not, he argued,  cross
    the threshold of an offence for which the appellant should be  removed.
    He referred to the circumstances in which the  appellant  had  come  to
    Britain - he had been on remand in Poland for two  years  but  had  not
    been tried and had therefore fled to Britain.  It  is  the  appellant's
    case that he had not committed the robbery for which he  was  tried  in
    his absence and sentenced in 2011.

9.   Of relevance was the issue as to whether or not  the  appellant  was  a
    general threat.  He argued that the appellant was not  and  he  pointed
    out that the reason behind the offence  for  which  the  appellant  was
    sentenced here was to avoid what the appellant considered was an unfair
    prison sentence.

10.  The Secretary of State was wrong he claimed to say that there had  been
    no change of circumstances.  Since the appellant had come here  he  had
    committed no offences in Britain apart from that relating to  documents
    to facilitate his residence here. He was two months short of  the  five
    year period of residence which would give him increased protection.  He
    was settled with his wife and child here.

11.  He argued that there was no risk of re-offending -  the  appellant  had
    put behind him the issues for which he had been  convicted  in  Poland.
    He emphasised that our concern should be  only  with  the  question  of
    whether or not the appellant was a present risk and not the  fact  that
    he had been convicted in the past.  He argued that  the  appellant  was
    not a genuine or sufficiently serious threat to warrant deportation.

12.  With regard to the issues relating  to  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR and his son's rights  under  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 he asked us to take  into
    account, when assessing the proportionality of the decision,  that  the
    appellant had lived in Britain for just under the five year period,  he
    and his wife were both exercising Treaty rights here and that his  son,
    who had been born on 7 March 2009 had lived here all his life.  It  was
    not, he argued, proportionate to break up the  family  unit  which  had
    only ever existed in Britain.

13.  It was Mr Mold's view that when assessing the Article 8 rights  of  the
    appellant under the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  that  they
    should  be  looked  at  as  a  freestanding  right  rather  than  being
    intertwined with the provisions of Immigration Rules 398  and  399  and
    that that test was the same as that under Regualation 21 (5).

14.  In reply Mr Melvin relied on written submissions in which  he  referred
    to a consideration of the rights of an EEA national who  has  permanent
    residence here.  Mr Mold, at this stage, made it clear that he was  not
    arguing that the appellant had enhanced rights which would come once he
    had been resident in Britain for five years exercising Treaty rights.

15.  Mr Melvin went on to argue that it was relevant that the appellant  was
    not genuinely integrated into Britain  referring  to  the  decision  of
    Advocate General Bot in C-378/12 Onuekwere.  He argued that the periods
    of residence in prison indicated that the  person  concerned  was  only
    integrated to a limited extent, particularly where that person   was  a
    multiple recidivist.

16.  He argued that the appellant was 40 and given the  length  of  time  he
    had been  in  Britain,  albeit  that  he  had  a  child  here,  it  was
    proportionate for him to be removed.  He stated that it was  recognised
    that the interests of appellant's son might be best served by remaining
    in Britain with his mother who is his primary carer but it was open  to
    them to  join  the  appellant  in  Poland  as  they  were  both  Polish
    nationals.

17.  He went on to emphasise that the issue of  the  appellant's  propensity
    to re-offend was relevant and he stated that there was nothing to  show
    that  that  was  lessened.   He  referred  back  to  the  list  of  the
    appellant's offences between 1999 and 2004 and asserted that  said   to
    the appellant  was  a  career  criminal.   He  had  not  engaged  in  a
    rehabilitation programme either  here  or  in  Poland.   His  offending
    showed an escalation over the years - his latest sentence, in 2011  had
    been for five and a half years.   Moreover,  he  had  broken  his  bail
    conditions by entering Britain and had continued to do so by continuing
    to remain here.  He argued that it was perverse  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant was in these circumstances  exercising  Treaty  rights.   His
    situation here had been, at best precarious.  He pointed  to  the  fact
    that the appellant had spent most of his life in Poland and was in good
    health and argued that it would be entirely appropriate to deport  him.
    He asked us therefore to dismiss the appeal.

18.  In reply Mr Mold stated that the burden lay on the Secretary  of  State
    to show that the appellant remained a risk and stated that  integration
    was a relevant factor to be taken  into  account.   He  emphasised  the
    appellant had, he claimed committed no other  offences  since  entering
    Britain in 2007 apart from those relating to the identity documents for
    which he received a prison sentence here and that that offence was,  he
    argued because he had found that he  had  been  unfairly  convicted  in
    Poland.



Discussion

19.  It is accepted on behalf of the appellant that he is  not  entitled  to
    permanent residence here under the provisions of Regulation 15(1) as he
    has not lived in Britain for a continuous period of five years.  He  is
    therefore not entitled to the enhanced protection to which a  permanent
    right of residence under Regulation 15, would entitle him. We  accepted
    that, under the provisions of Regulation 21 the decision to deport  the
    appellant must be made on the grounds of public policy, public security
    or public health and may not be made to serve economic ends.

20.  As is made clear  in paragraph 27 of Bouchereau  Article  3(2)  of  the
    Directive states  that  previous  criminal  convictions  shall  not  in
    themselves constitute grounds for the exclusion or  deportation  of  an
    EEA national.  A specific appraisal from  the  point  of  view  of  the
    interests inherent in protecting the requirements of public policy must
    be undertaken.  Paragraph 28 of the judgment in  Bouchereau  emphasises
    that the existence of a previous criminal record can,  therefore,  only
    be taken into account insofar as the circumstances which gave  rise  to
    that conviction are evidence of personal conduct constituting a present
    threat to the requirements of public policy.  Paragraph 29 sets out the
    further guidance that a finding that such a threat exists  implies  the
    existence in the individual concerned of a propensity  to  act  in  the
    same way in the future.

21.  The reality in this case is that the  appellant's  offences  in  Poland
    involved not only the facilitation of unauthorised residence,  and  the
    destruction of documents  but  also  trafficking  in  human  beings,  a
    particularly serious crime.  Moreover, in 2004, the appellant committed
    the robbery for which he was sentenced in 2011.  Mr Mold argued that he
    had committed no offences since 2004 (although, of course, he  accepted
    that the appellant had committed the  offence  which  had  led  to  his
    deportation here) but the reality is that the  appellant  was  detained
    for approximately two years after he committed the offence  of  robbery
    and then left Poland while on bail which was itself a  further  offence
    and that that offence  continued  as  he  did  not  surrender  to  bail
    thereafter.  This was the context in which the appellant committed  the
    further crime of obtaining  possession of  an  identity  document  with
    improper intent.

22.  We note the sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge  O'Mahony  where  he
    states:-

         "You have committed serious offences and they are serious  offences
         because the circulation and use of false  documents  threatens  the
         integrity of our borders, and the borders  of  other  countries  as
         well for that matter, and potentially threatens national  security,
         not that I am suggesting that anyone has anything very much to fear
         from you in that regard of course not.  But there is an aggravating
         feature here and that is that you were doing this to evade  justice
         in another country, what that justice would lead to it is  not  for
         me to say, but there it is, and that is  not  the  usual  situation
         that applies here."


23.  In his sentencing remarks the judge therefore highlighted  the  serious
    nature of a crime which "potentially threatens national security".

24.  We  consider  that  taking  into  account  the  context  in  which  the
    appellant committed the crime, indeed  taking  also  into  account  the
    escalating offending shown  by  the  appellant  the  appellant's  crime
    could properly be considered  to be a present  threat and we   conclude
    that the removal of the appellant is justified on the grounds of public
    policy and  public  security  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
    Regulation 21.


25.  We must also consider the issue of the proportionality of removal  both
    under the European Union legislation and under the ECHR.   The  reality
    is, of course, that the appellant is not in Britain, he is  not  living
    with his wife and child and given the sentence which  he  has  received
    and indeed that there is no evidence  that he has appealed against that
    sentence, there is no realistic possibility  of  his  living  with  his
    family here again for some very considerable time.

26.  Having said that it is  relevant  that  we  consider  factors  such  as
    integration of the appellant into this country.  We accept Mr  Melvin's
    submission that the fact that the appellant has  been  imprisoned  here
    and indeed was in Britain because he was seeking to evade a  trial  and
    possible prison sentence in Poland are factors which  militate  against
    the conclusion that he is integrated in this country.

27.  We received after the hearing the judgment of  the  European  Court  of
    Justice in the case of Onuekwere Case C-378/12 in which  at  paragraphs
    25 and 26, the importance of integration of an EEA  national  into  the
    host member state, is considered.  That paragraph reads as follows:-

         "25. Such integration, which is a pre-condition of the  acquisition
             of the right of permanent residence laid down in Article 16(1)
             of Directive 2004/38 is based  not  only  on  territorial  and
             temporal factors but also on qualitative elements, relating to
             the level of integration in the host Member State (see Case C-
             325/09 Dias  [2011] ECR 1-6387, paragraph  624),  to  such  an
             extent that the undermining of the link of integration between
             the person concerned and the host  Member State justifies  the
             loss of the right of  permanent  residence  even  outside  the
             circumstances  mentioned  in  Article   16(4)   of   Directive
             2004/38...


         26.  The imposition of a prison sentence by the national  court  is
             such as to show the non-compliance  by  the  person  concerned
             with the values expressed by the society or  the  host  Member
             State in its criminal law, with the  result  that  the  taking
             into   consideration  of  periods  of  imprisonment  for   the
             purposes of the acquisition  by  family  members  of  a  Union
             citizen who are not nationals of aMember State of the right of
             permanent residence for  the  purposes  of  Article  16(2)  of
             Directive 2004/38 would clearly be contrary to the aim pursued
             by that Directive in establishing that right of  residence."


28.  We consider that that lack of a willingness to integrate is a  relevant
    factor in the proportionality exercise.

29.  A further factor that should be taken into account is  the  possibility
    of rehabilitation within the host member  country.   That  however  can
    hardly be relevant in this case where the appellant has been extradited
    to  Poland  and  is  likely  to  be  in  Poland  for  some  time.   Any
    rehabilitation  which  will   take   place   should   surely   be   the
    responsibility of the Polish courts and other authorities there.

30.  The issues of integration and rehabilitation are  specific  factors  we
    take into account  in the  balancing   exercise  when  considering  the
    proportionality of removal within the context of  the  Directive.   The
    other factors which we consider are relevant and would be  relevant  in
    an assessment of the appellant's rights under Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    relate to the appellant's family life here and the  fact  that  he  had
    started a business.  There is very  little  evidence  of  the  business
    activity before us and we were not directed to any specific information
    thereon.  We accept that the appellant's wife and child are  living  in
    Britain and that clearly is a very strong factor regarding  the  rights
    of the appellant under Article 8 but, given  that  he  himself  is  not
    living in Britain and indeed cannot do  so,  that  factor  is  of  less
    relevance.  In all, we conclude that the removal of  the  appellant  is
    not disproportionate under either EU law or  under  the  provisions  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

32.  It follows from the above that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    having been set aside we re-make the decision and dismiss  this  appeal
    on both immigration and human rights grounds.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy














-----------------------
[1] Orfanopoulos [2004] ECR 1-5257 at paras 64-68; Calfa [1999] ECR 1-11 at
paras 21-25; Nazli [2000] ECR 1-957 at paras 57-64; Bouchereau [1977] ECR
1999 at paras 25-37
[2] Case C-340/97 Nazli [2000] ECR 1 at para 61
[3] Orfanopoulos [2004] ECR 1-5257 at paras 79

