
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01415/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Court of Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2016                  |On 18 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   M.A.R.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood, Counsel, instructed by Owens Stevens
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Appellant)  appeals
         against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Easterman,
         promulgated on 29 September 2016, in which he allowed the appeal of
         M.A.R. (the Respondent), against the  Appellant's  decision  of  09
         July 2014 to  make  a  deportation  order  against  him  under  the
         automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.



Background

      2. The Respondent is a national of Jamaica, born on 16 August 1963. He
         entered the United Kingdom in May 1993 using a  passport  that  did
         not belong to him. He remained in the UK unlawfully  until  granted
         Discretionary Leave To  Remain  in  2009,  following  a  successful
         appeal on Article 8 grounds.

      3. The Respondent is married  to  NR  (partner)  and  has  been  in  a
         relationship with her since 1997. The  Respondent's  partner  is  a
         British citizen and has lived in the UK since she was 12 years old.
         The family have 4 children, the oldest (JR)  being  born  in  March
         1999, the next (GV) born in December 2000, the  3rd  born  in  June
         2006, and the 4th born in December 2009. The Respondent has  a  5th
         child, born to a former partner in September 1999. This child lives
         with her mother and the Respondent sees her during  the  half  term
         holidays and sometimes at weekends. They  speak  on  the  telephone
         about her schooling and she has a good relationship with her  half-
         siblings. The child is said to suffer from dyslexia and had  slowed
         development, and has to take steroids and attend hospital.

      4. In 1997 the Respondent received a 3 month conditional discharge  in
         respect of an offence of having an article with a  blade  or  which
         had a sharp point in public. In  1999  the  Respondent  received  a
         community service order of 80 hours in respect of a conviction  for
         possession of an offensive weapon in public. In  January  2003  the
         Respondent received a two-year custodial sentence in respect  of  a
         conviction for possession of a controlled class A drug with  intent
         to supply. In October 2008 the Respondent received  a  sentence  of
         one year imprisonment, wholly suspended for 12 months,  in  respect
         of possession of a class  A  drug.  In  June  2012  the  Respondent
         received a 12 month conditional discharge in respect of an  offence
         of obstructing powers of search for drugs. In 2012  the  Respondent
         was convicted of supplying a class A drug and initially received  a
         six-year sentence. This however was reduced to a four-year term  of
         imprisonment following an appeal in November  2013.  The  Appellant
         thereafter made a deportation order in respect of the Respondent as
         he was subject to the automatic deportation provisions  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007.

      5. The Appellant's deportation order was appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal but this decision, which went in the Respondent's  favour,
         was successfully appealed to the Upper Tribunal and the matter  was
         remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing,  no
         facts preserved. This fresh hearing occurred on 5 September 2016.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

      6. At the hearing  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  three
         bundles  provided  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  which  included
         statements from his partner and their two oldest  children,  and  a
         statement  from  his  child  by   his   ex-partner.   The   bundles
         additionally  contained  various  school  reports   and   probation
         reports. The Judge heard oral evidence  from  the  Respondent.  The
         Respondent's partner was unable to attend the hearing  because  she
         was still in Jamaica on holiday but the judge took her statement at
         its highest.

      7. The judge recorded the Respondent's evidence, noted that his father
         was no longer alive and that his mother lived in the USA.  None  of
         his immediate family lived in  Jamaica.  The  Respondent  expressed
         remorse for his offending, blamed his behaviour on  his  addiction,
         and expressed his shame at letting his family down. He  claimed  he
         had not been in any trouble while serving his 4 year  sentence  and
         had not failed any drugs tests. He said he had been on a number  of
         programmes including drug treatment programmes and had completed  a
         cannabis awareness group. He had also undertaken various courses in
         maths, English, bricklaying, carpentry, and he  had  a  diploma  in
         construction. He had helped other inmates with reading, writing and
         mathematics. At the hearing he said he had a City & Guilds  diploma
         and was a painter and decorator. His family would visit him as much
         as possible and would email several times a week, and  he  and  his
         family spoke on the phone every other  week  with  visits  once  or
         twice a month.

      8. Evidence was given concerning JR's troubling  behaviour  at  school
         which was said to have been triggered by the Respondent's  absence.
         The Respondent claimed  that  since  his  release  JR  had  a  more
         positive attitude to his schoolwork and his  grades  had  improved.
         His head of year had noticed the great  improvement.  Evidence  was
         also given by the Respondent relating to problems GV had exhibited.
         Since his release from custody this child  had  started  to  behave
         herself. The Respondent was concerned  for  his  children  as  they
         lived in an area that was subject to gang violence and he wanted to
         steer his son away from bad influences. If  he  was  not  there  to
         assist his children the Respondent believed there would be a severe
         impact on his family.

      9. The Respondent claimed it would be  impossible  for  his  wife  and
         children to relocate to Jamaica as they had no  place  to  live  or
         money to send the children to school, and  his  partner  could  not
         leave her job in the UK.

     10. In the part of his decision containing his  findings  of  fact  and
         conclusions the judge indicated that  he  had  considered  all  the
         evidence and had  taken  the  children's  interests  as  a  primary
         consideration. The judge directed himself with  specific  reference
         to s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 [72].
         The judge gave  reasons  as  to  why  he  was  satisfied  that  the
         Respondent had a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
         partner [75] and with all his children [76]. The judge analysed the
         Respondent's  relationship  with  the   child   from   his   former
         relationship and noted, notwithstanding that he had not taken  part
         in her upbringing, that this child had physical difficulties and it
         was important to have a father figure in her life to make her  feel
         more confident. This however was the extent to which the judge  was
         able to factor the Respondent's input into her life in the  absence
         of any school reports and any  evidence  that  the  effect  of  his
         absence as a father may have had on her at times when they were not
         in contact [77].

     11. The judge found that, despite his offending, the Respondent clearly
         had had a 'major effect' on his other children in  terms  of  their
         behaviour, their attendance and studying, which appeared  for  some
         time to be going downhill severely [78].  The  judge  considered  a
         letter from Hertford Regional College which was  undated,  relating
         to JR. The judge found it difficult to know how the contents of the
         letter fitted in with the Respondent's incarceration  and  release.
         The judge noted that JR was not attending classes as frequently  as
         he should, although his overall attendance had improved. Nothing in
         the letter directly referred to  the  Respondent.  The  judge  then
         analysed a letter from Oasis Academy which was written  in  respect
         of JR and GV, both of who had attended the institution.  The  judge
         noted  that  both  children  had,  at  times,  displayed  extremely
         challenging  behaviour  which  had  an  adverse  effect  on   their
         attainment. JR was considered 'vulnerable' and was  targeted  as  a
         black Caribbean boy who had been at risk of failing to achieve  his
         GCSE targets. Mr Burke, a teacher at the Academy, was appointed  as
         JR's academic mentor and helped JR develop  strategies  that  would
         complement and enhance  his  learning  experience  and  manage  his
         behaviour. Mr Burke noted that JR often spoke positively about  his
         father and clearly admired him. Mr Burke stated that the Respondent
         was exceptionally supportive of JR and  they  often  spoke  on  the
         telephone and met during parent teacher conferences. The Respondent
         was supportive and would often contact Mr Burke personally  to  ask
         for revision material and to offer advice.

     12. A further letter from Mr Campbell, head of Year  10  at  the  Oasis
         Academy, stated that the Respondent interacted very well  with  the
         school when it came to attending  meetings  in  regard  to  GV  and
         regularly attended parent evenings as well  as  other  meetings  in
         relation to his  daughter.  This  enabled  the  Academy  to  see  a
         positive step in GV's academic progression and the school had built
         a good relationship with both parents.

     13. Following  this  analysis  the  judge  concluded  that  there  were
         exceptional or very compelling circumstances which  outweighed  the
         Appellant's interest in  deporting  foreign  criminals.  The  judge
         found that the Respondent's presence was very  significant  to  his
         children's wellbeing [85]. The judge found that  this  was  a  case
         where  the  Respondent's  custodial  sentence  had   an   immediate
         detrimental effect on his children's behaviour such as to seriously
         affect their studies and their ability to progress at school [86].

     14. At [90] the judge stated,

             "I am just satisfied in this case that the influence,  despite
             his record of the [Respondent] on his children is one  without
             which their wellbeing will be significantly impaired over  and
             above the loss of a parent, in the general run of life. To put
             that another way, I have tried to weigh in my own mind whether
             this is all part  and  parcel  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship  or  whether  the  effects  of  removal  of   the
             [Respondent] go  beyond  that  and  cause  there  to  be  very
             compelling circumstances relating to  the  well-being  of  the
             children that are not catered for within the phrase of genuine
             and subsisting relationship."

     15. At [93] the judge concluded that  the  deportation  decision  would
         cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations under the ECHR.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

     16. The grounds contended that the judge was not entitled  to  conclude
         that the adverse impact on the children's education was  sufficient
         to displace the strong public interest given that the  Respondent's
         offending was at the most serious end of the  offending  scale.  It
         was  submitted  that  the  judge  failed   to   identify   anything
         exceptional in the factual matrix before him. The  grounds  further
         contended that the judge failed to identify  what  in  the  instant
         case  would  render  the  deportation  "duly  harsh".  The   ground
         submitted that the judge place the  children's  best  interests  as
         "the" primary consideration. The children's mother was said  to  be
         their primary carer and she would continue to care for them in  the
         event of the Respondents deportation.

     17. In granting permission to appeal to the UT the First-tier  Tribunal
         found it arguable that the judge may not have sufficiently factored
         in Parliament's view that the separation of a family will sometimes
         be justified in cases of serious offending, that the judge may  not
         have sufficiently identified what it was in this  case  that  meant
         that the Respondent should  succeed  in  his  appeal,  and  it  was
         arguable that the judge  failed  to  balance  the  identified  best
         interests of the children against the public interest in  deporting
         foreign criminals.

Submissions at the error of law hearing

     18. Mr Bramble expanded upon the grounds and submitted that  the  judge
         failed  to  identify  the  "unduly  harsh"  consequences   of   the
         deportation order. In the absence of any finding as to whether  the
         deportation would have an "unduly harsh" effect on the children the
         judge was unable to identify the factors that were "over and above"
         such an effect. It was submitted that the judge was not entitled to
         conclude, on the evidence  before  him,  that  the  impact  on  the
         Respondent's children amounted to "very  compelling  circumstances"
         within the terms of s.117C. It was further submitted that the judge
         failed to take sufficient account of the relevant  public  interest
         factors. In his conclusions the judge only made brief reference (at
         [91]) to the public interest in the Respondent's removal,  and  the
         specific public interest factors had not  been  particularised.  It
         was submitted that the  decision  was  a  one-sided  exercise  that
         focused mainly on the children  at  the  expense  of  the  relevant
         public interest factors.

     19. Mr Haywood adopted his helpful Rule 24 response. He submitted  that
         it was important to read the decision in the round and as a  whole.
         He took me through the decision identifying where the judge had set
         out the case in detail and the arguments from both sides. The judge
         had properly identified relevant features in the  case.  The  judge
         had recorded submissions relating to the specific public  interests
         in the Respondents deportation and these featured in  the  skeleton
         argument before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  the  judge  had
         clearly taken into account. The judge had identified  relevant  and
         recent authorities such as LW (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 369 and had
         separated out the "normal" impact on children  who  have  a  parent
         subject to deportation from the particular impact on the  education
         and wellbeing of this Respondent's children. It was submitted  that
         there had been no challenge to the important factual findings  made
         by the judge in respect of the educational evidence  at  paragraphs
         80 to 83 of the decision. It  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had
         carefully  considered  the  educational  evidence  and  reached   a
         conclusion that was rationally open to him for the reasons he gave.
         The  fact  that  the  judge  set  out  the  wrong  version  of  the
         immigration  rules  was  not  material  because   the   judge   had
         concentrated  on  s.117C  rather   than   the   immigration   rules
         themselves. Mr Haywood submitted that, in the event that I found  a
         material error of law, that the matter ought to be remitted back to
         the first-tier Tribunal. Mr Bramble did not make any reply.

Discussion

     20. It is apparent that the judge set out  the  wrong  version  of  the
         immigration rules in his decision. At [12] the judge  set  out  the
         relevant immigration rules relating to  deportation  as  they  were
         prior to 28 July 2014. The decision challenged was made on  9  July
         2014. But paragraph A362 of the immigration  rules  states,  "Where
         Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under Part 13  of
         these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed where  the
         requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014 are met,  regardless
         of when the notice of intention to deport or the deportation order,
         as appropriate, was served." Following both YM (Uganda) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  1292  (paragraph
         39) and Chege (section 117D - Article 8  -  approach)  [2015]  UKUT
         00165 (IAC) (paragraph 13) the Judge  should  have  considered  the
         immigration rules are they were at the date of the hearing and  not
         at the date of the decision  (consider  also  the  decision  of  MK
         (section 55 - Tribunal options)  Sierra  Leone  [2015]  UKUT  00223
         (IAC)).

     21. Mr Haywood however submits that this had little material bearing on
         the judge's assessment. It is clear  from  [72]  that  the  judge's
         conclusion was reached by reference to s.117C of the 2002  Act  and
         not the immigration rules. The judge properly identified that "very
         compelling circumstances" had to be identified that were "over  and
         above" any "unduly harsh" impact that his deportation would have on
         his partner or children. Although at paragraph 73 the  judge  spoke
         in  terms  of  the  need  for  "exceptional  circumstances"   under
         paragraph 398, there is not  in  my  view  any  difference  between
         "exceptional circumstances" and "very compelling circumstances".  I
         am satisfied that, despite setting out the wrong rules, this  error
         was not material.

     22. At [74] the judge accurately cited NA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         662. At paragraph 37 of this authority Jackson LJ stated,

             "In relation to a serious offender, it will often be  sensible
             first to see whether his case involves  circumstances  of  the
             kind described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  both  because  the
             circumstances so described set  out  particularly  significant
             factors bearing upon respect for private  life  (Exception  1)
             and respect for family life (Exception 2) and because that may
             provide a helpful basis on which an  assessment  can  be  made
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2"  as  is  required
             under section 117C(6). It will then be necessary  to  look  to
             see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions 1 and
             2 are of  such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
             conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered by the
             circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy
             the test in section 117C(6)."

     23. The need to determine whether the exceptions in paragraphs  399  or
         399A are met in an appeal involving  an  offence  that  received  a
         custodial sentence of 4 years or more was also  considered  by  the
         President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC) in Greenwood  (No.  2)  (para
         398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC). Headnote (i) reads,

             "The exercise of considering whether there are very compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399
             and 399A of the Immigration Rules must, logically, be preceded
             by an assessment that  the  Appellant's  case  does  not  fall
             within paragraph 399 or 399A."

     24. The judge reminded himself of the need for a structured decision to
         ensure  that  due  weight  is  given  to  the  public  interest  in
         deportation proceedings. The judge  then  considered  the  evidence
         relating to the Respondent's children ([77] et seq).  At  [84]  the
         judge stated that the question he had to answer was whether, taking
         the genuine parental relationship that the Respondent has with  his
         children into account and the  other  factors  including  the  more
         limited relationship with his child by his  former  partner,  there
         could be said to be exceptional or  very  compelling  circumstances
         which outweighed the  Appellant's  interest  in  deporting  foreign
         criminals. While this is ultimately the correct question the  judge
         then proceeded to answer the question without first identifying how
         the Respondent's deportation would cause an "unduly  harsh"  impact
         on his children.

     25. At [85] the judge states that  it  is  "very  harsh"  (not  "unduly
         harsh") for any child in a subsisting relationship to  be  deprived
         of the presence of a parent as this  is  very  significant  to  the
         child's wellbeing. This is clearly not a finding that the impact on
         the Respondent's children would be "unduly harsh".

     26. Although at [90]  the  judge  stated  that  the  wellbeing  of  the
         children will be significantly impaired "over and above the loss of
         a parent, in the general run of life", he does not consider whether
         such impact will be 'over and above' an unduly harsh effect on  the
         children. Nowhere in his decision does the judge actually make  any
         finding as to how the effect of the Respondent's deportation  would
         be unduly harsh for his children. The judge has  not  followed  the
         structured approach suggested in NA. In order to determine  whether
         there are "very compelling circumstances" over and above  those  in
         Exception 2 in s.117C it would have greatly assisted the  judge  if
         he had first ascertained whether  the  deportation  would  have  an
         "unduly harsh" effect on his children, and, if so, or the manner in
         which the effect would be 'unduly harsh', even if neither Exception
         could apply. The  judge  went  straight  to  his  consideration  of
         whether there were "very compelling  circumstances"  without  first
         identifying how the effect on the children would be "unduly harsh".
         This has the consequence of rendering the judge's approach  to  the
         evidence  before  him  relating  to  the  effect  on  the  children
         potentially unsafe because there was no  clear  separation  between
         what would be needed to amount to an  'unduly  harsh'  effect,  and
         what would be needed to constitute  very  compelling  circumstances
         over above an unduly harsh effect.

     27. In determining whether the judge was nevertheless lawfully entitled
         to his conclusion in respect of the existence of  "very  compelling
         circumstances", despite failing to identify the manner in which the
         effect on the children would be "unduly harsh", it is necessary  to
         examine  the  evidence  upon  which  he  relied  in  reaching   his
         conclusion.

     28. Mr Haywood submitted that no issue had been taken by the  Appellant
         with the judge's factual findings. In Mr Haywood's  submission  the
         judge's factual analysis of the evidence relating to the  children,
         including the  letters  from  schools  and  colleges,  was  legally
         unimpeachable. I fully accept that the Appellant has not challenged
         the basic factual findings made by the judge. The essential feature
         however of the Appellant's challenge to the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision is that the judge was not entitled to conclude that  "very
         compelling circumstances" existed. It  is  therefore  necessary  to
         determine whether the judge was rationally entitled  to  find  that
         "very compelling circumstances" existed based on the evidence  that
         was actually before him. Mr  Haywood,  in  his  Rule  24  response,
         submitted that the judge's factual analysis could only be impugned,
         if the correct framework had been applied, if it was a rational.  I
         accept this submission. This proposition finds support in  Mukarkar
         v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 and, and in the context of  deportation
         appeals, Greenwood (No. 2) (para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT  00629
         (IAC) where the President of the Upper Tribunal stated, at [16],

             "The test for unreasonableness, which later  became  known  as
             perversity, or irrationality, is whether  the  decision  under
             appeal is one which no person acting judicially  and  properly
             instructed on the relevant law could reasonably have made. The
             restraint which  an  appellate  court  must  exercise,  having
             regard to these principles, features in the  decision  of  the
             House of Lords in Moyna v Secretary  of  State  for  Work  and
             Pensions [2003]  UKHL  44.  In  R  v  Monopolies  and  Mergers
             Commission, ex parte South Yorkshire Transport  [1993]  1  WLR
             23, Lord Mustill offered the following pithy summary (at 32  -
             33):

                  "In such a case the Court is entitled  to  substitute  its
                  own opinion for that of the person to  whom  the  decision
                  has been entrusted only if the  decision  is  so  aberrant
                  that it cannot be classed as rational."

             Decisions  which  fall  "within  the  permissible   field   of
             judgment" do not satisfy this elevated hurdle."

     29. At the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing JR was 17 years old.
         According to the bail documents the Respondent  was  released  from
         immigration detention in August 2014. At this time  JR  would  have
         been 15 years old. The judge placed weight on  statements  from  JR
         that were taken when he was 15 years old  and  17  years  old.  The
         letter from Mr Paul Bragg, Behaviour for Learning Co-Ordinator/Year
         Leader at the Oasis Academy, dated 13 November 2014, indicated that
         JR had issues managing his anger and focusing on his academic work.
         When the letter was  written  JR  was  15  years  old.  The  letter
         indicated that, prior to the Respondent's incarceration, JR made  a
         considerable amount of progress in  managing  and  controlling  his
         anger but that he  lost  "some  ground"  when  the  Respondent  was
         incarcerated. Significantly the letter then indicated that JR, "...
         did not slip back to his previous position." The letter noted  that
         the Respondent's return to the family home had an almost  immediate
         calming effect  on  JR.  this  letter  did  not  suggest  that  the
         Respondent's incarceration prevented JR from progressing a school.

     30. The judge placed considerable reliance  on  a  letter  from  Marcus
         Burke, who taught JR for 2 academic  years  and  was  his  academic
         mentor at the Oasis Academy. The letter is dated the  '10th  March'
         and was presumably written in 2016. Mr Burke does not indicate over
         which 2 years he taught JR or when he was JR's academic mentor.  JR
         left the Oasis Academy  in  July  2015.  The  judge  described  the
         content of the letter which indicated  that  both  JR  and  GV  had
         displayed, at times, "extremely challenging behaviour" that had  an
         adverse effect on their attainment. The letter  does  not  identify
         when this extremely challenging  behaviour  occurred  or  give  any
         further  details  about  it.  Following  JR  being  identified   as
         vulnerable, Mr Burke was appointed  his  academic  mentor  to  help
         facilitate his learning and monitor his behaviour. Mr Burke  helped
         JR to develop strategies that  would  complement  and  enhance  his
         learning experience, and strategies to help manage  his  behaviour.
         Mr Burke noted that the Respondent was exceptionally supportive  of
         JR and that he often spoke to  the  Respondent  via  telephone  and
         during parent  teacher  conferences.  The  judge  twice  quoted  Mr
         Burke's  firm  belief  that   the   Respondent's   "robust   input,
         encouragement and guidance was and is paramount to the  development
         and the success of both GV and JR" (see [82] and [87]). It must  be
         noted that although Mr Burke talks in  the  present  tense  of  the
         Respondent's influence on JR, the letter was written some 8  months
         after JR  left  the  Oasis  Academy.  The  letter  indicates  that,
         notwithstanding the  positive  influence  of  the  Respondent,  the
         school had put into place strategies to assist JR. By the  time  of
         the First-tier Tribunal appeal JR was older and  had  not  attended
         the Oasis Academy since July 2015, some 26 months earlier.

     31. The most recent educational document relating to JR  was  from  the
         Hertford Regional College and was undated (see [80]). Presumably JR
         started attending the HRC after he  left  the  Oasis  Academy.  The
         letter, written by Thomas Smith, lecturer, indicated  that  he  was
         JR's tutor and programme manager on  his  BTEC  level  II  Extended
         Certificate in Sport course. The letter indicated  that  JR  had  a
         difficult and unimpressive start to the school year,  that  he  was
         consistently late, missed classes and was  a  disruptive  influence
         when in class. This behaviour resulted in him  having  disciplinary
         meetings with the Head of Development and JR being set  targets  to
         achieve if he was to stay in the course.  The  letter  stated  that
         since the start of the spring term (presumably from  January  2016)
         there had been an improvement in JR's overall behaviour  in  class.
         Although there was still room for improvement he  was  now  getting
         more involved in class discussions and showed a good  knowledge  of
         some of the units he was studying. The letter stated that JR  would
         continue to receive support  from  his  tutors  but  ultimately  he
         needed to want to do well and make the right decisions. The  letter
         noted that JR was also taking  his  GCSEs  English  and  functional
         skills mathematics. His attendance on both  of  these  courses  had
         been a problem and was an area that still needed some attention. As
         the judge noted this  letter  made  no  reference  at  all  to  the
         Respondent. This is surprising given that it  was  likely  to  have
         been  written  in  support  of  the  Respondent's  appeal.  As  the
         Respondent was released from detention August 2014  he  would  have
         been a continuing presence  JR's  life  since  he  began  attending
         Hertford Regional College.

     32. The judge noted that, in his oral  evidence,  the  Respondent  said
         that JR was at university or college in Hertford but was unclear on
         the precise name of the institution. The Respondent stated that  JR
         was undertaking a physical training diploma but was not quite  sure
         whether it was for 2 or 3 years [40].

     33. The letter Mr Burke wrote on 10 March 2016 also referred to GV. She
         was in Year 10 and Mr Burke was her teacher and had  been  teaching
         her for 2 academic years. GV was receiving  extra  support  in  her
         lessons  and  she   attended   targeted   numeracy   and   literacy
         intervention classes. She  was  said  to  struggle  to  access  the
         curriculum  and  sometimes  responded  with  frustration  and  this
         affected her self-esteem. The Respondent was said to be  supportive
         and to be eager to help the Academy and GV develop  her  confidence
         and her  attainment.  Mr  Burke's  reference  to  the  Respondent's
         "robust input, encouragement and guidance" related to both  JR  and
         GV.

     34. The judge considered, at [83], a letter  written  by  Mr  Campbell,
         Head of Year 10 at the Oasis Academy, dated  11  July  2016,  which
         indicated that the Respondent and his wife provided support  to  GV
         and had a good parent teaching  relationship.  The  Respondent  was
         said to interact very well with the school  and  attended  meetings
         regarding GV and  regularly  attended  parent  evenings  and  other
         meetings in regards to concerns that the school had with  GV.  Both
         parents were said to be extremely supportive in meetings addressing
         certain issues relating to GV's learning development and they  were
         working alongside the school in support of the school's development
         programmes. The  letter  indicated  that  the  school  was  looking
         forward to the relationship  continuing  and  that  the  Respondent
         would also continue to play an  integral  role  in  his  daughter's
         academic progress.

     35. The judge considered the statement from  the  Respondent's  partner
         (at [44] to [45]) which indicated that, since his release,  he  had
         been helping their  children  whose  behaviour  had  improved.  The
         partner  indicated  that  the  Respondent's  deportation  would  be
         devastating for her children's wellbeing. The statements  from  the
         children,  including  the  Respondent's  child  from   his   former
         relationship, indicated that they missed  their  father  very  much
         when he was in prison and that they could not  imagine  life  being
         separated from him ([46] & [47]).

     36. The best interests of the children must be a primary  consideration
         but they can be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other
         considerations (ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2011] UKSC 4). The mere  fact  that  there  will  be  a
         detrimental effect on the best interests of the  children  where  a
         parent is deported  in  circumstances  where  the  children  cannot
         follow  him  does  not  by   itself   constitute   an   exceptional
         circumstance  (LC  (China)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  1310;  [2015]  Immigration  AR  2  and
         Secretary of State for the Hone Department v  CT  (Vietnam)  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 488. In CT (Vietnam) the Court of  Appeal  held  (paras.36
         and 38):

             "The effect on the children was, on  the  evidence,  to  leave
             them unhappy at the prospect of their father being on  another
             continent.  I  readily  accept  that  description.  Experience
             teaches that most children would so react. I cannot accept the
             conclusion that, added to  a  low  risk  of  reoffending,  the
             effect on them tips the balance. These children  will  not  be
             bereft of both loving parents. Nor was  there  evidence  of  a
             striking condition in either (I  ignore  the  stepchildren  by
             virtue of their age)  which  his  presence  in  the  UK  would
             dispositively resolve. He is said to have "a  particular  tie"
             with the Respondent. The son was  said  to  have  spoken  less
             confidently when his father was in prison and to have returned
             to confidence upon his release. That is not exceptional. ...

             Appellate  guidance  is  clearer  now  than   when   the   FTT
             promulgated its  decision.  As  paragraph  24  of  LC  (China)
             succinctly explains, where the person to be deported has  been
             sentenced  to  4  years'  imprisonment  or  more,  the  weight
             attached to the public interest in  deportation  remains  very
             great despite the  factors  to  which  paragraph  399  refers.
             Neither the British nationality of the  Respondent's  children
             nor their likely separation from their father for a long  time
             is  exceptional  circumstances  which  outweigh   the   public
             interest in his deportation. Something  more  is  required  to
             weigh in the balance and nothing  of  substance  offered.  The
             approach of both the FTT and the UT failed to give  effect  to
             the clearly expressed Parliamentary intention."

     37. In SSHD v AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 The  Court  of  Appeal
         considered  a  number  of  authorities  concerning  the  impact  of
         deportation decisions on children and stated (paragraph 17):

             "It will be rare for the best interests  of  the  children  to
             outweigh the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
             criminals. Something more than a  lengthy  separation  from  a
             parent is required, even though such separation is detrimental
             to the child's best interests. That is commonplace and  not  a
             compelling circumstance. Neither is it looking at the  concept
             of  exceptional  circumstances  through  the   lens   of   the
             Immigration Rules. It would undermine the specific  exceptions
             in the Rules if the interests of the children in maintaining a
             close and immediate relationship with the deported parent were
             as a matter of course to trump the strong public  interest  in
             deportation.   Rule   399(a)   identifies    the    particular
             circumstances where it is accepted that the interests  of  the
             child will outweigh the public interest  in  deportation.  The
             conditions are  onerous  and  will  only  rarely  arise.  They
             include the requirement that it would not  be  reasonable  for
             the child to leave the UK and that no other family  member  is
             able to look after the child in the UK. In many, if not  most,
             cases where this exception is potentially engaged  there  will
             be the normal  relationship  of  love  and  affection  between
             parent and child and  it  is  virtually  always  in  the  best
             interests of the child for that relationship to  continue.  If
             that were enough  to  render  deportation  a  disproportionate
             interference with family life, it would drain the rule of  any
             practical significance. It would mean that  deportation  would
             constitute a disproportionate interference with  private  life
             in the ordinary run of  cases  where  children  are  adversely
             affected and the carefully framed conditions  in  rule  399(a)
             would  be  largely  otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very
             compelling justification overriding the high  public  interest
             in deportation, there  must  be  some  additional  feature  or
             features affecting the nature or quality of  the  relationship
             which take the case out of the ordinary."

     38. Although this decision was delivered in the context of the  pre  28
         July 2014 Rules, the Court of Appeal stated, obiter, "For the  most
         part they set more stringent requirements to be met before leave to
         remain will be permitted under the specific exceptions.  The  broad
         principles we set out in this judgment in respect of the article  8
         assessment of foreign criminals would apply equally under  the  old
         and new Rules. We find it very difficult to see how the  article  8
         position of these deportees could possibly be  improved  under  the
         new Rules."

     39. It is quite clear that this was not an easy decision for the First-
         tier Tribunal judge. However, having considered the  evidence  upon
         which the judge relied, I am compelled to conclude that  the  judge
         was not rationally entitled to find that the impact on the children
         amounted  to  "very  compelling  circumstances"  as  understood  by
         reference to s.117C. In reaching this decision  I  first  note,  as
         considered earlier, that the judge did not identify the  manner  in
         which the Respondent's deportation would  have  an  "unduly  harsh"
         effect on his children. The various letters from  the  Academy  and
         the College indicate  that  the  Respondent  did  have  a  positive
         influence on his children and that he was very supportive of  their
         education. However, whilst his incarceration did  have  an  adverse
         impact on the children's education the Oasis Academy  was  able  to
         implement strategies to assist and support both JR and GV,  and  GV
         continues to receive extra support in her lessons. The evidence did
         not suggest that JR's ability to progress at his College  would  be
         significantly hindered by the Respondent's deportation. A  parent's
         deportation is, unfortunately, always likely  to  have  an  adverse
         effect on a child's education. Whilst there may be  instances  when
         the impact on an child's education and behaviour is so serious that
         a deportation does have an unduly harsh effect or constitutes  very
         compelling circumstances, I am not satisfied  that  the  particular
         evidence before this judge entitled him to reach  either  of  those
         conclusions. In my judgement the evidence  of  the  impact  on  the
         education  and  behaviour  of  the  Respondent's  children   cannot
         rationally support a conclusion that  it  amounted  to  an  "unduly
         harsh" effect, having regard to the seriousness of the Respondent's
         offending and the relevant public  interest  factors  (applying  MA
         (Pakistan) & Ors, R  (on  the  application  of)  v  Upper  Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and  MM
         (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [3016]  EWCA
         Civ 450), let alone a conclusion  that  the  impact  on  children's
         wellbeing and their education  would  amount  to  "very  compelling
         circumstances" over and above an "unduly harsh" effect on them.

     40. Independent of the above analysis, I am additionally satisfied that
         the judge materially erred in law by failing to  demonstrably  take
         into account the relevant public  interest  factors.  Although  the
         judge made general mention of the strong  public  interest  in  the
         Respondent's  removal,  and  had  previously,  when  recording  the
         submissions  of  the  representatives,  referred  to  those  public
         interests ([49] & [52]), the judge did not  identify  the  relevant
         public interests specific to deportation hearings in that  part  of
         his decision dealing with his reasons. This gives rise to a concern
         that the judge failed to lawfully balance the full range of  public
         interests in his assessment. In AJ (Zimbabwe) the Court  of  Appeal
         stated, at [11(6) & (7)]

             "When having regard to the  public  interest  in  deportation,
             there are three important facets: the need  to  deter  foreign
             criminals from committing serious  crimes;  an  expression  of
             society's revulsion at  serious  crimes  and  building  public
             confidence in the treatment  of  foreign  criminals  who  have
             committed such crimes; and the risk of re-offending. It is  an
             error to assume that the risk of re-offending is the sole,  or
             even the  most  important,  facet  where  serious  crimes  are
             committed: see the observations of Wilson LJ in OH (Serbia)  v
             The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ
             694 para.15 drawing upon the judgments  of  this  court  in  N
             (Kenya) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2004]
             EWCA Civ 1094.

             It is not enough for a  tribunal  in  its  reasons  simply  to
             identify a  strong  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
             foreign criminals; there must be a  full  recognition  of  the
             very powerful weight to be given to that  factor  and  of  the
             need for compelling factors to outweigh it: Secretary of State
             for the Home Department v MA  (Somalia)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  48
             para. 25 per Richards LJ"

     41. Although the judge had considered the skeleton argument, which  did
         refer to the relevant public interest factors,  the  decision  does
         not sufficiently indicate that these public interest  factors  were
         taken into account by the judge.

     42. For the above reasons I am satisfied that the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal is vitiated by material errors of law. Following  the
         hearing of this appeal the Supreme Court promulgated its  decisions
         in Hesham Ali (Iraq) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department (Respondent) [2016] UKSC 60 and Makhlouf  (Appellant)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Respondent)  (Northern
         Ireland) [2016] UKSC 59. Having read both these judgements I do not
         consider it necessary to invite  further  submissions  from  either
         representative. Neither decision dealt with the amendments  brought
         by the Immigration Act 2014 which introduced sections 117A to D  of
         the 2002  Act,  and  neither  dealt  with  the  amendments  to  the
         immigration rules brought into force on 28 July 2014. As Mr Haywood
         submitted at the hearing, the judge concentrated his assessment  on
         the s.117C  considerations  and  not  the  immigration  rules.  The
         Supreme Court did not find that the  immigration  rules  (paragraph
         398) constituted a 'complete code', but  did  conclude  that  "very
         compelling circumstances" would need to be demonstrated  to  resist
         deportation in respect of a serious offence (see [46] & [50] of the
         majority decision in Hesham Ali).

     43. Mr Haywood submitted that the matter ought to be remitted  back  to
         the first-tier Tribunal to enable a lawful assessment to be made in
         light of any further evidence that may be provided relating to  the
         effect of  the  deportation  on  the  children.  I  note  that  the
         Respondent's partner did not give oral evidence although the  judge
         took her statement at its highest. Nor was any  evidence  given  by
         his children. Mr Bramble did not make any submissions in the  event
         that I identified a material error of law. Although the  first-tier
         Tribunal only promulgated its decision in September I  consider  it
         appropriate to remit the matter back to  the  first-tier  Tribunal,
         before  a  judge  other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Easterman,  to  consider  any  further  evidence  adduced  by   the
         Respondent  and  to  apply  the  correct   legal   provisions   and
         principles.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.

The matter will be remitted for a full fresh hearing at Hatton Cross  before
a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Easterman.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    17 November 2016

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
