
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01586/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2016                           |On 06 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     T T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Chapman, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision   of
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Peart  promulgated  on  12
    July  2016  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the   decision   of   the
    Respondent's decision of 24 July 2014 not to revoke a deportation order
    made against him on 21 January 2008.


    Anonymity Direction

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, of Tamil ethnicity. He suffers
    from paranoid schizophrenia which has resulted  in  him  requiring  in-
    patient treatment on a number of occasions on account of relapses which
    occur from time to time. That is in addition to the two prolonged stays
    in hospital pursuant to orders made under sections 37  and  41  of  the
    Mental Health Act 1983 subsequent to convictions in 2002 and  2004  for
    ABH and GBH respectively.

 4. His case is that he is at risk on return of ill-treatment of sufficient
    severity to engage article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention  on  the
    grounds that:

      i) He falls within the categories of those at risk as identified in GJ
         & Ors (Sri Lanka) (post-civil war returnees) CG  [2013]  UKUT00319;
         alternatively,

     ii) Owing to the manifestation of his mental illness,  he  is  at  real
         risk of being detained, and following GJ at [168] and the  headnote
         at  [(4)]  he  faces  serious  ill-treatment   or   torture;   and,
         alternatively,

    iii) His mental health is such, and the lack of facilities on return  to
         Sri Lanka is such that article 3 is breached; further, that  he  is
         at risk of detention in Sri Lanka under mental  health  provisions,
         and that the conditions under which he would be held would  violate
         article 3.

 5. For the reasons set out at length in the refusal letter,  which  it  is
    unnecessary  to  repeat  here,  the  respondent  did  not  accept  that
    deporting the appellant to Sri Lanka would be in breach of article 3.

 6. There is, as is noted in the three earlier decisions in this appeal,  a
    long history to this case. That is not in dispute, and there is  little
    purpose in rehearsing it again here save in setting out the history  of
    this appeal; an earlier asylum appeal was  dismissed  in  2003  and  an
    appeal against a decision to make a deportation order was dismissed  in
    2007.

 7. This appeal first came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Youngerwood
    who, in a decision promulgated on 24 June 2015,  dismissed  the  appeal
    finding, amongst other matter that:

        i) The appellant did  not  fall  within  the  categories  of  those
           identified in GJ as being at risk [21];

       ii) There was no real risk (as opposed to a speculative  risk)  that
           he would be detained because of  his  mental  problems,  and  be
           subjected  to  severe  ill-treatment  in  detention  [22],   the
           observation in GJ at [168] that those who were detained were  at
           risk of torture being confined to those  fell  within  the  risk
           categories identified in GJ.

      iii) This was not a deathbed or critical case scenario [31]; that the
           appellant would be able to access the same treatment as  in  the
           UK, and that the in-patient treatment facilities had improved;

       iv) This case was not  exceptional,  and  article  3  would  not  be
           breached by his removal.

 8. The appellant appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  on  four
    grounds, identified by it in its determination at [21]:

      Ground 1 - the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  interpretation  of  the
      application of  Article  3  to  a  health  case  was  too  narrow  and
      incorrect;

      Ground  2  -  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   proceeded   upon   a
      misunderstanding of all aspect of Dr Smith's report and failed to take
      account of the guidance in the case of GJ;

      Ground 3 -  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  had  erred  in  his
      interpretation of  what  had  been  said  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      paragraph 168 of the decision in GJ;

      Ground  4  -  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had   erred   in   his
      interpretation of paragraph 398 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

 9. The Upper Tribunal found no merit in  grounds  2  -  4,  concluding  in
    particular at [24] that the concession made in GJ at [168]  in  context
    "makes it plain that the concession was to  the  effect  that  detained
    individuals within a certain category remained at risk.  That  category
    was those detained under the  Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act,  such  as
    members of the LTTE who had  been  undergoing  a  re-education  process
    known as "rehabilitation" and had found themselves detained for lengthy
    periods without judicial supervision."

10. The Upper Tribunal did, however, find merit in ground 1, remitting  the
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  The terms  of  that
    remittal are not set out in the decision nor are there directions  made
    pursuant to section 12 (3) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act
    2007, although there was a power to do so.

11. On remittal to the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal  came  before  judge
    Peart who, at [22] - [24] stated:

    22.  Ms Chapman asked me to consider the appellant's vulnerability  and
        risk on return in the event that he  is  interviewed  and  detained.
        This  was  explored  in  some  detail  in  the  decision  of   Judge
        Youngerwood at [221 and referred to in the Upper  Tribunal  decision
        promulgated on 21 December 2015 finding the error of law  only  with
        regard to ground 1. Grounds 2, 3 and 4 were found to have no  merit.
        The circumstances relied on in at  [1681  made  it  plain  that  the
        concession that anyone detained in Sri Lanka would  be  at  risk  of
        persecution was to the effect that  detained  individuals  within  a
        certain category remained at risk; that category did not include the
        appellant. See the decision of Judge Youngerwood at [221].

    23.  I accept that because of the manner in which the  appellant  might
        present due to his illness, in the event that he is  apprehended  by
        the Sri Lankan authorities for any reason,  stopped  at  random  for
        checks or interview of any kind, a speculative outcome might be that
        he is temporarily detained. I do not accept that such a  speculative
        outcome reaches the high Article 3 threshold.

    24.  Insofar as the appellant's Article 3 claim comprises a  claim  for
        protection because of the fear of ill-treatment in Sri Lanka, I find
        that was comprehensively addressed in  [pic]the  decision  of  Judge
        Youngerwood and the error of law  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
        panel. I turn to the other aspect of the appellant's Article 3 claim
        that he cannot return  to  Sri  Lanka  because  of  his  psychiatric
        illness and the detrimental effect that return would have upon him.

12. In addition, the judge found that:

        i) This was not a deathbed case, unlike that in N [20015]  UKHL  31
           [25];

       ii) There is provision  for  psychiatric  treatment  in  Sri  Lanka,
           albeit no to the standard available in the United Kingdom  [44],
           [49];

      iii) The appellant's parents are elderly, and  not  in  the  best  of
           health  but  there  was  no  suggestion  that  that  appellant's
           siblings would be unable or unwilling to support him as they had
           supported  their  parents,  and  that  there  was  not  credible
           evidence to suggest that the appellant's mother would  not  want
           or be able to care for him, ensuring  his  compliance  with  his
           drug regime, and so on [46]; and,

       iv) It would not be  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to  relocate  to
           Colombo with the assistance of family to access better treatment
           there.

13. The judge then dismissed the appeal on article 3 and 8 grounds.

14. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that in the de
    novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal that the judge erred:

        i) In that, having found that the appellant would  be  at  risk  of
           detention if apprehended by the Sri Lankan authorities  for  any
           reason [23], due to the  manner  in  which  he  may  present  on
           account of  his  illness,  he  then  applied  [23]  too  high  a
           threshold, the test here being  serious  possibility,  following
           Aswat v UK [2012] ECHR 473; and, that there are difficulties  in
           him accessing treatment as a Tamil;

       ii) In finding, in the absence of any evidence, that the appellant's
           family would rally round to support him [46];  a  finding  which
           was contrary to the appellant's brothers evidence,  there  being
           no explanation for rejecting the latter;

      iii) In concluding that the National Institute of  Mental  Health  in
           Colombo would have appropriate expertise to treat the  appellant
           [47], contrary to the evidence of the  appellant's  psychiatrist
           and the findings in GJ at [456]

15. On 11 August 2016, Designated Judge Murray granted  permission  on  all
    grounds.

16. It was on that basis that the appeal came before  me  on  29  September
    2016 when I found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved
    the making of an error of law and I set it aside. The reasons for  that
    decision are set out in the annex  to  this  decision.    I  also  gave
    directions as to how this matter was to proceed.

17. The primary issue in remaking this appeal is whether there  is  a  real
    risk that the Appellant will be detained if returned to Sri Lanka.   It
    is submitted on his behalf that this is likely for a number of reasons:-



      i) due to a relapse and a display of erratic,  disturbing  or  violent
         behaviour resulting in detention at a police  station  rather  than
         hospitalisation;

     ii) due to the appellant's obsessive compulsive disorder ("OCD");

    iii) as a Tamil returnee;

     iv) on account of a real or imputed association of the LTTE given  that
         several family members were involved with that organisation;

      v) on account of time spent in the United Kingdom.

18. It is further submitted that, as  Sri  Lanka  has  a  long  and  proven
    history of routine torture as an habitual practice that  the  appellant
    is at risk of such treatment, the risk being heightened on  account  of
    his ethnicity and on account of the stigma  attached  to  those  mental
    health problems.  It is submitted also that the appellant may suffer  a
    violent psychotic episode if detained, heightening  the  risk  of  ill-
    treatment at the hands of the police.

19. Further, and in the alternative, it is  submitted  that  the  appellant
    requires a very high level of specialist care which is not available in
    Sri  Lanka;  and,  that  the  absence  of  such  care  exacerbates  the
    likelihood of a relapse, subsequent detention and the risk  of  violent
    mistreatment and torture.

20. The respondent submits that the appellant does not fall within the risk
    categories set out in the country guidance there being little  evidence
    that Tamils per  se  face  danger  on  return  and  that  although  the
    appellant has had a number  of  relapses  over  the  past  decade,  the
    chances of this are insufficient to show he would become  violent  such
    that he faces detention by the police and subsequent ill-treatment  nor
    is it accepted that the stigmatisation of discrimination towards  those
    with mental health problems is such  to  indicate  that  the  appellant
    faces a real risk.

21. It is not accepted that the appellant's ethnicity  would  increase  any
    risk to him nor is it accepted that his family is associated  with  the
    LTTE or, even if it did, this  would  increase  the  risk  to  him,  GJ
    indicating that nearly all the Tamils have some family links  with  the
    LTTE which is not without more increase to the risk to them.  It is not
    accepted either that the appellant would be at risk from a  visit  from
    the police as he did not fall within the risk categories.

22. The respondent did not accept, in considering the chances of relapse if
    the appellant's extended family were unable to assist him on return.

23. The respondent did not accept the expert report  of  Dr  David  Rampton
    noting that there was only one example quoted of somebody  with  mental
    health problems being detained and beaten by the  security  forces  and
    most of the evidence relied upon is out of date.  It is submitted  also
    that the Upper Tribunal in GJ had significant doubts about Dr Rampton's
    evidence.

24. An evaluation of the  appellant's  mental  health  is  central  to  the
    determination in this case.  It is not disputed that the appellant  has
    serious mental health problems there is no effective challenge  to  the
    diagnosis of Dr Chiedu Obuaya set out in his report of  15  June  2016,
    building on his original report of 17 March 2015.  The doctor states in
    his report as follows:-

         "6.1     Diagnosis and Treatment

         6.2   In  my  original  report  I  made  a  diagnosis  of  paranoid
             schizophrenia as characterised in the  10th  revision  of  the
             International Classification of Diseases by the  World  Health
             Organisation (ICD10 WHO 1992).

         6.3  Mr T  still  fulfils  the  diagnostic  criteria  for  paranoid
             schizophrenia.  He has in the past twelve  months  suffered  a
             relapse of his  psychosis,  necessitating  a  brief  inpatient
             psychiatric admission.

         6.4  I base this opinion on my  objective  examination  of  Mr  T's
             mental  state,  my  previous  knowledge  of  his   psychiatric
             history, my perusal of his medical records and the  collateral
             history provided by staff at his care home.

         6.5  Mr T's mental state is relatively stable, although  there  are
             some residual psychotic symptoms evident (4.12). Schizophrenia
             is by its nature relapsing and remitting.   I  note  that  the
             relapse in December 2015 occurred in spite of his  concordance
             at the time with his prescribed psychotropic medication.

         6.6  This highlights the role that psychosocial factors can play in
             precipitating relapses  of  psychosis.   Whilst  it  would  be
             speculative to  attribute  the  relapse  with  any  degree  of
             certainty to Mr T's unsuccessful asylum claim of 2015, I  note
             the absence of any  other  apparent  stresses  that  may  have
             triggered  the  relapse.   This  suggests  that  the   ongoing
             uncertainty about his immigration status  may  have  plausibly
             been a factor.

         6.7  Mr T's current treatment consists of  psychotropic  medication
             and psychosocial interventions.  The former  consists  of  the
             oral anti-psychotic drugs clozapine and amisulpride,  as  well
             as the anti-depressant drug sertraline.  Psychosocial  support
             is provided in the care home and includes  direct  supervision
             by staff, engagement in one-to-one sessions and the  provision
             of structured daytime activities."

    It is sensible at this point to observe  that  the  recent  summary  of
    recent progress includes at[4.5] that  the  appellant  had  had  to  be
    returned to the home in which he  stays  by  the  police  in  which  he
    damaged a medicine cabinet in his room earlier [4.6] and  that  he  had
    expressed delusional beliefs that people could read his mind;  that  in
    autumn 2015 he had  engaged  in  an  increasing  degree  in  ritualised
    behaviour, an indicator for relapse; that he had  been  informally  re-
    admitted as an inpatient at Chase Farm  Hospital  showing  symptoms  of
    psychosis despite no  evidence  that  he  had  not  complied  with  his
    medication and that whilst his mental  state  had  remained  relatively
    stable, the staff had noticed that he was responding to unseen stimuli,
    indicative of psychosis and that he engages in compulsive rituals  such
    as repeatedly opening and closing  doors  and  chanting  which  can  be
    managed sensitively by the staff.

25. Commenting on the prognosis, Dr Obuaya states as follows:-

    "7.3     The medication (which has been optimised) has  been  effective
          in treating his psychosis (and compulsive rituals) and should,  in
          the longer term, reduce the risk of relapse, as well as harm to Mr
          T and others.

    7.4  Whilst Mr T's symptomatic response  to  treatment  has  been  very
          good,  it  is  not  possible  to  predict  when  or   under   what
          circumstances  future  episodes  will  occur.   However,  I  would
          emphasise that future relapses are  essentially  inevitable.   His
          functioning is reasonably good when his symptoms are in partial or
          full remission,  although  he  still  requires  a  high  level  of
          supervision from experienced care staff and is not  able  to  live
          independently.

    7.5  At his current level of functioning, Mr T's prognosis  would  thus
          be moderate and his illness would most likely follow  a  relapsing
          and remitting course.  He is likely to need  at  least  twelve  to
          eighteen months of stability  before  a  move  to  an  independent
          accommodation is considered.  At present, were he  to  move  to  a
          more independent setting,  the  risk  of  relapse  would  increase
          significantly and the prognosis would be worse.

    7.6  Mr T has  a  number  of  good  prognostic  factors  including  his
          adequate  level  of   insight   into   his   diagnosis   and   his
          characteristic symptoms, his reasonably good level of  functioning
          and his compliance with his  prescribed  psychotropic  medication.
          Poorer prognostic factors include his limited support network  and
          social isolation."

26. The  doctor  also  observes  that  the  appellant  will  need  lifelong
    treatment with the anti-psychotic drugs which have been prescribed.

27. Dr  Obuaya  observes  also,  in  connection  with  the  fact  that  the
    observation that psychiatric care  in  Sri  Lanka  is  not  of  a  high
    standard that without the current level of care he receives his  mental
    state is likely to deteriorate and the periods of relapse are likely to
    be longer and more severe.  It is also noted [9.11] that  any  form  of
    perceived adversity or psychosocial stress would increase the  risk  of
    Mr T relapsing to a moderate  degree.   This  would  also  include  the
    process of relocating to Sri Lanka and adjusting to life there  without
    the support currently provided.

28. Additional information about the appellant's condition is provided in a
    statement of Evelyn Yusufu, currently the manager of the care  home  in
    which the appellant resides.  This is a rehabilitation unit where those
    with mental issues are  taught  the  basic  steps  towards  independent
    living.  The appellant is  said  to  be  able  to  do  the  basics  [3]
    including cooking and he also has one-to-one sessions with a member  of
    staff every day.  It is also said that he exhibits usually  around  3pm
    onwards each day OCD in opening and closing doors  and  if  he  is  not
    allowed to do so becomes agitated and can get aggressive.  The issue of
    self-medication has been put on hold [6] and reference again made to  a
    relapse in January 2016 [8].  It is noted at [9] that stepping him down
    to supported housing with 24 hour staff is not appropriate though  this
    might be possible in the future.  Miss Yusufu has concerns as  to  what
    could happen to the Appellant if his structure were to be disrupted and
    his removal to Sri Lanka may cause deterioration and given his  history
    and aggression and the fact that he has had physical fights with  other
    residents she is concerned  as  to  what  reactions  would  be  to  his
    behaviour in Sri Lanka.

29. I have considered also the statement of Josephine  Lynch  who  was  the
    previous manager of  the  Maison  Moti  Care  Home.   This  is  broadly
    consistent with the more recent  report  of  Miss  Yusufu  and  in  her
    description of the appellant's behaviour.  A  number  of  incidents  of
    aggression and destructive  behaviour  are  described,  similarly,  the
    earlier report of Dr Obuaya dated 17 March 2015.  This  does,  however,
    give more detail of other previous  relapses  and  instability  in  the
    appellant's mental state.

30. Viewing this evidence as a whole, I consider that there is a real  risk
    of the appellant relapsing on return to Sri Lanka.  I find  that  there
    is a real risk of a relapse even if, as has happened in the past in the
    United Kingdom, he were to receive optimal treatment; that is what  has
    happened in the past on an almost annual basis. I consider  also  that,
    as the medical evidence indicates, there is a real risk that the change
    in the appellant's circumstances occasioned by removal to Sri Lanka  is
    likely to exacerbate the risk of relapse  given  the  change  from  the
    surroundings with which he is familiar.

31. Whilst I note the respondent's submission that the appellant's parents,
    mother and/or extended family would be able to assist and support  him,
    I find this is unsupported by the evidence when properly analysed.

32. For the reasons given in the attached error of law decision, I  am  not
    satisfied that finding that there was no credible evidence  to  suggest
    that the appellant's mother will not want to or be unable to  care  for
    the appellant  is  sustainable.   The  judge's  findings  at  [46]  are
    speculative, and failed properly to take into account  the  account  of
    the appellant's brother who was otherwise believed.  Given  the  stigma
    attached  to  mental  illness  in  Sri  Lanka  even  now,  despite  the
    improvement since the experience  of  many  cases  of  PTSD  after  the
    Tsunami, it is likely that extended family would not want to help,  not
    least because  of  how  the  appellant's  mental  ill-health  manifests
    itself.

33. Given the particular condition of this appellant, and the challenges he
    poses even to experienced professionals in a specialist hostel, and who
    were unable to prevent the deterioration noted by Dr Obuaya at [4.7], I
    consider that the appellant's elderly  mother  would  not  be  able  to
    manage him or care for him, however much she might wish to do  so.  She
    is herself elderly and in poor health.

34. The level of support  from  mental  health  professionals  provided  at
    Maison Moti cannot be compared with the support of family  which  could
    be provided.  Whilst it is  clear  that,  as  Mr  Melvin  submits,  the
    appellant is compliant with his drug regime and supervision and is able
    to cook for himself, do his washing and keep his room  clean,  that  is
    while he receives support from  professionals  closely  monitoring  his
    situation. He is in an environment where there is professional  support
    24 hours a day. It is to be noted also that the circumstances are  such
    that he needs permission to leave the property and that it  is  locked.
    That is clear from the reports referred to above from the  current  and
    former managers.

35. It is also evident that despite this high level  of  intervention  that
    the appellant has nonetheless regularly  relapsed  and  the  OCD  which
    manifests itself on a daily basis needs careful management.  Further, a
    common thread through all the medical evidence is  that  the  appellant
    becomes violent and aggressive when he relapses or  when  attempts  are
    made to prevent him carrying out the behaviours  such  as  opening  and
    shutting the doors in which his OCD manifests itself.

36. While I bear in  mind  Miss  Chapman's  submission  that  the  OCD  may
    continue in Sri Lanka, I consider that it would be entirely speculative
    to consider  how  in  an  entirely  different  environment  this  would
    manifest itself, if at all; there is insufficient medical  evidence  to
    support the submission.

37. I consider it unlikely given  the  lack  of  facilities  available  for
    inpatient mental health care in Sri Lanka, that the appellant would  be
    taken into inpatient care at least initially, nor is  there  sufficient
    evidence that he would be admitted if he  sought  voluntary  admission.
    Further, for the reasons set out above, it is unrealistic, I  consider,
    to expect the appellant's elderly mother to be able to provide him with
    the necessary support or to control him when  he  relapses  or  becomes
    aggressive. I am not satisfied that there are any other  relatives  who
    would be able to support him.

38. What then is the risk of the appellant being taken  into  detention  on
    return to Sri Lanka?    For  the  reasons  set  out  above,  given  the
    appellant's history, and the particular manner  in  which  his  illness
    manifests itself, and cannot be  controlled,  I  consider  that  it  is
    likely that the appellant will  after  arrival  suffer  a  relapse  and
    become aggressive or violent owing to his mental illness.

39. While I accept that, as the medical evidence shows, he has some insight
    into his illness, there is no indication that this is such that he  has
    sought, even in the  context  of  his  current  highly-supervised  care
    regime, additional help when he has begun to relapse. On the  contrary.
    In his report,  Dr  Obuaya  noted  [4.7]  that  on  admission  after  a
    deterioration,  the  appellant   showed   little   insight   into   the
    deterioration in his mental  state,  or  removes  for  his  threatening
    behaviour prior to admission.  It is also of note that  this  admission
    was as a result of a police response to  his  behaviour  [4.6].  It  is
    therefore, given past behaviour, unlikely that the applicant would seek
    help prior to any serious deterioration in his mental health.

40. It is thus likely that the appellant will at some point  behave  in  an
    aberrant manner which is likely to cause alarm or  an  apprehension  or
    fear.

41. There is, as Mr Melvin submitted, little evidence specific to  how  the
    police react to those with mental  health  problems.   The  expert,  Dr
    David Rampton, was able to identify only one case in which  a  mentally
    ill person was ill-treated by  the  police  and  whilst  Mr  Melvin  is
    correct to submit that one incident is not indicative that all  persons
    with mental health problems face violent beatings by  the  authorities,
    that is in reality to ask the wrong question.  The question is how  are
    the police likely  to  react  to  a  Tamil  man  being  violent  and/or
    aggressive when encountered and to how they treat those detained.

42. With regard to the risks of the appellant being detained by the  police
    I have had regard to the report of Dr David  Rampton  produced  by  the
    appellant.  Whilst I note  the  submissions  from  Mr  Melvin  that  Dr
    Rampton's evidence was not to be accepted without caution,  given  what
    was said in GJ at [240] to [241] those  concerns  do  not,  I  consider
    apply to what he states in his report at [4.2]:


    4.2 It is also highly likely that violent  or  even  erratic  behaviour
    will attract the attention of the police in Sri Lanka, as it  has  done
    in the UK. Sri  Lanka  has  a  considerable  security  force  presence,
    including the police, with State forces  having  undergone  significant
    expansion under the Rajapaksa-led government.  The  Sri  Lankan  Police
    force has 16 divisions and a working force of over 89,000.10 This is an
    approximate ratio  of  1ce  service  worker  for  every  230  citizens,
    stronger in ratio to population size than the police-to  citizen  ratio
    of the combined Police services of England and Wales.11 Given also that
    there  is  evidence  from  science  and  social  science  sources  that
    individuals suffering from mental health illnesses  in  Sri  Lanka  are
    stigmatised  and  that  there  is  a  lack  of  sensitivity,   if   not
    stigmatisation of the mentally ill,12  combined  with  the  sparse  and
    rudimentary availability of mental health workers in the country, 13 it
    is highly likely that the Police would intervene and a possible  breach
    of the peace caused by [the  appellant's]  illness  with  detention  or
    custody at a Police Station rather than hospitalisation being a  likely
    recourse. As has been acknowledged in a Sri Lankan Ministry  of  Health
    and World Health Organisation,  report,  in  Sri  Lanka  "violence  has
    always been considered a police, legal, personal, or family problem and
    not as a health problem that needs detailed epidemiological  analysis."
    14. The same report goes on to acknowledge the  "gross  inadequacy"  of
    mental health provision in Sir Lanka and the urgent need for  a  multi-
    stakeholder approach that  goes  beyond  the  tendency  to  respond  to
    violence through family or police frameworks. 15 All of this  indicates
    a likelihood that the Police rather than another public  service  would
    deal with a mentally ill person undergoing behavioural problems.

43. It is clear from the extensive footnotes  which  are  longer  than  the
    cited  passage,  that  these  conclusions  are  properly  reasoned  and
    supported by evidence. I am  satisfied  also  that,  in  this  context,
    violence being seen as a family problem  is  a  reference  to  domestic
    violence.

44. I consider that, in the circumstances,  the  appellant's  behaviour  is
    likely to attract the attention of the police, both by its nature,  and
    in the particular circumstances where he does not have  family  support
    or connections with the community. I am satisfied that  it  is,  as  Dr
    Rampton opines, likely that the police would intervene and would detain
    the appellant and that the police would more likely to be involved than
    another public service is  to  an  extent  confirmed  by  the  lack  of
    availability of help in mental ill health in Sri Lanka.

45. There is insufficient indication that it would be immediately  apparent
    to the police that the appellant  is  suffering  from  any  mental  ill
    health nor is it likely,  I  consider,  that  the  police  would  treat
    somebody whose aggression or violence flows from mental health problems
    differently from somebody who did not have those problems;  they  would
    not necessarily be apparent nor, were the person  being  aggressive  or
    violent and thereby creating a risk for others, be likely to be treated
    differently from any other such person.

46. I note also that there continues to be a significant stigma attached to
    mental health albeit the evidence indicating that this has lessened  in
    the light of the numbers of people who have  acquired  PTSD  and  other
    mental difficulties in the aftermath of the Tsunami.   With  regard  to
    the risks attendant on those returning, I consider that,  although  the
    situation has changed to a degree since the change in government in Sri
    Lanka, there is insufficient indication to show that  I  should  depart
    from the guidance given in GJ.

47. I do not consider that the appellant submits that  he  is  at  risk  of
    persecution as a Tamil per se or that Tamils are simply  by  virtue  of
    being Tamils at risk of detention; the submission to that  effect  made
    by Mr Melvin is, I consider, to misrepresent the case which is that  as
    a result of a number of cumulative risks, the appellant is at  risk  of
    ill-treatment of sufficient severity to engage Article 3.  In any event
    this submission does not focus on the issue in this case which  is  the
    evidence that torture has been used as a routine practice against those
    suspected of major and minor crimes (see Dr Rampton's report at  [5.0])
    which is supported by  evidence  from  Human  Rights  Watch  and  other
    sources (see note 21).  None of that  evidence  was  addressed  by  the
    respondent nor were submissions made about it.

48. It would be apparent to the police  that  the  appellant  has  recently
    returned from the United Kingdom.  He is at the very least likely to be
    asked where he lives and where he has been and any  electronic  records
    consulted will indicate a recent return to  Sri  Lanka.   Any  ID  card
    would have been newly issued.  That  does  not,  however,  in  my  view
    materially increase the risk of ill-treatment but I do note that  there
    is considerable evidence of discrimination against Tamils in Sri Lanka.
     It is notable also, from the respondent's own country information  and
    guidance on Tamil separatism, version  3,  August  2006  at  2.3.3  the
    security personnel continue to be  responsible  for  the  detention  of
    civilians accused of LTTE connections in 2015; and at 3.1.4 that  if  a
    person is detained by the Sri Lankan security services there remains  a
    real risk of ill-treatment or harm requiring international  protection.
    There is also evidence at section 6.1.8, 6.1.9 of continuing harassment
    of  Tamils  albeit  not  reaching  the  threshold  as  to   amount   to
    persecution.  It is  also  noted  in  section  6.2  societal  attitudes
    discrimination continues.  At section 6.6  it  is  noted  that  several
    sources indicate the continuation of torture against criminal suspects,
    not just against suspected  LTTE  members  or  supporters  albeit  that
    abductions are less common [6.6.6].  I also note the evidence that  the
    appellant's family were involved with the LTTE, this was at some  point
    considerable distance in the past, the elder  brother  having  fled  in
    1989, claiming asylum in Norway and  there  is  no  indication  of  any
    adverse  interest in the family since 2000.

49. While I have considered the report from Freedom of Torture dated August
    2015 I do not consider  that  it  adds  materially  to  the  background
    evidence set out above or  in  GJ.   In  any  event,  it  is  concerned
    primarily with those who have come initially at least  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities on account of links perceived or otherwise
    with the LTTE.  That is  of  little  assistance  here  where,  for  the
    reasons set out above, I consider that any adverse  attention  is  more
    likely to flow from the manifestations of the  appellant's  mental  ill
    health.

50. Accordingly, I am satisfied that there is a real risk of the  appellant
    relapsing and that this will result in behaviour which will  result  in
    his arrest and detention.  I am satisfied also that if detained he  is,
    on the basis of the evidence before me at  risk  of  being  ill-treated
    and/or subjected to torture by occasioning a breach of Article  3.   On
    that basis alone given that this ill-treatment would flow directly from
    the actions on the part of the state.

51. Having reached these findings of fact  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
    consider whether, were the appellant not at risk  of  ill-treatment  at
    the hands of the state, the conditions in which he would be treated for
    his psychiatric problems would engage Article 3.  I  consider  that  in
    any event they would not.  Whilst  it  is  clear  that  the  facilities
    available in  Sri  Lanka  are  inadequate  there  is  nonetheless  some
    facilities available.  The drugs which were prescribed to the appellant
    are available; there is inpatient  treatment  available,  albeit  to  a
    restricted  degree  but  in  reality  given  the  very  high  threshold
    identified in N, I do not consider that it could in any way  be  argued
    that the any lack of treatment that the appellant would  incur  or  the
    subsequent consequences of his  relapse  would  in  and  of  themselves
    amount to a breach of Article 3.   The  reason  that  I  have  found  a
    potential breach in this case is because of the treatment that would be
    meted out to him by the state, that is by the police and/or  the  army,
    not through any inaction or failure to provide treatment on their part.



52. For the reasons set out above, the  appellant  has  satisfied  me  that
    appeal must be allowed as he has  satisfied  me  that  the  immigration
    decision made was wrong on the basis of section 84 (1) (g) of the  2002
    Act.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.

 3. Attention is drawn to the anonymity order made in this  case,  pursuant
    to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 4. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:   1 February 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01586/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 September 2016                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                                     t t
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, instructed by Wilsons solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Presenting Officer


                    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision   of
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Peart promulgated on 12 July  2016
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent's decision
    of 24 July 2014 not to revoke a deportation order made against  him  on
    21 January 2008.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, of Tamil ethnicity. He suffers
    from paranoid schizophrenia which has resulted  in  him  requiring  in-
    patient treatment on a number of occasions on account of relapses which
    occur from time to time. That is in addition to the two prolonged stays
    in hospital pursuant to orders made under sections 37  and  41  of  the
    Mental Health Act 1983 subsequent to convictions in 2002 and  2004  for
    ABH and GBH respectively.

 3. His case is that he is at risk on return of ill-treatment of sufficient
    severity to engage article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention  on  the
    grounds that:

      i) He falls within the categories of those at risk as identified in GJ
         & Ors (Sri Lanka) (post-civil war returnees) CG  [2013]  UKUT00319;
         alternatively,

     ii) Owing to the manifestation of his mental illness,  he  is  at  real
         risk of being detained, and following GJ at [168] and the  headnote
         at  [(4)]  he  faces  serious  ill-treatment   or   torture;   and,
         alternatively,

    iii) His mental health is such, and the lack of facilities on return  to
         Sri Lanka is such that article 3 is breached; further, that  he  is
         at risk of detention in Sri Lanka under mental  health  provisions,
         and that the conditions under which he would be held would  violate
         article 3.

 4. For the reasons set out at length in the refusal letter,  which  it  is
    unnecessary  to  repeat  here,  the  respondent  did  not  accept  that
    deporting the appellant to Sri Lanka would be in breach of article 3.

 5. There is, as is noted in the three earlier decisions in this appeal,  a
    long history to this case. That is not in dispute, and there is  little
    purpose in rehearsing it again here save in setting out the history  of
    this appeal; an earlier asylum appeal was  dismissed  in  2003  and  an
    appeal against a decision to make a deportation order was dismissed  in
    2007.

 6. This appeal first came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Youngerwood
    who, in a decision promulgated on 24 June 2015,  dismissed  the  appeal
    finding, amongst other matter that:

        i) The appellant did  not  fall  within  the  categories  of  those
           identified in GJ as being at risk [21];

       ii) There was no real risk (as opposed to a speculative  risk)  that
           he would be detained because of  his  mental  problems,  and  be
           subjected  to  severe  ill-treatment  in  detention  [22],   the
           observation in GJ at [168] that those who were detained were  at
           risk of torture being confined to those  fell  within  the  risk
           categories identified in GJ.

      iii) This was not a deathbed or critical case scenario [31]; that the
           appellant would be able to access the same treatment as  in  the
           UK, and that the in-patient treatment facilities had improved;

       iv) This case was not  exceptional,  and  article  3  would  not  be
           breached by his removal.

 7. The appellant appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  on  four
    grounds, identified by it in its determination at [21]:

      Ground 1 - the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  interpretation  of  the
      application of  Article  3  to  a  health  case  was  too  narrow  and
      incorrect;

      Ground  2  -  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   proceeded   upon   a
      misunderstanding of all aspect of Dr Smith's report and failed to take
      account of the guidance in the case of GJ;

      Ground 3 -  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  had  erred  in  his
      interpretation of  what  had  been  said  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      paragraph 168 of the decision in GJ;

      Ground  4  -  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had   erred   in   his
      interpretation of paragraph 398 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

 8. The Upper Tribunal found no merit in  grounds  2  -  4,  concluding  in
    particular at [24] that the concession made in GJ at [168]  in  context
    "makes it plain that the concession was to  the  effect  that  detained
    individuals within a certain category remained at risk.  That  category
    was those detained under the  Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act,  such  as
    members of the LTTE who had  been  undergoing  a  re-education  process
    known as "rehabilitation" and had found themselves detained for lengthy
    periods without judicial supervision."

 9. The Upper Tribunal did, however, find merit in ground 1, remitting  the
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  The terms  of  that
    remittal are not set out in the decision nor are there directions  made
    pursuant to section 12 (3) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act
    2007, although there was a power to do so.

10. On remittal to the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal  came  before  judge
    Peart who, at [22] - [24] stated:

    22.  Ms Chapman asked me to consider the appellant's vulnerability  and
        risk on return in the event that he  is  interviewed  and  detained.
        This  was  explored  in  some  detail  in  the  decision  of   Judge
        Youngerwood at [221 and referred to in the Upper  Tribunal  decision
        promulgated on 21 December 2015 finding the error of law  only  with
        regard to ground 1. Grounds 2, 3 and 4 were found to have no  merit.
        The circumstances relied on in at  [1681  made  it  plain  that  the
        concession that anyone detained in Sri Lanka would  be  at  risk  of
        persecution was to the effect that  detained  individuals  within  a
        certain category remained at risk; that category did not include the
        appellant. See the decision of Judge Youngerwood at [221.

    23.  I accept that because of the manner in which the  appellant  might
        present due to his illness, in the event that he is  apprehended  by
        the Sri Lankan authorities for any reason,  stopped  at  random  for
        checks or interview of any kind, a speculative outcome might be that
        he is temporarily detained. I do not accept that such a  speculative
        outcome reaches the high Article 3 threshold.

    24.  Insofar as the appellant's Article 3 claim comprises a  claim  for
        protection because of the fear of ill-treatment in Sri Lanka, I find
        that was comprehensively addressed in  [pic]the  decision  of  Judge
        Youngerwood and the error of law  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
        panel. I turn to the other aspect of the appellant's Article 3 claim
        that he cannot return  to  Sri  Lanka  because  of  his  psychiatric
        illness and the detrimental effect that return would have upon him.

11. In addition, the judge found that:

        i) This was not a deathbed case, unlike that in N [20015]  UKHL  31
           [25];

       ii) There is provision  for  psychiatric  treatment  in  Sri  Lanka,
           albeit no to the standard available in the United Kingdom  [44],
           [49];

      iii) The appellant's parents are elderly, and  not  in  the  best  of
           health  but  there  was  no  suggestion  that  that  appellant's
           siblings would be unable or unwilling to support him as they had
           supported  their  parents,  and  that  there  was  not  credible
           evidence to suggest that the appellant's mother would  not  want
           or be able to care for him, ensuring  his  compliance  with  his
           drug regime, and so on [46]; and,

       iv) It would not be  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to  relocate  to
           Colombo with the assistance of family to access better treatment
           there.

12. The judge then dismissed the appeal on article 3 and 8 grounds.

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that in the de
    novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal that the judge erred:

        i) In that, having found that the appellant would  be  at  risk  of
           detention if apprehended by the Sri Lankan authorities  for  any
           reason [23], due to the  manner  in  which  he  may  present  on
           account of  his  illness,  he  then  applied  [23]  too  high  a
           threshold, the test here being  serious  possibility,  following
           Aswat v UK [2012] ECHR 473; and, that there are difficulties  in
           him accessing treatment as a Tamil;

       ii) In finding, in the absence of any evidence, that the appellant's
           family would rally round to support him [46];  a  finding  which
           was contrary to the appellant's brothers evidence,  there  being
           no explanation for rejecting the latter;

      iii) In concluding that the National Institute of  Mental  Health  in
           Colombo would have appropriate expertise to treat the  appellant
           [47], contrary to the evidence of the  appellant's  psychiatrist
           and the findings in GJ at [456]

14. On 11 August 2016, Designated Judge Murray granted  permission  on  all
    grounds.

15. Ms Chapman submitted that the judge had erred in  concluding  that  the
    risk of ill-treatment in detention  identified  in  GJ  ant  [168]  was
    confined to those in the risk categories; and, that accordingly he  had
    erred in adopting  too  high  a  threshold  in  respect  of  article  3
    violations where the state is responsible.  Further, there was  a  risk
    of him being detained in a mental hospital in condition which, owing in
    part to his vulnerability, would breach article 3 in themselves,  given
    the evidence about Angoda, the only secure inpatient facility available
    in Sri Lanka,

16. Mr Kotas submitted that there  was  no  risk  of  the  appellant  being
    detained other than temporarily, and that this was not likely to result
    in ill-treatment.

    Discussion

17. Care must be taken to identify the basis of the  hearing  before  Judge
    Peart.  It  is  evident  from  Judge  Youngerwood's  decision  that  he
    considered both articles 3 and 8, and the relevant  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules, dismissing the appeal on both grounds.  The  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal challenged both findings and permission
    was given on all grounds. I do not consider that fact  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal found no error in respect of grounds 2 - 4 can be construed as
    a direction that only part of the decision was to be  remade,  or  that
    its scope was to be limited. Indeed, given that  at  [36]  -  [37]  the
    Upper  Tribunal  observed  that  what  would  amount   to   exceptional
    circumstances was not something they could describe or list,  it  would
    be difficult and impractical to make directions limiting the scope of a
    fresh decision in respect of article 3. In the  circumstances,  neither
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  or  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
    binding on Judge Peart.

18. The challenges to the article 8 and Immigration Rules findings had been
    made contained within grounds 2 to 4. Given that  the  judge  did  make
    findings in respect of both article 8 and the Immigration Rules at [52]
    - [63], it appears that he proceeded, properly, on the basis that  this
    was a de novo hearing.  To the  extent  that  he  considered  that  the
    matters referred to at [22] were not matters  on  which  he  needed  to
    reach a finding, that was incorrect.

19. Putting aside the health aspects of the article 3 case, that is, access
    to treatment (and more remotely,  whether  detention  as  an  inpatient
    would engage article 3), the appellant's case is that he is,  owing  to
    his behaviour both in the aspects of OCD and in lashing out, at risk of
    detention if he comes to the attention of the Sri  Lankan  authorities.
    He argues also that if detained, he is  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  of
    sufficient severity to engage article 3.

20. The judge considers at [23] that the  chance  of  the  appellant  being
    detained is speculative but it not clear whether he considers that  the
    article 3 threshold is not met because of  a  low  probability  of  the
    event occurring, or because the probability of  ill-treatment  is  low,
    given what at [22] he concludes is the risk of that occurring. Further,
    this analysis is conducted through the prism of what is said to be  the
    high article 3 threshold.

21.  Despite Mr Kotas' submissions to the contrary, I do not consider  that
    the article 3 threshold in respect of actions on the part  of  a  state
    are high, unlike in health cases; the issue is  one  of  real  risk  or
    serious possibility of a breach. While it  is  unlikely  that  a  short
    detention would not per se cross that threshold, that is predicated  on
    there being no real risk of ill-treatment in detention.

22. Were the appellant to be detained, that would  not  necessarily  engage
    article 3 unless that were in  conditions  that  were  so  poor  as  to
    constitute inhuman or  degrading  treatment.  It  is  not  argued  that
    conditions in criminal detention do reach such a  threshold,  and  thus
    the adoption of an incorrect  test  does  not  necessarily  affect  the
    outcome.  If, however, there is a risk of ill-treatment  in  detention,
    then the outcome is, as Ms Chapman submitted, material.

23. The absence of the risk of ill-treatment was addressed by the judge  at
    [22], and flows from an analysis of GJ. Having considered GJ in detail,
    I respectfully disagree with the previous  Upper  Tribunal  as  to  the
    effect  of  [168].  First,  the  guidance  given  at   (4)   makes   no
    qualification as to the risk of ill-treatment  in  detention.  Had  the
    guidance been that only certain categories of people would be  at  risk
    of torture or ill-treatment in detention, then the Upper Tribunal would
    have said  so.   Further,  there  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the
    concession given that limits it, and the concessions recorded at  [168]
    and [169] must be seen in the context of the issues agreed between  the
    parties,   the   origin   of   the   comments   on   those   undergoing
    "rehabilitation".

24. The decision under challenge contains no independent reasoning for  the
    conclusion that the  risk  of  ill-treatment  is  confined  to  certain
    categories,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  conclusion  is  an  incorrect
    application of Country Guidance as set out in GJ.

25. In this context, I am satisfied that the conclusion that the  appellant
    was not at a risk of  ill-treatment  in  detention  serious  enough  to
    engage article 3 involved the making of an error of law.

26. Turning to the other grounds of appeal, I bear in mind that, absent the
    possible article 3 violation while detained on mental  health  grounds,
    this is otherwise a health case. In that context, it  is  difficult  to
    argue that, even taking the appellant's case at its highest, it crosses
    the high threshold set out in N, not least in the light of  GS  (India)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 82.

27. That said, there is, as Ms Chapman submitted, a  possibility  that  the
    appellant, given the nature of his condition which, even  when  managed
    in the  United  Kingdom,  relapses  such  that  he  requires  inpatient
    treatment, may result in him being detained in a hospital in Sri Lanka.
    The only possibility is, it appears, Angoda, and it is  submitted  that
    the conditions there are so severe  as  to  engage  article  3,  on  an
    analogy with Aswat. That issue  is  not  expressly  considered  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal which I consider is an error, given
    that the threshold in such circumstances is lower than that  applicable
    in health cases.

28. Given that any  analysis  of  whether  inpatient  treatment  is  likely
    involves an evaluation of what  support  and  outpatient  treatment  is
    likely to be provided, then errors identified in the grounds  at  [4.2]
    and [6] are material, given that here is no proper evidential basis for
    the conclusion that the family would rally round, and  for  not  taking
    into account at [45] the appellant's brother's evidence that the family
    would not be able to assist. Further, the finding at  [46]  that  there
    was no credible evidence that the appellant's mother would be unable to
    assist is an unreasoned rejection of this brother's evidence which  was
    otherwise accepted.

29. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and  I  set  it
    aside.

    Remaking the decision - directions

30. It is my preliminary view that the decision should  be  remade  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. Accordingly, I make the following directions:

      i) The appellant  and  respondent  are  permitted  to  adduce  further
         background and/or expert  material  in  respect  of  the  following
         issues:

          i) The basis on which it is said the  appellant  is  at  risk  of
             being detained, and in what circumstances;

         ii) The likely consequences of detention by the authorities;

        iii) What support and treatment he is likely to  receive,  and  the
             likelihood that he faces in patient treatment; how  soon  that
             is likely to be needed; where it  would  take  place;  whether
             that would necessarily be compulsory and/or in a secure  unit;
             the conditions in such units.

     ii) Such material must be served at  least  21  days  before  the  next
         hearing.

    iii) If it  is  intended  to  call  further  oral  evidence,  the  prior
         permission of the Upper Tribunal MUST be sought at least 10 working
         days before the next hearing.

     iv) The appellant must serve a skeleton argument 5 working days  before
         the hearing, addressing the above issues.

      v) The parties are at liberty to apply for any further directions,  in
         writing, and preferably by email to:

         FieldHouseCorrespondence@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and I set it aside.

Signed                                  Date:  5 October 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
