
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01694/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On:  3rd October 2016                     |On: 12th October 2016            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     SMW
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Ms T. Jaber, Counsel instructed by Sutovic and
                       Hartigan
For the Respondent:     Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to be a national of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran
    born in 1980.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Background to this Appeal

 3. The Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom  via  Calais  on  the
    26th January 2005. He was interviewed and sent back to France. No  copy
    of that screening interview now exists, but it would  appear  that  the
    Appellant gave a false name, date of birth  and  account.  He  did  not
    claim to have any political problems in Iran. Within a matter of  weeks
    he was back in the United  Kingdom.    We  know  this  because  on  5th
    February 2005 he claimed asylum. His application was  rejected  on  the
    11th April 2005. The reasons for that decision are also now lost in the
    mists of time, as neither party has been able to produce a copy of  the
    reasons for refusal letter.


 4. What we do have is  a  copy  of  a  determination  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal  dated  9th  June  2005.  The  Appellant  was  not
    represented before Judge Ghani.  He gave oral evidence  and  relied  on
    the statements he had made to the immigration service. He said that  he
    had left his village in Iranian Kurdistan because his family  had  come
    under pressure from the authorities. His brother was a  member  of  the
    KDPI and had disappeared. The security services had come to the  family
    home looking for him. They had  arrested  the  Appellant's  father  and
    detained him for one week. Over a year later they  had  come  back  and
    arrested him again. On this occasion the police had held his father for
    between 15 and 20 days. They had accused him of being a member  of  the
    KDPI and had suggested that the Appellant might be  involved  too.   It
    was against this background that the family had  taken  a  decision  to
    send the Appellant away. An agent was obtained to arrange  his  illegal
    departure from Iran and get him to safety in Europe.

 5. Judge Ghani considered the fact that the Appellant had failed to  claim
    asylum in France, and that he had given "completely different"  details
    when interviewed in January from the facts that  he  now  relied  upon.
    These matters case serious doubt on his credibility as a  witness.   As
    for the account the Judge did not find it  to  be  plausible  that  the
    Appellant's father would have been  arrested  in  the  manner  claimed.
    The Judge did not find  it  credible  that  the  Appellant  would  have
    remained at home the whole time since his  brother  went  to  join  the
    KDPI, if it was believed that he was at risk. It was  implausible  that
    he could have escaped arrest. Although the Judge accepted that he would
    be questioned upon return to Iran, she did not accept that  this  would
    entail any ill treatment and the appeal was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant did not  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  He  remained  here
    unlawfully. He came to the attention of the  Respondent  when,  on  the
    27th July 2007, he was convicted at Warwick  Crown  Court  of  using  a
    false instrument (an EEA registration card).  He  was  sentenced  to  6
    months' imprisonment.

 7. The Respondent took a decision to deport him on the  grounds  that  his
    removal was conducive to the public good. The decision  was  served  on
    the 28th April 2008 and his appeal against that decision was  heard  in
    his  absence  by   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   CJ   Deavin.     The
    determination, dated 29th May 2009 contains no reasoned  findings  save
    to say that the Secretary of State's concerns had not been displaced.

 8. It seems that there were difficulties  in  securing  the  documentation
    necessary to affect the Appellant's removal to Iran.  He  was  held  in
    detention for approximately  13  months.  On  the  14th  May  2009  the
    Appellant wrote to  the  Iranian  embassy  asking  for  their  help  in
    securing his release and saying he wanted to return to  Iran.  At  some
    point he made an application to return under the  'Facilitated  Removal
    Scheme' (FRS).

 9. On the 11th January 2012 he requested that the Deportation Order signed
    on the 6th August 2008 be revoked, invoking  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.   He  was  interviewed;  the  Respondent  scrapped   the   FRS
    application and granted him permission to work.   There was no decision
    until the 12th August 2014. The Respondent rejected the asylum claim on
    the grounds that he had not been found to be credible  in  his  earlier
    appeal, and further on the ground  that  his  nationality  was  now  in
    doubt. The letter gives a number of reasons why it is not accepted that
    the Appellant is in fact Iranian.  The  human  rights  application  was
    rejected and the Respondent refused to revoke the deportation order.

10. The appeal in respect of all of these matters came before Judge Hussain
    of the First-tier Tribunal. In a  decision  dated  28th  November  2014
    Judge Hussain held  that  the  appeal  against  deportation  should  be
    allowed on human rights grounds. The Appellant was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a British woman and due,  inter  alia,  to
    her health issues it was found to be unduly  harsh  to  expect  her  to
    relocate.  The Respondent's appeal against that decision was  dismissed
    by me in a decision dated 29th March 2016.

11. Judge Hussain dealt only briefly with the  asylum  grounds.  He  stated
    that he found the appellant's claim  to  have  lost  contact  with  his
    family to be "implausible" and without further  analysis  rejected  the
    appeal on Devaseelan grounds. The Appellant appealed that decision  and
    in my decision  of  29th  March  2016  I  found  the  grounds  to  have
    established a material error in law. The Appellant had produced country
    background material which had not been  before  Judge  Ghani  and  this
    required consideration. The appeal had not been given anxious scrutiny.
    I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Hussain (on asylum  grounds
    only).

12. The matter has therefore come back before me for re-making.


    The Respondent's Case


13. The very detailed reasons for refusal letter is dated 12th August 2014.
    On the matter of the Appellant's claimed nationality, the author  notes
    that he can speak only a few words of Farsi. The Respondent notes  that
    Farsi is the national language  of  Iran  and  that  it  is  taught  in
    schools. He has failed to  produce  any  documentary  evidence  of  his
    nationality,  and  was  unable   to   answer,   to   the   Respondent's
    satisfaction, questions about the geography of the North West of  Iran.
     He could not, for instance, name any local rivers.  He  described  the
    mountains as the Gularash when they are in fact the  Zagros  range.  He
    could not name all of the Iranian national holidays and his explanation
    "we are Kurdish and Sunni and we do not celebrate what they  celebrate"
    was rejected as not credible given that the Appellant  claims  to  have
    left Iran when he was 24.  He could not name all of the  Farsi  months,
    or answer questions  about  Iranian  history  such  as  the  date  that
    Khomeini returned to the country.


14. In respect of the rest of the claim the  Respondent  addresses  country
    background evidence  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  Kurdish  ethnic
    identity, military service and illegal exit. The  Respondent  concludes
    that none of those factors give rise to a real risk of harm.


15. Ms Isherwood relied on the findings of the Upper Tribunal in SSH and HR
    v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (illegal  exit  failed
    asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT  00308  (IAC).  She  submitted  that
    there was in general no real risk of harm to  returned  asylum  seekers
    and this was all the Appellant was.  His  claim  that  his  family  had
    suffered problems because of his brother's involvement  with  the  KDPI
    had already been rejected. Judge  Ghani  had  given  good  reasons  for
    doubting the Appellant's credibility as a witness. When  he  had  first
    arrived in 2005 he had lied to an immigration officer. He had  given  a
    false name and a false account. That showed he was prepared to lie  and
    the situation was no different today.  The  'section  8'  matters  also
    weighed heavily against him because he had still  not  given  any  good
    reason why he had not claimed asylum in France.    It was evident  from
    the Appellant's own behaviour that he did not have a  genuine  fear  of
    harm in Iran because he had asked to go home. Why would  he  have  done
    that if the historical account he now advances was true?

16. Ms Isherwood submitted  that  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    completed his military service was neither here nor there. The  country
    background evidence showed that men were eligible for military  service
    between the ages of 18 and 34 and the appellant was  now  aged  36.  He
    would not therefore be at any risk of  conscription.  If  he  was,  the
    evidence indicated that you can, in effect,  buy  your  way  out.   His
    claim not to have had any contact with his family was not credible.


17. Ms Isherwood noted the expert report by Roya Kashefi relied upon by the
    Appellant. She submitted that the report did not assist me  because  Ms
    Kashefi herself acknowledged that it was difficult to assess the degree
    of risk in cases such as this.  Ms Isherwood submitted that Ms  Kashefi
    makes assertions unsupported by evidence and makes comments  about  the
    Appellant's credibility that are not her place to make. Credibility  is
    a matter for the Tribunal.


    The Appellant's Case

18. It is submitted on the Appellant's behalf that he faces a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in  Iran  for  reasons  of  his  imputed  political
    opinion.


19. The Appellant relies on the findings in SSH to the effect  that  as  an
    undocumented failed asylum seeker  he  is  reasonably  likely  to  face
    questioning upon return to Iran.

20. The Appellant accepts the conclusions in SSH that failed asylum seekers
    are not per se a category of  persons  at  risk  of  ill-treatment.  He
    relies however on three factors which he fears will increase  the  risk
    of ill-treatment such that the standard of proof would  be  met.  These
    factors are:

           a) His family history of involvement with the KDPI; and/or


           b) His ethnic/religious identity as a Sunni Kurd; and

           c) The fact that he has not completed his military service.

    Ms Jaber submitted that taken cumulatively with  his  11  year  absence
    from Iran, the Appellant has demonstrated himself to be at  risk.  Even
    if (a) is rejected on Devaseelan or other  grounds,  she  submits  that
    factors (b) and (c) would be sufficient to tip the risk of harm into  a
    'real risk'.

21. In respect of his claimed history the Appellant relies  on  his  asylum
    interview, his witness statement of the 1st  March  2005,  his  witness
    statement of the 6th October 2014 and his oral evidence.   The  account
    has remained consistent. The Appellant claimed to be from a village  in
    Piranshahr in rural Kurdistan. He attended school until he was 6  or  7
    and learned a bit of Farsi. Then he left to work on  the  family  farm.
    That is "how it is" where he is from. Everyone  was  Kurdish  where  he
    lived and everyone spoke Sorani.  They did not engage with the  Iranian
    state, history or holidays, for instance.


22. His elder brother Muhammad Ali left home to join the KDPI at some point
    in 2002.  Two or three months after this the authorities  came  to  the
    family home to look for him. They would ask about where  he  was.  This
    became a regular occurrence. The  Appellant  did  not  know  where  his
    brother was, but believed that he may be in Iraq. In his oral  evidence
    before me he explained that the KDPI guerrillas do not remain  in  Iran
    but stay on  the  border  region  in  the  mountains  between  the  two
    countries. He could not say with certainty that was where  his  brother
    had gone, but that was what he presumed to be  true.  When  the  police
    arrested and detained the Appellant's father they told  him  that  they
    suspected that the family were supporting the KDPI.  In  December  2004
    the Appellant's mother died. His brother  was  contacted  and  returned
    home for her burial. The next day someone came to the house to say that
    his presence had been reported  to  the  authorities.  The  Appellant's
    brother left. The Appellant's father was afraid that  when  the  police
    came they would take him away instead, so that was why he got him  out.
    He was taken to Piranshahr, from there to Ormia, and from there  across
    the border into Turkey.


23. The Appellant denies having had the  opportunity  to  claim  asylum  in
    France. Although he did have contact with the police he did not know or
    understand that he could inform them that he wanted to seek asylum. The
    police in France were just interested in rounding you  up  and  letting
    you go.  In respect of events since he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
    the Appellant states that he did not have a representative  during  his
    initial claim. Someone who saw him once at the detention  centre  never
    came back. He  represented  himself  with  the  assistance  of  Kurdish
    community groups.   When he asked to return to Iran it was  because  he
    was desperate to get out of detention. Someone came to see him  from  a
    group concerned with bail and they suggested that if he filled in  that
    form he would get released. It worked. He did not want to  go  back  to
    Iran at any time. The Appellant states that he has had no contact  with
    his family. Nor has he attempted to contact them.

24. In respect of military service the Appellant states that in his village
    most people  avoided  the  draft.  This  is  normal  in  small  Kurdish
    villages.  They did not come to the village to force people to  do  it.
    The Appellant did not have an identity card and as such  was  'off  the
    radar'. If he had gone through a checkpoint into a big city perhaps  he
    would have been conscripted but this was not an issue for him.

25. The Appellant relies on an expert report by  Roya  Kashefi  dated  28th
    September 2016. Ms Kashefi is the Head of the Human Rights Committee of
    the Association des Chercheurs Iranians (ACI), which she  describes  as
    an international non-profit organisation dedicated to the unbiased  and
    objective study of Iran.   She  prefaces  her  report  by  stating  her
    awareness of, and adherence to,  the  Ikarian  Reefer  principles.  Her
    expertise comes from over 25 years of academic and legal study of Iran.
    She has presented papers to numerous international conferences  at  the
    UN, in the UK and EU parliament. She has a close  working  relationship
    with ethnic and religious groups inside and outside of Iran as well  as
    an expert knowledge of political groupings  in  the  country.  She  has
    given expert evidence in the UK, Canada and in the EU.


26. Ms Kashefi confirms that to her knowledge the village identified by the
    Appellant as his home is in the West Mangoor district of Piranshahr  in
    West Azerbaijan. The village is recorded as comprising 572  people,  of
    whom 196 are illiterate. She notes that when the Appellant was asked to
    write down his address  he  used  the  Farsi,  as  opposed  to  Arabic,
    alphabet.  He spelled Piranshahr with the Farsi 'P' not the Arabic 'B'.
    She concludes from this that the Appellant is likely  to  have  learned
    the Farsi alphabet.  He was able to correctly  identify  nearby  towns.
    His recorded response to the question about mountains in  his  locality
    was 'Qulrosh'. The correct term is Quo'rosh.  In respect of language Ms
    Kashefi confirms the Respondent's  view  that  Farsi  is  the  national
    language and this is taught in school. She notes:


         "It is this very fact that many of Iran's ethnic groups  object  to
         because they believe  the  mother  tongue  is  just  as  important.
         Misguidedly in a form of inverted chauvinism some Kurdish activists
         prohibit their children from studying at national  schools  because
         their schooling would be in Farsi and not  Kurdish.  I  should  add
         that none of dissident Iranian  Kurdish  political  groups  support
         this practice. This lack of schooling  also  has  economic  reasons
         whereby the children's labour is needed by the family..." [at 36]


27. In respect of his lack of documentation from Iran Ms Kashefi notes that
    the legal requirement to register birth is not always observed in rural
    villages.   A birth  certificate  would  have  been  required  for  the
    Appellant to be able to register at school. Since  2000  Iranians  have
    been required to carry a National Identity Card  but  there  have  been
    numerous technical problems to issuing these documents.   A  government
    spokesperson clarified that in August 2015 there were still an estimate
    5  million  Iranians  living  without  the  card,  now   an   essential
    requirement to applying for a driving licence,  passport  applications,
    banking and the like.  Overall, having considered all of  the  evidence
    in including the detailed reasons for refusal letter, Ms Kashefi is  of
    the opinion that the Appellant is Iranian.

28. In respect of risk Ms Kashefi concurs with the findings in  the  recent
    country guidance case of SSH [at 40]. She agrees that there  is  not  a
    real risk to failed asylum seekers per se. She does  however  make  the
    following points in favour of the Appellant's case:

       i)   As an undocumented ex-pat the Appellant  will  be  returned  to
          Iran on a laissez passer obtained from  the  Iranian  embassy  in
          London.  This is the finding of the Tribunal in SSH.  The process
          for obtaining one of these temporary travel documents is set  out
          in detail in Appendix 3 of the  report.  The  Appellant  will  be
          required to complete form G11.  This requires him to  state  when
          and how he left Iran, and on what basis he has  remained  in  the
          United Kingdom.  At paragraph 48 of her main  report  she  states
          that in the absence of ID documents the process can take  several
          days.  This  delay  gives  the  authorities  an  opportunity   to
          investigate the individual before he returns to Iran;


      ii) The Appellant is known to have been in the United  Kingdom  since
          2005. He has not completed his military service.  She writes  [at
          59]: "although it is compulsory for all  men  in  Iran  to  serve
          conscription some decide not to. They either have  the  means  to
          buy off the service, or can come up with health or other  reasons
          for exemption.  Others  who  cannot  do  either  choose  to  live
          clandestinely. If one does not engage with officialdom it is easy
          to disappear. Where and how [the Appellant] lived readily offered
          him that opportunity. He would have encountered problems  if  for
          example he needed to enrol in university or applied for a driving
          licence or entered into legal employment as opposed to working on
          the family land. If an ID card had been applied for  tracing  him
          would have been easier. His explanation  is  plausible  given  my
          knowledge of the region and practises surrounding conscription in
          general in Iran. Without a doubt, being  returned  to  Iran  will
          highlight the fact that he is a draft evader". She adds  [at  64]
          that the  draft  evasion  will  be  flagged  by  consulate  staff
          processing  the  travel  document  so  that  there  is   a   real
          possibility that he would be arrested on  arrival.  There  is  no
          provision for conscientious objection in  Iranian  law.  'Missing
          conscripts' may be eligible for pardon if  special  circumstances
          apply; those circumstances are defined  in  Article  190  of  the
          Procedural Regulations for the Conscription Code if the conscript
          has behaved in an exemplary manner during his service;


     iii) As a Sunni Kurd the Appellant is more likely  that  other  (Shia,
          ethnic Iranian) Iranians to suffer ill-treatment in detention. At
          14: "The manner in which  young  Kurdish  men  are  treated  when
          detained has been widely reported in numerous international human
          rights reports. Use of force, beatings, ill  treatment  and  even
          torture during interrogations undermine Iran's own national  laws
          and international obligations". This remains true notwithstanding
          President Rouhani's promise of tangible socio-economic investment
          in Kurdish areas.


    My Findings


29. My starting point for my consideration is the decision of Judge  Ghani,
    promulgated over eleven years ago. That decision  is  an  authoritative
    assessment of the Appellant's case as it  stood  at  that  date.  I  am
    entitled to take account  of  events  that  have  occurred  since  that
    judgement. I can take into account any matter which occurred before the
    first appeal but that was not known to be relevant  to  the  judgement.
    Where the witness seeks to introduce matters personal to  him  that  he
    could have told the first judge and did not, this  evidence  should  be
    treated with the greatest  circumspection.   In  respect  of  objective
    material such as country background information, there is less need for
    caution, but I should remember that evidence  relating  to  matters  as
    they stood then will rarely if ever be determinative of matters as they
    stand today.  If new evidence  is  adduced  I  should  always  consider
    whether there is some very good reason for its absence before the first
    tribunal. That is the guidance given in Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -
    ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702.


30. I need not be concerned  with  whether  the  Appellant  has  sought  to
    introduce new 'personal' evidence. His account has remained  the  same.
    He left Iran because the  authorities  were  harassing  his  family  on
    suspicion of support for the KDPI. His brother had left home to  go  to
    the mountains to fight with  the  peshmerga  and  the  security  forces
    appeared to know that. It had been common ground that such facts  would
    give rise to a well-founded fear of  persecution  if  they  were  true.
    The appeal was dismissed on the grounds that they were not. Judge Ghani
    gave three reasons for  rejecting  the  Appellant's  credibility  as  a
    witness.

31. The first was his failure to claim asylum in France, or indeed  in  any
    other safe third country that he might have passed through en route  to
    the United Kingdom.  There is no disputing that this was the route that
    the Appellant took,  nor  the  effect  of  section  8  of  the  Asylum,
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.  These were  matters
    that evidently weighed heavily in the balance before Judge  Ghani,  who
    described the s.8 issues as casting "serious doubt" on the  Appellant's
    credibility. Before me Ms Jaber pointed to the subsequent authority  of
    JT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 878.  Sitting some three years after Judge Ghani took her decision,
    the court held that the proper approach to s.8 issues would be to weigh
    them in the round as part of a global assessment  of  credibility.  The
    statute does not require decision makers to  find  that  s.8  behaviour
    would cast "serious doubt" on a claimant's credibility.    Whilst  that
    is correct, I am not satisfied that JT Cameroon would have changed  the
    Tribunal's approach to s.8 in this case. The Appellant did not fail  to
    claim asylum in France once, but twice: having been returned  there  by
    the British immigration authorities in early 2005  he  stayed  there  a
    matter of weeks before returning and making his claim here.  That was a
    matter that Judge Ghani was entitled to take a dim view of.  As Pill LJ
    puts it in JT [at 21]: "Where section 8 matters are held to be entitled
    to some weight, the weight to be given to them is entirely a matter for
    the fact-finder".


32. The second ground that Judge Ghani gave for  doubting  the  Appellant's
    credibility is the  fact  that  he  had  apparently  given  "completely
    different" details in a screening interview in January 2005 to the ones
    he subsequently gave when  claiming  asylum  for  the  second  time  in
    February of that year.  I cannot know how different those details were,
    since the original refusal letter, as well as that screening interview,
    are not available. The determination does not set them out in any great
    detail.  Before me the Appellant said that he could not really remember
    what he had said. He denies having said that  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom to work, but as I understand it he acknowledges that some false
    details were given. That was plainly a  matter  that  Judge  Ghani  was
    entitled to give weight to. It would have been perverse if she did not.
    Nothing in the evidence before me changes that matter.

33. The Devaseelan argument advanced before me concerns Judge Ghani's third
    reason. The Appellant's  account  of  his  father  being  arrested  and
    subject to short detentions is rejected by Judge  Ghani  on  the  basis
    that such events were "implausible". Judge Ghani appears  to  give  two
    reasons for so  finding.  The  first  is  hard  to  understand.  Having
    recorded the evidence that the father was accused, along with his sons,
    of giving succour to the KDPI [at 14-15], the Judge goes on to find  it
    "implausible" that the authorities would not suspect the  father  along
    with the sons [at 44].  This is not an  appeal  against  Judge  Ghani's
    decision but for my part that analysis did appear to misunderstand  the
    actual evidence. The central reason given however, and the focus of  Ms
    Jaber's submissions, was the finding that it is "implausible" that  the
    father would be subject to  arrest  in  this  way.  The  Appellant  was
    unrepresented before Judge Ghani, and had spent much of the time  since
    his arrival in detention. He had not therefore been  able,  or  perhaps
    had not known that he should, produce a bundle  of  country  background
    material.  Ms Jaber  directed  me  to  several  country  reports  which
    establish that the Iranian security  forces  operating  against  groups
    such as the KDPI will frequently use tactics such as this in  order  to
    put pressure on Kurdish families and to deter other  young  Kurds  from
    joining the guerrillas. I need not refer to all  of  that  evidence  in
    detail since it is neatly summed  up  by  Ms  Kashefi  in  her  report:
    "imputed political opinion and the arrest of family members in place of
    the suspect are common occurrence  in  dissent  cases"  [at  63].   She
    points out that in 2004 the Head of the Judiciary  in  Iran  issued  an
    ordinance aiming to prohibit the practice, an indication that  it  must
    have been widespread at that time. By May of 2005  the  same  Ayatollah
    was forced to concede that his ordinance had been  widely  ignored  and
    that  the  "absolute  injustice"  of  this  method  continued.    I  am
    satisfied that had this material been before Judge Ghani she could  not
    have found, as she did, that it was "implausible" that the  Appellant's
    father would have been detained in lieu of his son.


34. In this appeal I have to  make  a  global  assessment  of  all  of  the
    evidence before me. I weigh in the balance Judge  Ghani's  findings  on
    s.8 and the Appellant's behaviour in the early months of 2005.  For the
    sake of completeness I agree that these are matters that do damage  his
    credibility. I now assess the new reasons advanced  by  the  Respondent
    for rejecting the account.  These are, primarily, the  contention  that
    the Appellant is not Iranian at all. Although it is not spelled out, it
    is presumably suggested that he is an Iraqi from across the mountainous
    border.  The Respondent gives a number of reasons for  her  conclusion,
    and each of them is considered and  addressed  by  Ms  Kashefi  in  her
    report.  The accuracy and objectivity of  that  report  was  before  me
    challenged by Ms Isherwood, so  it  is  appropriate  to  consider  that
    matter at this juncture.

35. I have no concerns about Ms Kashefi's expertise. Her experience is  set
    out at Annex 1 of her report and it  is  apparent  that  she  has  been
    commenting on, and researching, Iranian affairs  for  over  twenty-five
    years. She is the head  of  the  human  rights  committee  of  a  well-
    respected international organisation and she clearly knows her subject.
    I have no concerns about her objectivity. Ms Isherwood  submitted  that
    the report attempts to assess the Appellant's credibility and to  "make
    excuses" for his inability to, for instance, answer questions about the
    geography of Piranshahr. That is not how I read the report at  all.  Ms
    Kashefi sets out her  understanding  of  the  geography,  and  cultural
    norms, in Piranshahr and leaves it to me to assess whether the  account
    is plausible in the context of that information.  I find this to  be  a
    well-balanced and objective report. Ms Kashefi  for  instance  endorses
    the findings of the Tribunal in  SSH,  notwithstanding  that  they  are
    findings markedly unhelpful to the Appellant's case.  Overall it  is  a
    report  that  I  attach  significant  weight  to.   I  now  return   to
    consideration of the Respondent's reasons for refusal.

36. First there is the issue of  language.  The  Appellant  speaks  only  a
    little Farsi and the Respondent considers this to be  suspicious  given
    that it is the national language of Iran and the only  language  taught
    in schools. The Appellant responds to this challenge by pointing to the
    conditions in rural Kurdistan. Ms Kashefi confirms his evidence that it
    is the norm in a tiny village such as his for children to leave  school
    at an early age - he reckons that he had left by the age of seven -  in
    order to help their families in  the  fields.   This  economic  bar  to
    education is compounded by what Ms Kashefi calls "inverted  chauvinism"
    whereby some Kurdish families deliberately withdraw their children from
    school in protest at the Farsi only curriculum.  I  see  no  reason  to
    reject her evidence on this matter.    It  seems  to  me  that  in  the
    absence of any evidence that the Appellant instead speaks  Arabic,  his
    inability to speak Farsi is a neutral factor.


37. Next are  matters  of  geography.  Again,  there  would  appear  to  be
    plausible explanations for each of the points made.  The Appellant  was
    asked at interview a number of questions about  his  claimed  place  of
    origin, Piranshahr.  The refusal letter concludes that  he  incorrectly
    identified  the  province  as  'Ormiyeh'  when  it  should  have   been
    'Piranshahr County'.  Ms Kashefi notes that Oroumiyeh  is  the  nearest
    main city. It is perhaps then understandable that he made that mistake.
     He could not name the local rivers. That is not a matter  I  attach  a
    great deal of weight to; I  consider  it  unlikely  that  many  British
    people would be able to name rivers in their home county.  He said  the
    mountains were called the 'Gulurash' when they are actually the Zagros;
    in her report Ms Kashefi clarifies that the word he used  was  recorded
    as 'Qulrosh' , not the proper name for that range, but simply the  word
    for 'mountains', 'Quo'rosh'.  He named the currency as the 'toman' when
    country background evidence shows it to be the 'rial'. Ms  Kashefi  was
    able to helpfully point out that the 'touman'  remains  the  term  that
    most Iranians use today.  In assessing the evidence  on  this  point  I
    have borne in mind the evidence that the  Appellant  was  not  educated
    beyond the age  of  seven,  and  that  he  led  a  relatively  isolated
    existence in his home village.    His lack of knowledge  about  matters
    such as administrative boundaries must be assessed in that context.

38. The only positive evidence that I have in respect  of  the  Appellant's
    nationality is as follows.  He  has  consistently  stated  that  he  is
    Iranian, and went so far as to write to the Iranian embassy  requesting
    their assistance in getting him released  from  immigration  detention.
    As Ms Kashefi notes, he writes using the Farsi alphabet as  opposed  to
    the Arabic (the 'P' in  Piranshahr  is  not  available  in  the  Arabic
    script).  He has managed, according to Ms Kashefi's analysis at  least,
    to have answered  a  number  of  questions  about  Iran  correctly.  In
    addition to those matters mentioned above, he was able to identify  his
    tiny village in Piranshahr, and the fact that Sardasht is to the south.
     Asked to name Iranian holidays he  mentioned  'Sizdabedar',  a  custom
    celebrating the 13th day of the  new  year.  Although  it  is  also  an
    ancient Kurdish tradition as far as Ms Kashefi  is  aware  it  is  only
    Iranians who refer to it as 'Sizdabedar'. There is in contrast  nothing
    at all to support the suggestion that he is Iraqi.

39. I have weighed all of that evidence in the round. I bear  in  mind  the
    negative credibility findings reached by  Judge  Ghani.  I  am  however
    satisfied that the Appellant has demonstrated that he an Iranian. It is
    a matter about which he has remained entirely consistent, including  in
    his approach to the Iranian authorities. It seems to me  unlikely  that
    he would have contacted the wrong embassy at what he describes as being
    a point of desperation to get out of detention.  He was  able  to  give
    some accurate information about Iran, and those questions that he could
    not answer can be explained by his lack of education  and  the  insular
    nature of the Kurdish community.

40.  In conclusion  I  find  that  the  appellant's  account  has  remained
    consistent over the eleven year period that he has been recounting  it.
    It is a relatively modest account of harassment, and I  note  that  the
    Appellant does not, for instance, claim  to  have  ever  been  arrested
    himself. It is an account that is entirely plausible in  light  of  the
    country background material.  Against that I weigh the  fact  that  the
    Appellant  sought  to  interfere  with  the   proper   maintenance   of
    immigration control when he first arrived. It is accepted that he  gave
    false identity details, presumably in an attempt  to  foil  his  third-
    country return to France. The fact that he refused to claim  in  France
    is further a matter that must be counted  against  him.  Those  matters
    notwithstanding, I am prepared to accept  that  sometime  in  2004  the
    Appellant left Iran because his father was  worried  about  what  might
    happen to him. Local security forces were harassing the family  because
    the Appellant's brother was believed - correctly - to have  joined  the
    peshmerga.


41. I must now assess where that finding leaves the Appellant in respect of
    a risk on return today. It is not suggested that the Appellant has  any
    outstanding warrants against him, nor that his tangential  and  imputed
    involvement with the KDPI has led over the years to any great  manhunt.
    Ms Jaber nevertheless relies on that past  history,  coupled  with  the
    Appellant's status as a draft-evading Kurd, to submit that there  is  a
    real risk of harm.

42. It has long been accepted that failed asylum seekers returned  to  Iran
    are questioned on arrival. That has been recently  reaffirmed  in  SSH.
    It was the view of the Upper Tribunal that there is not a real risk  of
    ill-treatment at that stage. It is accepted that if the individual left
    illegally, and returns without proper documents, he may be  transferred
    to a particular court to be dealt with.  On  the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal in SSH there was not a  real  risk  of  harm  at  this  stage,
    either. Although the penalty for illegal exit can as a matter of law be
    a period of imprisonment (which would necessarily entail  a  breach  of
    Article 3) it  is,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  a  simple  and
    relatively  small  fine.     The  difficulty  only  arises  where   the
    individual concerned has some outstanding  business  with  the  Iranian
    security  forces,  such  as  for  instance,  internet  activism.    The
    Appellant makes no claim to have engaged in such sur place activity. He
    submits however that the three factors identified by Ms  Jaber  [at  20
    (a)-(c) above] will place him in that category of 'additional interest'
    such that the burden of proof will be discharged.

43. The Appellant relies on the evidence of Ms  Kashefi.   Her  concern  is
    that when he applies for his laissez-passer in  London,  the  consulate
    staff will notice that he has not completed his military service.  That
    message will be conveyed to  Iran.  When  the  Appellant  arrives,  his
    failure to report for duty will be assessed.  The  evidence  before  me
    indicated that 'missing conscripts' who are caught are  arrested.  They
    are generally then sent to enrol  for  military  service;  absent  some
    exemplary conduct during that service, will then face their  punishment
    for draft evasion at the  end  of  the  period  served.  This  evidence
    appeared to relate to missing conscripts who are still of service  age,
    ie between 18 and 34.  There was some debate between the parties as  to
    the effect of the Appellant's age today. At 36 he  would  not  strictly
    speaking be liable for call-up, although I note Ms  Jaber's  submission
    that he may still be forced to serve. Even if that is not the  outcome,
    I consider it to be highly unlikely that the security personnel charged
    with processing the Appellant's re-entry would overlook the  fact  that
    he did evade the draft. The fact that he has successfully managed to do
    so past his 35th birthday does not appear to me to be a good reason  to
    suppose that arrest and penalty would not follow. Having had regard  to
    the  generality  of  the  country  background  material  -   persistent
    discrimination against Kurds, a  repressive  state  and  endemic  human
    rights abuses - I must consider the possibility that in the  course  of
    'investigations' the Appellant would be  subject  to  ill-treatment.  I
    must also consider the possibility that during such investigations into
    how he managed to avoid the draft, the security services  in  his  home
    area would be contacted, and that there may still, over a decade later,
    be records (or  even  living  memories)  connecting  him  to  his  KDPI
    brother.   I have weighed all of these matters in  the  round.  I  find
    this to be a finely balanced case, but applying the lower  standard  of
    proof I am satisfied that there is a real risk of serious harm. That is
    because the Appellant is not simply  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  He  is
    someone with family connections to a banned political group and who has
    himself  broken  Iranian  law  by  avoiding   the   draft.   In   those
    circumstances I find it to be reasonably likely that he would  be  ill-
    treated during detention and questioning.

      Decisions


    44. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  of
        law in respect of the asylum grounds of appeal. That  decision  was
        set aside in my decision attached.


    45. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee".


    46. There is an order for anonymity.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    7th
                                October 2016
