
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01071/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 29 October 2016              |on 15 December 2016             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     H A
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield instructed by Roelens Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Isherwood Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against the refusal by the Secretary of State  to
        revoke a deportation order made against HA.
     2. The appellant is citizen of Eritrea. It is agreed that  the  issues
        upon which the Upper Tribunal are required to make findings of fact
        are as follows:


         a.  When the applicant left Eritrea and in what circumstances
         b. Is he or is he not likely to be considered as  someone  who  has
         exited illegally
         c.  If the answer is in the affirmative, whether he faces a risk of
         persecution on the grounds that he existed  Eritrea  illegally  and
         has evaded the draft into military service.
         d. In the event of his return whether he would be conscripted  into
         national service and whether there would be a consequential  breach
         of Articles 3 and 4 ECHR.
         e. Whether as a forced returnee he faces detention and therefore  a
         breach of Article 3 ECHR.
         f. The appellant's credibility.


     3. The last issue is, in many respects, the foundation  on  which  the
        remaining issues are to be considered and so I shall consider  this
        element first.
     4. It is my primary finding that  the  appellant  is  not  a  credible
        witness and is a person who has deliberately lied in an attempt  to
        misled this and other Tribunals into accepting the case he  chooses
        to advance at that particular time.
     5. The appellants appeal against the making of the  deportation  order
        was heard on the 2  November  2010  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Rintoul and Mr A P Richardson JP. The panel  dismissed  the  appeal
        and in doing so made the following  findings  in  relation  to  the
        credibility of the claim:


                  46. In assessing the Appellant's credibility, we take into
             account Section 8 of the 2004 Act, bearing in mind that it  is
             neither determinative nor a starting point.  As was  noted  in
             the  refusal  letter,  there  is  some  inconsistency  in  the
             Appellant's evidence as to his date of birth.   Initially,  he
             has said that he was born on 16 July 1984 but it appears in  a
             witness statement prepared with the assistance of Refugee  and
             Migrant Justice that he was born in 1987.  This date was  also
             given in  his  interview   The  Appellant  now  says  (witness
             statement paragraph 5) that it is 16 July 1984  and  that  the
             confusion arose when his sister  had  come  to  visit  him  in
             prison and had told him, on the basis of her calculation, that
             his date of birth should be 1987 and that she  is  older  than
             him and has left the family earlier when he  was  young.   The
             Appellant's sister's evidence is inconsistent with that of her
             brother.  She has maintained throughout that she was  born  on
             15 January 1981 and that she left Eritrea in 1996.  That would
             have made her 14 or 15 at the time yet she says  that  firstly
             in her oral evidence that the Appellant was some two or  three
             years of age when she left then later that he was five or  six
             and that she was not sure and that she was young  at  he  time
             when the discrepancies were put to her.   There  is  then  the
             evidence of the two step sisters said to have been adopted  by
             the Appellants mother.  He makes no mention of them.


                  47. On his evidence, the Appellant was 12 years of age  in
             1996, the year it is said that his sister  left  the  country.
             There would therefore appear to be  only  a  matter  of  three
             years of age between them and whilst they may both  have  been
             relatively young at the time, it does not follow that this  is
             an explanation as to  how  the  appellants  sister  could  not
             answer constantly regarding her bothers age at  the  time  she
             left.
                  48. The Appellant's sisters evidence is that the Appellant
             did in 1996 travel to Ethiopia with his mother.   He  says  he
             has no recollection  of  travelling  there  then  on  his  own
             account, he  would  have  been  12.  This  is,  we  find  ,  a
             significant discrepancy and we do not accept that he would not
             recall being taken being taken to Ethiopia by  his  mother  at
             the age of 12, had that in fact happened.
                  49. There are other discrepancies between the evidence  of
             the Appellant and his sister.  Mrs Seal  said  also  that  her
             mother had become a Jehovah's witness but that she had  ceased
             to be so although she did not say when.  This is  contrary  to
             the Appellant's evidence that he was not aware of  any  member
             of his family ever changing religion which is surprising given
             the relatively small gap in their ages  and  it  appears  also
             (and Mrs Seal has not  denied  the  contents  of  the  letters
             written  on  her  behalf  by  the  RLC  that  her  father  was
             imprisoned and subsequently killed)  and  again  there  is  no
             mention of this. Even allowing for the fact  that  she  was  a
             minor at  the  time  ,  there  are  a  substantial  number  of
             differences in what she appears to have set out as her  asylum
             claim and what is now put forward and what is put  forward  by
             the Applicant.
                  50.Further discrepancies arise between the evidence of the
             Appellants and his sister.  He says that she  was  in  contact
             with him wen he was in Italy.  She says that he was  not.   We
             consider that these discrepancies  have  not  been  adequately
             explained.
                  51. We consider the Appellant's account of the raid on his
             home makes little sense in the context of  his  evidence  that
             this was the sole meeting arranged at his house  and  that  it
             was done without the knowledge of his parents.  It is implicit
             in the Appellant's evidence  that  arrangements  were  put  in
             place for the meeting which, if he was to  be  sure  that  his
             mother was not there, is predicted in  his  knowing  that  she
             would be  out  at  a  specified  time  and,  for  some  period
             otherwise he would not have been able to fix a date  and  time
             for the meeting to take place without his mother being  there.
             We find it improbable that he would not have known  where  she
             was going or have some indication of when she was going or how
             long she was going out for were, if he knew, as he must,  that
             she was away for a specified time.
                  52.We note that evidence that  is  common  for  people  in
             Eritrea to stay in school for longer than what might otherwise
             be necessary partly because they start education late,  partly
             because they have to repeat years and partly also  because  of
             the incentive to remain in school to avoid military service.
                  53 We consider, given the  unchallenged  evidence  of  Mr.
             Seal in the correspondence passing between him, UNHCR and  the
             British Embassy in Addis Ababa,  that  the  Appellant  was  in
             Ethiopia in 2007.  His evidence of other matters is  dependant
             to a considerable extent on what  he  has  been  told  by  the
             Appellant and his sister.  He was dependant on their  evidence
             for knowing when  the  Appellant  left  Eritrea  and  went  to
             Ethiopia.
                  54.We have no  reason  to  doubt  Mr  Haile  Kidaneariam's
             evidence that the Appellant has attended Pentecostal services,
             nor that the Appellants knowledge of the Pentecostal community
             in Ethiopia/Eritrea was detailed and that he has been involved
             with the church or some time, attending  prayer  meetings  and
             offering other assistance to the church.
                  55.We have considered the documents said to  show  that  a
             fine was  paid  in  respect  of  the  Appellant  left  Eritrea
             unlawfully, but in line with the principles set out in  Tanvir
             Ahmed we have considered these in the round, and we note  that
             they were issued  some  years  after  it  was  said  that  the
             Appellant left Eritrea, and for the date on which he  did  so,
             we are dependant upon his evidence and that of his sister.
                  56.Taking all these factors into account and  viewing  the
             evidence as a whole, we  find  that  the  credibility  of  the
             Appellant and his sister is wholly undermined by the  serious,
             unexplained discrepancies in their testimony which goes to the
             core of the  Appellant's  claim  and,  for  that  matter,  his
             sister's initial claim for asylum.   We  consider  that  their
             accounts of their  family  and  when  the  Appellant  went  to
             Ethiopia are so different, that considerable doubt is cast  on
             both  of  their  accounts,  but  we  bear  in   ind  that  the
             Respondent has conceded that they are related.
                  57.We find that the evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his
             sister is undermined to such an extent that we do  not  accept
             that the Appellant left Eritrea unlawfully.  We are  dependant
             upon their evidence as to when he did so,  and  at  what  age.
             Other than the evidence placing the Appellant in  Ethiopia  in
             2007, we are dependant on either  evidence  to  establish  the
             timeline of the Appellants claim.  We bear in mind  also  that
             it  is  for  the  Appellant  to  show  that  he  left  Eritrea
             illegally; the fact that as noted above, it is difficult to do
             so does not remove the need to show that he did so.   See  GM,
             YT and MY (Eritrea) -v- SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  833.   In  this
             case, we have  found  both  the  Appellant  and  his  sister's
             evidence to be wholly undermined.  We do not accept  that  the
             Appellant's knowledge of the Pentecostal Church in Eritrea  is
             knowledge of his presence there.  As Mr Kidanemariam said, the
             churches  in  Ethiopia  are,  as  one  would  expect,  closely
             involved with churches in Eritrea; it is inevitable that  news
             would spread from the one to the other.
                  58. We are not satisfied that the Appellant did not  leave
             Eritrea at an age and at  a  time  when  it  would  have  been
             possible. Accordingly we are not satisfied that he  did  leave
             illegally, or that he would otherwise be see as a draft evader
             or deserter.

     6. The panel went on to reject the claim to be at risk on  account  of
        the claim to be a Pentecostal Christian. This issue  has  not  been
        renewed before the Upper Tribunal in this case and is deemed to  be
        a head of claim abandoned by the appellant.
     7. On 13 May 2013 the respondent refused  to  revoke  the  deportation
        order. The appeal against that decision came before  another  panel
        of the First-tier Tribunal composed of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Corben and Mr S A Hussain JP on 4 October 2013. In a decision dated
        20 November 2013 the First-tier Tribunal found it reasonably likely
        that the appellant had left Eritrea illegally as he  claimed.   The
        panel find at [44-45]


             44. The  appellant  had  produced  some  school  reports  that
             purportedly show that he was attendance at school between 1994
             and 1998. His age in those reports is recorded as being  8-11.
             The age given in those school reports is not consistent with a
             date of birth in 1984 and is more consistent with a 1987 birth
             date.  However if authentic these reports would  indicate  the
             appellant was in Eritrea prior to the border war in  1998  and
             would suggest that if the appellant fled Eritrea  in  February
             2007 he was aged 19.  We approach  our  consideration  of  the
             authenticity of these school reports with some caution  as  we
             have not seen the originals and there is  no  explanation  why
             these  documents  could  not  have  been   obtained   earlier.
             Nonetheless the content of the reports is detailed,  Mr  Alagh
             on behalf of the respondent was unable to identify any feature
             to cast doubt on the authenticity of the  school  reports  and
             Professor Kibreab from his own experience and from a source he
             consulted found no reason to doubt the authenticity either.
             45. Taking all the evidence that is available  to  us  in  the
             round and bearing in the standard  of  proof  required  by  an
             asylum  appellant  we  accept  that  there  is  a   reasonable
             likelihood that the appellant left  Eritrea  illegally  in  or
             around February 2007.  We bear  in  mind  that  the  appellant
             would have a strong motive for leaving Eritrea illegally  once
             he became liable to commence  national  military  service  and
             that would be in either 2002 or 2005 depending on which  given
             date of birth is correct. There is no evidence  that  he  fell
             into one of the limited exceptional categories of persons that
             might have been able to leave Eritrea legally  at  that  time.
             It is of course possible that he  left  Eritrea  much  earlier
             than 2007 but from Professor Kibreab's evidence he would  have
             been exposed to expulsion in the period 1999 to 2000 following
             the border war and if  he  managed  to  avoid  that  as  being
             accepted as a de facto  Ethiopian  we  find  it  difficult  to
             understand why the appellant would have ended up in a  refugee
             camp in Ethiopia in 2007.


     8. Permission was  granted  to  the  respondent  to  appeal  by  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Storey on 16 January 2014 and an error of law  found
        by Judge Story on the 16 April 2016 on  the  basis  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had failed to give adequate reasons  for  concluding  that
        the appellant left Eritrea and is at risk on return.  The  decision
        was set aside.  There has been delay  in  relisting  to  await  the
        publication  of  the  country  guidance  case  of  MST  and  Others
        (national service - risk categories) Eritriea CG [2016] UKUT  00443
        (IAC).


Background

     9. The appellant claims to be a  national  of  Eritrea  which  is  not
        disputed by the respondent. The appellant claims to have been  born
        on the 16 July 1984 which is not accepted.
    10. In his latest asylum claim the appellant asserts he left Eritrea on
        27 February 2005 as opposed to his earlier claim of having left  in
        2007. The appellant claims that he gave the date  of  2007  on  the
        basis his sister had provided contradictory and untruthful evidence
        during  the  course  of  her  own  claim  and  during  the  earlier
        proceedings.
    11. The appellant claims to have left Eritrea without an exit visa and
        to have been 20 years of age at the time. The appellant claims he
        had not been called upon to perform military service at the time.
    12. The appellant claims to have travelled into Ethiopia  illegally  in
        2005 where he stayed in a refugee camp in Shimbelba.  He  travelled
        from the camp with the  assistance  of  an  agent  to  the  United
        Kingdom. The appellant claim his mother was fined 50,000 Nakfa as a
        result of his illegal exit from Eritrea.
    13. The appellants country expert,  Professor  Kibreab  opined  in  his
        report that whether the appellant left  Eritrea  in  2005  or  2007
        would make little material difference as the only date that has any
        bearing is 1996 as  the  circumstances  of  those  exiting  Eritrea
        before this date were different.
    14. What is clear from a consideration of all the available evidence is
        that the appellant is willing to change his account to fit in  with
        what he perceives to be the country situation and to  maximise  his
        changes of being permitted to remain in the UK.
    15. I refer above to the claim to have given false evidence  previously
        as he claims he was advised to do so by his sister as she had given
        a false account in her own and  earlier  proceedings.  However  the
        appellant tries to excuse his conduct he is admitting  that  on  at
        least one occasion has had lied to the Tribunal and provided  false
        information in relation to his claim for international  protection.
        There may be no practical difference in terms of the effect of  the
        dates in question but that does not absolve the appellant from  his
        culpability.
    16. The relevance of the current claim to have  left  in  2005  to  the
        credibility of  the  claim  is  demonstrated  by  the  relationship
        between this date and the appellants evidence to the original First-
        tier Tribunal who he told he left in 2007 and  had  never  been  to
        Ethiopia before 2007 and that he had been arrested in May/June 2006
        as there was a police raid on the  prayer  meeting  at  his  house,
        following which he was arrested and taken to a police  station  and
        thereafter into detention at a local prison before  being  released
        after three months. If the appellant left Eritrea in 2005 he  could
        not have been in the country to have been  arrested  in  2006.  The
        appellant now claims in his witness statement  of  the  21  October
        2016 that the events referred to in Eritrea did happen to  him  but
        two years before the date he originally claimed.
    17. The appellant also provided documents which he  claimed  originated
        from his school in Eritrea. That for 1994/5  claims  the  appellant
        was aged 8, that for 1995/96 that he was aged 10  and  for  1997/89
        that he was aged 11. The appellant currently claims  to  have  been
        born on 16 July 1984 which in 1994 would make him 10-11, in 1995/96
        aged 11-12 and 1997/98 aged 13-14. The  reports  were  obtained  to
        prove a date of birth the appellant is no longer relying upon.
    18. The appellant also claimed in his screening interview to have  been
        married to his wife in Addis Ababa in Ethiopia in May 2007 yet also
        to be single, but in  his  latest  statement  that  they  were  not
        married officially.
    19. A further  discrepancy  arose  during  cross-examination  when  the
        appellant was asked if he had ever been to Sudan which  he  denied.
        In his sentencing remarks dated 8 July 2009 his Honour Judge  Fenn,
        sentencing the appellants following his guilty plea to the offence
        of possessing an identity document with intent stated:


             "..As is so often  the position in cases such as yours we know
             very little about you. You are believed to be 21 years old and
             originate form Eritrea.  I am told that you  left  Eritrea  in
             February 2008, following three short prison sentences ---eight
             days, one month and one month -- which came about because, due
             to your religious convictions, you declined to do the national
             service that the state required you to do.
             You travelled to Sudan.  In  Sudan,  there  were  difficulties
             which resulted, again, in you being  imprisoned.  You  secured
             your release through the assistance of your sister, who  is  a
             resident of this country and has been for many years.  But you
             decided not to remain in the Sudan  ,  and  acquired  a  false
             Italian identity and travelled to Italy."


    20. It is not unreasonable to assume that the information  referred  to
        by the Sentencing Judge will have originated from either Mr S Smyth
        the appellants Counsel at that hearing or a  Pre  Sentence  Report,
        the historical content of both which must have originated from  the
        appellant. If the appellant was claiming to be 21 years of age when
        sentenced he must have relied upon a date of birth in 1988, a third
        version and neither 1984 nor 1987.
    21. The version given to the Crown Court is also  contradicted  by  the
        appellant at paragraph 16  of  his  witness  statement  of  the  22
        October 2010 in which he claims he was never called up for military
        service and that he left the country before he was called  up.  The
        alleged imprisonment and the reason  for  the  same  is  internally
        inconsistent.
    22. The claim by the appellant that he lied previously at  the  request
        of his sister is not supported by any evidence from the  sister  to
        this Tribunal that she either told him to lie or that  she  herself
        had provided a false account.
    23. The appellant has also provided what he claims is evidence  of  his
        mother having been fined as a result of  his  having  left  Eritrea
        illegally. The date of the document is said to be  18  August  2010
        and was provided at the same time as the school reports.
    24. The appellant now claims he crossed into Ethiopia in February  2005
        where he was encountered and searched by  Ethiopian  officers.  The
        appellant had an Eritrean Air Force ID card on him which he  claims
        he was able to persuade the Ethiopian authorities was a fake  as  a
        result of which the appellant was sent to  the UNHCR Refugee camp.
        The appellant claims he later left the camp to live with an aunt in
        Addis Ababa although without the permit required to allow  refugees
        to leave the camp. The appellant claims that in August 2007 he  was
        detained by the Ethiopian police. His aunt informed his mother  and
        his sibling became aware. A series of e-mails  have  been  provided
        and the appellant claims he was eventually released when his sister
        bribed  the  authorities.  His  sister  then   provided   financial
        assistance after which the  appellant  claimed  to  have  travelled
        through Sudan and Italy, even though in his oral evidence he denied
        ever having been to Sudan.
    25. The e-mails passed between a Mr James Seal and UNHCR. Mr  Seal  has
        provided a witness statement dated 23 September 2010 confirming  he
        is married to the appellants sister and that in 2007 his wife heard
        through a family friend that the appellant was imprisoned in  Addis
        Ababa. She travelled to 'Addis' in 2007 to secure his release which
        she was able to achieve.
    26. The first e-mail is dated 9  October  2007  from  Mr  Seal  to  the
        British Consul in Addis Ababa advising of his wife's visit for  the
        purpose of vising her brother who has been  imprisoned.  The  reply
        from the Vice Consul is dated  9  October  2007  acknowledging  the
        message.
    27. A further e-mil dated 18 October 2007 appears to be between Mr Seal
        and a person described as a 'Protection Intern'  at  the  UNHCR  in
        London. In that e-mail Mr Seal is asked for the appellants  details
        which he provides with a date of birth of July  1986.  The  Interns
        confirmed the details had been passed to the UNHCR officer in Addis
        Ababa in an e-mail dated 22 October 2007.
    28. A further e-mail from the 'Protection Intern' is in the following
        terms:


             As your brother was in Shimelba camp, he has a ration card, he
             has  been  recognised  as  a  refugee  by  the  Government  of
             Ethiopia.  He may have  been  arrested  for  having  relocated
             "illegally" out of the camp and therefore not  having  any  ID
             card.
             We would advise that Mr Woldekidan  visit  the  office  during
             reception  hours  of  Tuesday  08:00-10:00   and   the   Legal
             Protection department can see him.
             It is likely that he will still be advised to go to  Shimbelba
             camp however as Ethiopia exercises an  encampment  policy  and
             all Eritreans are to  be  assisted  in  the  camp.   UNHCR  is
             addressing this issue,  but  we  would  advise  that  refugees
             follow the rules and regulations of the  Government  to  avoid
             putting themselves at risk.


    29. On 28 October 2007 Mr Seal advised the Protection Interns that they
        had managed to get the appellant released from detention  and  that
        he was to attend the UNHCR to be  registered  officially  with  the
        UNHCR. In an earlier e-mail the Intern had  advised  Mr  Seal  that
        they had contacted their offices in Addis Ababa to find out why the
        appellant had been  denied  access  to  the  normal  procedure  for
        refugee status determination in Ethiopia and that  a  response  was
        awaited.
    30. The format of the copy e-mails is erratic with some having a header
        and some not, but no issue was raised regarding provenance  of  the
        same by Miss Isherwood.
    31. The UNHCR clearly indicate  that  the  appellant  had  been  denied
        access to the normal procedure for refugee determination whereas it
        is also claimed that he has been recognised as a refugee. It is not
        stated this is a grant of refugee status by the UNHCR and  even  if
        it was, the  same  is  not  binding  upon  this  Tribunal.   In  IA
        (Appellant) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 6  Lord  Kerr  said  "All  of  these
        factors require of the national decision-maker close  attention  to
        the UNHCR decision and considerable  pause  before  arriving  at  a
        different  conclusion.  The  approach  cannot   be   more   closely
        prescribed than this,  in  my  opinion.  The  UNHCR  conclusion  on
        refugee status provides a substantial backdrop to the  decision  to
        be made by the national authority. A claimant for  asylum  who  has
        been accorded refugee status by UNHCR  starts  in  a  significantly
        better position than one who does not have that status. But I would
        be reluctant to subscribe to the notion  that  this  represents  "a
        starting point" in the inquiry because that also hints at the  idea
        of a presumption. Recognition of refugee status by UNHCR  does  not
        create a presumption, does not shift the burden of proof and is not
        a starting point (if by that one implies that it  is  presumptively
        assumed to be conclusive) but  substantial  countervailing  reasons
        are required to justify a different conclusion". It was  also  said
        that a claimant's credibility was an accepted  basis  on  which  to
        depart from an earlier UNHCR decision. Where a claimant's story was
        so riddled  with  inconsistency  and  implausibility  that  it  was
        rendered unbelievable then a national authority was not obliged  to
        accept it simply because it was accompanied by a  favourable  UNHCR
        decision.
    32. If the e-mail evidence is relied upon it clearly  states  that  the
        appellant was in Ethiopia at the stated time having been there  for
        at least two years. As the e-mails are dated 2007 this supports  an
        arrival date at the camp in 2005.  Although the appellants  country
        expert accepts that this fact alone did not establish when  he  had
        arrived there, the fact only those Eritreans who come  across  into
        Ethiopia illegally are placed in refugee camps, and his presence in
        such a camp, is evidence of his  illegal  departure  from  Eritrea.
        This appears at paragraph 1.3 of the  report  of  Professor  Kibreb
        where it is written:


             1.3 In view of  the  importance  given  to  the  date  of  his
             departure, it is important to establish  whether  he  left  in
             1996 or 2007.  There is evidence to show that Mr  Abraha  left
             for Ethiopia much  later  than  1996.  The  only  material  to
             suggest that he left Eritrea is his sisters testimony which is
             denied by Mr Abraha. One indication that he  left  Eritrea  in
             either  2007  or  a  few   years   earlier   is   the   e-mail
             correspondence "between Mr Seal and the UNHCR stating that the
             Appellant had been in a refugee camp in  Eritrea  [sic]  (read
             Ethiopia)".   Although  as  the   Immigration   Judge   states
             correctly that this fact alone  "did  not  establish  when  he
             arrived there", given the fact that only those  Eritreans  who
             cross into Ethiopia illegally are placed in refugee camps, his
             presence in such a camp is evidence of his  illegal  departure
             from Eritrea.


    33. At 1.4 it is written:


             1.4 Had he left Eritrea in 1996 there was no way that he would
             live in one of the refugee camps in northern Ethiopia.   Those
             Eritrean's who lived in Addis Ababa or other parts of Ethiopia
             before the border war broke  out  in  1998  were  deported  to
             Eritrea.  Those who could not be identified by  the  Ethiopian
             authorities as Eritreans carried  on  living  in  Ethiopia  as
             Ethiopians.  Had Mr Abraha arrived in Ethiopia he  would  have
             been deported to Eritrea between the end of 1998 and 2000.  If
             he could not be identified by the  Ethiopian  authorities,  he
             would have continued to live in the Ethiopia  as  a  de  facto
             Ethiopian.  There were  no  refugee  camps  at  that  time  in
             northern Ethiopia.


    34. The report does not comment upon the position if the appellant  and
        his mother entered Ethiopia in 1996 lawfully and what  the  actions
        of the authorities would then be, and at paragraphs 1.5 and 1.6  of
        the report Professor Kibreb refers to the evidence  supporting  the
        appellants presence in Eretria which are  the  school  transcripts,
        which can have little weight  placed  upon  them  for  the  reasons
        stated above.
    35. It is known that exit from Eritrea has become highly restricted and
        that categories of those who may  be  granted  an  exits  visa  are
        [report of Professor Kibreb, para 1.21]:


            . Male over 55 years of age and a woman  who  is  47  years  or
              older;
            . Exempted from national service by 'The Committee'  on  health
              grounds;
            . 'demobilised'/discharged from national service or the Warsal-
              Yikaalo Development Campaign on health grounds - certified by
              The Committee;
            . Critically ill and cannot receive medical  treatment  in  the
              country - certified by a medical board;
            . Before  the  collapse  of  the  private  sector,  a  licenced
              merchant not affected  by  national  service  whose  business
              requires the need to travel abroad;
            . Younger than ten years
            . Sent by the government for short term training, further
              studies or conference or workshop attendance. Because most
              people sent on scholarships or to attend workshops and
              conferences fail to return, these avenues of leaving the
              country have shrunk dramatically. Only a handful of highly
              trusted individuals with first or post-graduate degree
              working for the government within the framework of the
              national service and the Warsal-Yikaalo Development Campaign
              could obtain exist visas for further studies and attendance
              of workshops and conferences; and
            . High-ranking  government  and  party  officials  on  specific
              missions.


    36. Miss Isherwood's submission that  the  fact  the  appellant  was  a
        basketball player who, on his account had been released from prison
        as a result of his sporting  ability, may indicate  that  he  could
        have left Eritrea on  a  sponsored  scheme  was  not  supported  by
        adequate evidence, especially as the claim to have been  in  prison
        is itself unreliable.

The questions:

    37. The first question in relation to when the appellant left  Eritrea,
        and in what circumstances, is a matter on which the burden of proof
        rests upon the appellant to the required lower standard. The  claim
        by the appellants sister that he left in  1996  is  denied  by  the
        appellant but, as demonstrated above, very little of what he  says
        in relation to his past is reliable. The sister did not attend  the
        hearing to  confirm  what  the  appellant  has  alleged  about  her
        providing false information is true.
    38. The evidence from the UNHCR only refers to 2007 and the  appellants
        presence in Ethiopia between (possibly) 2005 and 2007 but does  not
        assist  in  determining  when  he  left   Eritrea   and   in   what
        circumstances. The appellants evidence is  internally  inconsistent
        leading to the finding that the appellant has failed  to  discharge
        the burden  of  proof  upon  him,  even  to  the  applicable  lower
        standard, to prove that his current version of his  claim  that  he
        left  Eritrea  in  2005  is  proved  or  that  he  did  so  in  the
        circumstances claimed.
    39. The  second  question,  whether  the  appellant  is  likely  to  be
        considered as someone who has existed illegally, is  tied  in  with
        the answer to the first question. If the  appellant  left  in  1996
        this predated the restrictions imposed by the Eritrean  authorities
        on those able to obtain exit visas such that the majority of  those
        who left at a later date are likely to  have  left  illegally.  The
        experts opinion is that the fact the appellant was  placed  into  a
        refugee camp is evidence that he entered Ethiopia illegally as this
        is the profile of those who are placed in such, although  there  is
        the issue raised by the UNHCR as to why the  appellant  was  denied
        the normal procedures for refugee status determination in  Ethiopia
        which it is reasonable to assume he would have been  given  had  he
        been accepted as an illegal entrant.  The  headers  to  the  e-mail
        advising Mr Seal of this fact and that purportedly advising Mr Seal
        that the appellant has been recognised as a refugee have  not  been
        provided and so it is difficult to know the exact  chronology.  The
        experts opinion  that  the  appellants  presence  in  the  camp  is
        supportive of the claim to have  entered  illegally  does  arguably
        assist the appellants case when all the evidence is  considered  in
        the round. It is also necessary to  view  this  question  from  the
        perspective of the authorities on return to Eritrea  as  these  are
        the alleged agents of persecution. If the  appellant  continues  to
        lie if interviewed by them or cannot provide evidence that he  left
        lawfully it is  likely  that  it  will  be  assumed  that  he  left
        illegally. In his oral evidence the appellant  confirmed  that  his
        mother left Eritrea in 1996, with whom he claimed to be in  contact
        although there was insufficient evidence from this source to assist
        the appellant, whilst maintaining he did not  leave  at  that  time
        himself.  When it was put the appellant in cross  examination  that
        he could have left in 1996  he relied upon the school  certificates
        as showing this was not the case, but little weight can  be  placed
        upon this material for the reasons set  out  above.     If  it  was
        accepted he left in 1996 it is unlikely he will be  found  to  have
        left         illegally         by          any          prospective
        persecutor.
    40. The appellants ethnicity is not disputed. It is not  disputed  that
        he is of draft age even though his actual  date  of  birth  is  not
        established as a result of the inconsistencies in his evidence. The
        appellant stated he left Eritrea in possession of an air  force  ID
        card which he claimed was forged.  Miss  Isherwood  submitted  that
        this is evidence that the appellant may have completed his national
        service I do not accept this has been shown to be the case in light
        of the fact the claim that the card was provided  by  an  agent  to
        assist him in getting around road blocks is at a time  it  has  not
        been established the appellant was even in Eritrea at that time. As
        the appellant has not made out his claim in  relation  to  when  he
        left Eritrea I do not find he has proved that he left illegally  or
        that he will be viewed on return as someone  who  did  so  for  the
        purposes of evading military service.
    41. The third question, in the event of return he will  be  conscripted
        into military service and whether as a consequence there will be  a
        breach of Article 3 and 4 ECHR has to be answered in two parts.  In
        relation to the first part, as the  appellant  is  within  the  age
        range of those required to undertake military service and there  is
        no evidence he has done so, or falls within  the  limited  excluded
        categories, it is reasonable to assume that he will be required  to
        undertake military service as it is a mandatory requirement.
    42. The second part  of  the  question  is  based  upon  the  fact  the
        appellant will be forcibly conscripted into national service.  This
        is an issue considered by the Upper Tribunal in MTS at [416-430]:


             Forced or compulsory labour: our assessment


         416.           That leaves the issue of whether the system  amounts
         to "forced or compulsory labour".
         417.               In this  context  and  in  light  of  the  legal
         framework summarised earlier, it seems to us that the  evidence  we
         have before us is on a different footing. For one thing we have the
         ILO analysis and (unlike the international criminal law  framework)
         the ECtHR  has  seen  the  ILO  framework  to  have  a  bearing  on
         interpretation of Article 4 (see above [399]). For another, the ILO
         analysis,  taken  together  with  other  sources,   constitutes   a
         considerable body of very specific evidence tending  to  show  that
         the workings of the Eritrean system cannot be seen  to  fall  under
         any of the exclusions set out in Article 4(3).  That  is  important
         because in the course  of  various  ILO  proceedings  the  Eritrean
         government has not disputed that  their  military/national  service
         system amounts to forced or compulsory labour.  Their  argument  is
         directed only to their system falling under  one  or  more  of  the
         permitted exemptions or exclusions.
         418.                We take first the exclusion of 'any service  of
         a military character" (Article 4(3)(b)).
         419.           Paragraph 3(b) of  the  Article  excludes  from  the
         ambit of the  term  "forced  or  compulsory  labour",  as  used  in
         paragraph (2), "any service of a military character". There are  at
         least   two   respects   in   which   the   Eritrean   system    of
         military/national service falls outwith this  exclusion.  First  of
         all, its legislative framework, Article 5 of  the  1995  decree  in
         particular, identifies one of the objectives of military service as
         "to develop and enforce the economy of the national by investing in
         development work...." The legislative  framework  thereby  endorses
         the use of compulsory labour for purposes of economic  development.
         Second, there is overwhelming evidence that in its actual  practice
         the Eritrean state uses conscript labour for  services  of  a  non-
         military character. The 2015 UNCOI  Report  documents  the  use  of
         conscript labour in construction projects and in support of private
         enterprise, in  agriculture,  in  the  civil  service  and  in  the
         judiciary ([1399]-[1479]). In any event we do  not  understand  the
         arguments of the Eritrean representatives before the ILO to dispute
         the use of conscript labour in the  context  of  a  wide  range  of
         public works, although they do dispute (unconvincingly in our view)
         its use for private enterprise.
         420.           As regards assignment to civilian national  service,
         it seems to us that, notwithstanding that its  conditions  are  not
         generally oppressive, that is not a necessary condition for  forced
         labour. Here the UNCOI  argument  concerning  lack  of  freedom  of
         choice (which we rejected  in  relation  to  the  slavery/servitude
         argument) has in our judgement a proper place, since the effect  is
         that those forced to undertake such work are  prevented  often  for
         lengthy  periods  from   pursuing   their   own   occupations   and
         professions, save for some access to small family-based businesses.
         According to the Council of Europe/ECtHR study, it is not necessary
         for forced labour to exist that the condition being experienced  be
         permanent or unlikely to change (para 17).
         421.           We have not found it easy to  decide  the  issue  of
         whether it is correct to  conclude  that  the  Eritrean  system  of
         military/national service as a  whole  constitutes  forced  labour,
         given that civilian national service does not ordinarily result  in
         significant punishments and can sometimes  amount  to  little  more
         than attending an office in normal working hours and in the case of
         older women is sometimes said  to  be  undertaken  voluntarily.  On
         balance we consider that the breach is a generic  one  for  several
         reasons. First, the Eritrean government representatives before  the
         ILO have not sought to argue  that  civilian  national  service  is
         other than forced labour (although they dispute  whether  it  falls
         within permitted exceptions). Second, ILO organs have  seen  it  as
         generic. Third, even though we are unable to accept the findings of
         the  2016  UNCOI  Report  that  the  Eritrean  system   constitutes
         enslavement and servitude, it does particularise aspects that  have
         a strong bearing on the issue of forced labour. Thus the 2015 UNCOI
         Report notes at [1426] that;
           "The length and conditions of  work  for  conscripts,  including
           wages, working hours, place of assignment, leave time  and  rest
           days do not per se constitute elements of forced labour. But the
           open ended nature  of  national  service  and  the  often  harsh
           working and living conditions of conscripts subjected to  forced
           labour have a significant impact on the enjoyment of some rights
           including safe and healthy  working  conditions,  the  right  to
           security, integrity of the person, and  the  highest  attainable
           standard of physical and mental health".
         422.           In the same report at [1519] it is stated  that  the
         "Government has unlawfully and consistently been  using  conscripts
         and other members of  the  population,  including  members  of  the
         militia,  many  beyond  retirement  age,  as  forced  labourers  to
         construct  infrastructure  and  to  pursue  the  aim  of   economic
         development and self-sufficiency  of  the  State,  thus  indirectly
         government that has been in power for the past 24  years".  Fourth,
         even if not performed in oppressive conditions,  civilian  national
         service (like service in the people's militia)  nevertheless  falls
         within the description of work "exacted ...under the menace of  any
         penalty"  and  also  performed  against  the  will  of  the  person
         concerned, that is work for  which  he  "has  not  offered  himself
         voluntarily" ( Van Der Mussele, para 34). The fact that some  older
         women undertake it voluntarily, because  it  pays  them  something,
         does not seem to us to be enough to alter its underlying  character
         as forced labour. We would also observe that the Home  Office  CIGs
         on National Service appears to acknowledge that there may well be a
         real issue as regards forced labour  in  the  context  of  Eritrean
         national service.  At  2.3.46  of  the  August  2016  version,  for
         example, it is stated  (with  reference  to  non-civilian  national
         service) that "[w] here a person is able to demonstrate that  as  a
         result of the open-ended nature of their national service they will
         face a flagrant denial of their right not to be required to perform
         'forced labour', they will be entitled to a grant of  discretionary
         leave..." (see also 3.1.10 and, as regards women, 11.3.3).
         423.           In relation  to  the  exemption  for  "any  work  or
         service which forms part  of  normal  civic  obligations"  (Article
         4(3)(d)), we consider that the reasoning of the ILO organs  applies
         with equal force in the context of Article 4 of the ECHR. We do not
         consider that the use of conscripts in  civilian  national  service
         can escape the application of Article 4(3) on the basis  that  they
         form part of normal civic obligations. It is true  that  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence has seen this exclusion clause to include  compulsory
         fire service in Baden-Wurttemberg (  Karlheinz  Schmidt  v  Germany
         judgment pp no. 13580/88, 18 July 1994, [1994] ECHR 22,  para  23);
         compulsory jury service such as exists in Malta (in  Zarb  Adami  v
         Malta, Application no 17309/02,  [2006]  ECHR  637,  para  47);  an
         obligation to  conduct  free  medical  examinations  (  Reitmayr  v
         Austria, [1982] ECHR 17; and the obligation to participate  in  the
         medical emergency services ( Steindel v Germany, [2010]  ECHR  1471
         ). However, as the ILO organs have consistently  noted,  the  range
         and extent of work conscripts in Eritrea are required to perform in
         civilian national service goes well beyond  anything  that  can  be
         described as  the  performance  of  "  normal  civic  obligations",
         (emphasis added). The UNCOI Report of 2015 reinforces the  findings
         of the ILO that national  service  is  a  way  of  controlling  the
         population. Even though we consider  discharge/release  is  granted
         more frequently than has  been  contended  by  the  appellants  and
         UNHCR, it remains that for those who have to perform  such  duties,
         the type of work a conscript is expected to do is  again  arbitrary
         and includes agricultural work, working in the mining industry  and
         construction work. There is evidence of conscripts working for  the
         private  benefit  of  commanders  and  of  the  government  lending
         conscripts to foreign  companies  (e.g.  PK's  evidence,  the  EASO
         Report at 3.5 and the evidence relating to the mining industry).
         424.           As regards  the  exemption  based  on  provision  of
         emergency services (Article 4(3)(c)),  we  consider  that  the  ILO
         organs are entirely right in their  repeated  conclusion  that  the
         Eritrean reliance over a lengthy period on this provision goes well
         beyond the restricted nature of  this  exemption.  The  2015  UNCOI
         Report reinforces the ILO observations, noting at [1468] in respect
         of the people's militia for example, that "[T]he Commission is  not
         aware of any such situation of emergency in the last few years that
         would have justified the establishment of the People's Army. In any
         case, by definition, such situations of emergency  are  limited  in
         time and compulsory labour cannot be exacted  beyond  the  critical
         and genuine phase of emergency."
         425.           We  turn  then  to  consider  whether  our  findings
         regarding forced  or  compulsory  labour  would  be  any  different
         depending on whether we applied a "real risk" or "flagrant  denial"
         test. We are entirely satisfied that  the  open-ended  duration  of
         national service, coupled with the fact that its  duration  appears
         to be prolonged, gives rise to a real risk of a violation. There is
         a significant body of evidence  showing  that  conscripts  will  be
         required to engage in work where the conditions  amount  to  forced
         labour. There is strong  evidence  of  conscripts  working  in  the
         agricultural and construction industry in poor conditions. There is
         the  Bisha  mine  evidence.  There  is  strong  evidence  of   poor
         conditions and mistreatment during military and some types of civic
         service. However, despite such evidence, we do not find  that  such
         conditions are sufficiently widespread for us to conclude that they
         amount  to  forced  labour.  Not  all  conscripts  are  working  in
         conditions that would constitute forced labour.  Nevertheless,  for
         reasons given above, we consider that the lack of freedom of choice
         is sufficient to give rise to a  breach.  We  also  think  that  it
         amounts to a "flagrant breach" of the right to be protected against
         forced or compulsory labour, since in our views the Eritrean system
         effectively extinguishes that right.
         426.           In this regard we would emphasise  again  that  that
         unlike qualified rights such as Articles 8 to 11, the ECtHR has not
         regarded the limitations set out in Article 4(3) as being  intended
         to "limit" the exercise of the right  guaranteed  by  paragraph  2.
         Taken together with the fact that there has been recognition  of  a
         strong factual overlap between Articles  3  and  4,  (including  in
         respect of forced or compulsory labour) we  do  not  consider  that
         there is a need to establish extinguishment of content beyond  that
         set out in Article 4(2).
         427.           For similar reasons we also  consider  that  to  the
         extent  that  the  Eritrean  system  of  military/national  service
         breaches Article 4(2) it is also likely to give rise to a violation
         of Article 3.
         428.           We would emphasise, however, that our findings above
         concern active national service only. If one is a reservist subject
         to recall, we do not find that the risk of recall  is  sufficiently
         likely to amount to a breach  of  Article  4  (see  [297]  -  [307]
         above).
         429.           We conclude that  the  national  service  regime  in
         Eritrea does not as a whole  constitute  enslavement  or  servitude
         contrary to Article 4(1) of the ECHR, but that it  does  constitute
         forced labour under Article 4(3) which is not of a  type  permitted
         under Article 4(3)(a)-(d). A real  risk  on  return  of  having  to
         perform  military  national  service  duties  (including   civilian
         national service but not with the people's militia)  is  likely  to
         constitute a flagrant or a mere breach of Article 4(3) as well as a
         breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.
         430.           Where it is specified above that  there  is  a  real
         risk  of   persecution   in   the   context   of   performance   of
         military/national service, it is highly  likely  that  it  will  be
         persecution for a Convention  reason  based  on  imputed  political
         opinion. In so concluding we take into account that the Home Office
         CIG: Eritrea: National (incl.Military) Service, Version 3.0, August
         2016 at 2.2.6 considers that given the Eritrean  regime's  economic
         realpolitik and the widespread emigration "  it  is  unlikely  that
         avoiding national service, by itself, is  now  perceived  to  be  a
         political act by the government" (see also 2.2.3  and  3.1.3),  but
         note that the same document cites  the  May  2015  EASO  Report  as
         stating that "[d] ue to the political  and  ideological  nature  of
         national service,  most  sources  claim  that  desertion  or  draft
         evasion may be regarded by the  authorities  as  an  expression  of
         political opposition  or  treason".  Additionally,  in  this  CIG's
         Country Information section addressing this topic, only one  source
         interviewed by the UK FFM (a UN staff member) is cited  in  support
         of the proposition set out at 2.2.6 and (as UNHCR correctly pointed
         out in her submissions regarding this CIG) this  UN  official  does
         not directly answer the question of whether deserters  are  treated
         as traitors by the  government.  We  do  not  consider  the  recent
         evidence to demonstrate that the Eritrean regime has ceased viewing
         national service in  political  and  ideological  terms.  The  fact
         (noted in the AI "Just Deserters"  Report)  that  the  Wall  Street
         Journal, whose correspondent was permitted a media trip to  Eritrea
         in September  2015,  reported  that  the  Eritrean  government  had
         rejected a $222.7 million  plan  from  the  EU  to  facilitate  the
         demobilisation of long serving conscripts because "it would violate
         the principle that no one is exempt from  patriotic  duties",  only
         reinforces us in this view.


    43. Miss Isherwood produced no evidence to counter the  conclusions  of
        the Upper Tribunal in  MST  in  relation  to  this  point.  As  the
        appellant has not completed his national service he is likely to be
        conscripted into national service and intial military training.  In
        light of the finding in MTS that this establishes a  real  risk  of
        persecution or serious harm by virtue of such service  constituting
        forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and Article 3 of  the  ECHR,
        for this reason alone, this appeal must be allowed.


Decision

    44. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. That
        decision has been set aside.  I remake the decision as follows.
        This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    45. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
         I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30 November 2016

