
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01455/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2016                               |On 14 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                   miss sk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Physsas, of Counsel instructed by CK Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  17  October  1986,
    appeals, with permission, against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Woolley and Mrs L R Schmitt  JP)  who
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  to  make   a
    deportation  order  dated  2  July  2013.   That  decision  followed  a
    conviction of the appellant on 29  January  2013  for  the  offence  of
    possessing false identity  documents  contrary  to  Section  4  of  the
    Identity Cards Act 2010 for which the appellant was sentenced to twelve
    months' imprisonment.

2.   The appellant had entered Britain on  21  October  2011  as  a  student
    having been issued a visa valid from that date until 28  October  2014.
    In her witness statement she stated that she had completed  an  HND  in
    Software Engineering and had then applied to Northumbria University  to
    study for a BSc.  That application was refused as  she  had  failed  to
    meet the financial requirements.  She had  not  applied  to  any  other
    university as at that stage she knew that the next intake was not until
    September.

3.   The appellant claimed asylum on 3 April 2013 and was interviewed on  23
    May 2013.  On that occasion  she  said  that  she  graduated  from  the
    University of East London in 2013  with  a  BSc  in  Technology  and  E
    Commerce.

4.   At interview she stated that one of her brothers  had  been  killed  by
    the Sri Lankan Army in 2006 and her sister and surviving  brother  both
    lived in Colombo.  She had studied English  and  E  Commerce  and  then
    studied for an HND in Management.  She joined the  Rotary  Club  whilst
    she was in school in 2000  and  had  volunteered  for  them  thereafter
    working on a number of social service projects for them.  This included
    helping people to get an  education,  helping  at  orphanages  and  old
    people's homes and homes for the deaf mute.  When Jaffna had  been  cut
    off in 2006 she had taken food, clothes, money and  medicine  into  the
    city.  She had an uncle who was studying at the  University  of  Jaffna
    who would ask her to take food  into  camps  he  could  not  visit  and
    clothing parcels to people who were his friends.  Her  younger  brother
    was injured in a grenade attack in July 2006. He was  later  questioned
    by the army and in September that year was kidnapped. A week later  his
    body was found on the road.

5.   In October 2007 her uncle gave her an aid parcel to deliver but as  she
    had another commitment she asked a friend  to  deliver  it.   She  then
    learned that later that day her friend had been shot and  killed.   Her
    uncle was arrested in 2009 in Vavuniya while travelling  in  possession
    of weapons.  Only then did the family learn  that  he  was  in  fact  a
    senior member of  the  LTTE  intelligence  unit.   The  appellant,  her
    remaining brother and sister relocated to Colombo.  The family home  in
    Jaffna was raided, her computer was seized  and  her  father  arrested.
    She had resumed her studies in Colombo but was arrested there on 11 May
    2011 and transferred to Kalyjura prison  where  she  was  detained  for
    three months.  She said that she had been kept naked in water in a dark
    room and verbally abused.  She had cooperated with the  authorities  to
    disclose information regarding the location of people she had  assisted
    with her uncle.  She said that she had not been  taken  to  court.   In
    September 2011 her father paid a bribe to one of  the  prison  officers
    who helped her escape and took her to his home.  She had remained there
    until 21 October 2011 and then had travelled to the  airport  and  onto
    the United Kingdom.

6.   The Secretary of State considered  the  application  in  the  light  of
    recent documentary evidence including Human Rights  Watch  Reports  and
    the latest Amnesty International  Report.  In  the  light  of  relevant
    country guidance it was consider that it was important to focus on  the
    appellant's particular circumstances.   Having  set  out  the  list  of
    relevant factors in the  determinations  in  LP  (LTTE  area  -  Tamils
    Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT  00076  and  NA  v  UK  ECHR
    [2008] - risk on return to Sri Lanka  for  Tamils,   the  Secretary  of
    State considered that the appellant's claimed circumstances raised five
    of the twelve relevant factors.  These were considered  to  be  at  the
    lower level of risk. They were her Tamil ethnicity, a  previous  record
    as a suspected or actual LTTE member, a previous criminal record and/or
    outstanding arrest warrant, return from London or other centre of  LTTE
    fund raising and having made an asylum claim abroad.  It  was  accepted
    that the appellant was of Tamil ethnicity but it was not accepted  that
    that would lead to a real risk on return as a failed asylum seeker.  It
    was pointed out that the appellant had not known  that  her  uncle  had
    been connected with the LTTE and it was stated that the fact  that  the
    appellant's father had been released and that he had been able to pay a
    bribe to an officer to arrange for her to  leave  Sri  Lanka  indicated
    that the authorities did not have an adverse interest  in  her  or  her
    immediate family members: the fact that the  appellant  may  have  been
    detained but had been able to leave the camp with apparent ease  showed
    that she was of no adverse interest to the  authorities.   Moreover  it
    was considered that that fact  would  not  increase  the  risk  to  the
    appellant from the Sri Lankan authorities - the authority for this  was
    a letter from the British High Commission  dated  November  2011  which
    stated that large numbers of ex LTTE  cadres  in  Sri  Lanka  had  been
    released and others were to be released in batches over  the  next  few
    months.  Further reference was made to the rehabilitation  process  and
    the respondent concluded by saying that the appellant's claim that  she
    would be arrested and killed by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  was  not
    found to be credible.  It was stated  that  her  involvement  with  the
    LTTE, which she claimed to be unaware of, was low  level  and  was  not
    likely to lead to her incarceration or death on return.

7.   It was noted that she did not have a  criminal  record  or  outstanding
    arrest warrant and the Secretary of State did  not  consider  that  the
    fact that she was returning from London where  she  had  studied  would
    mean that she would come to the adverse attention  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  Similarly neither would the fact that  she  had  made  an
    asylum claim abroad.  Indeed, she would be removed in such a  way  that
    it would not be known that she had claimed asylum in Britain.

8.   On 10 August 2014  the  appellant  signed  a  witness  statement  which
    amplified what she said had happened to her in 2011.  She said that she
    had been arrested on Friday 6 May 2011 and  remembered  that  day  very
    well.  She had been held in  detention  for  about  four  months.   She
    claimed that  she  had  been  stripped  and  beaten  and  tortured  for
    information.  She claimed that she had been kept naked in a  dark  room
    and kicked and in paragraph 26 she said that during her time in  prison
    she was also raped.  She said  that  details  of  that  rape  had  been
    recorded in the Medical Foundation Report.

9.   She stated initially she had not  disclosed  to  anyone  that  she  was
    tortured in Sri Lanka or the extent of the  torture  and  ill-treatment
    because she was embarrassed by the torture and had not wanted to reveal
    that she had been sexually  assaulted.   She  said  that  none  of  her
    previous solicitors had asked if she was ill-treated or tortured whilst
    in detention.

10.  As well as being kicked she said that  nails  had  been  use  to  cause
    injury to her legs. She had been burnt with cigarettes on her legs  and
    she had been kept in solitary confinement as well as being hung by  her
    feet upside down with her hands being tied behind her.   She  had  said
    that she was affected mentally by her torture and ill-treatment in  Sri
    Lanka before she was helped to escape.  She asserted that she was still
    of interest to the authorities.

11.  A medical report was prepared by a  Dr  Jackie  Applebee  who  saw  the
    appellant on 21 March and 4 and 25 April 2014.  Dr  Applebee  began  by
    setting out what the appellant had told  her  of  her  history.  It  is
    evident that the first  interview  ended  because  of  the  appellant's
    distress and it was not until the second interview that  the  appellant
    gave further details of what she claimed had happened to her in prison.
     The appellant talked of the beatings she had received  and  also  said
    that one of the guards had cut her above her vagina and  that  she  was
    then tied to a table, beaten and burned all over with cigarettes.   She
    had indicated that she had been raped by one of  the  guards  and  that
    thereafter the guards came to her room regularly and  raped  her.   She
    could never see them because it was dark.

12.  Dr Applebee stated that the appellant had been reluctant  to  show  her
    scars and would only tolerate the examination of  her  lower  legs  and
    therefore most of the scars she documented were on her legs.   She  had
    however seen a scar which was shown to her when  the  appellant  pulled
    down her undershorts.

13.  At paragraph 67 onwards of her report Dr Applebee set  out  details  of
    the appellant's scars.  In paragraph 72 she stated:-

         "In my opinion Ms K would not inflict injuries on herself.  She has
         clearly been traumatised by the torture she endured, but she has an
         underlying robust personality and is not  someone  that  I  suspect
         would indulge in self-harm."


14.  She stated  that  she  had  not  been  allowed  to  perform  a  vaginal
    examination or genital inspection for signs of rape but stated:-

         "In  my  opinion  this  is  further  evidence  of  the  trauma  she
         experienced at the hands of the torturers."


15.  Her view was that the appellant had suffered the injuries  she  claimed
    in the way that she claimed and that the appellant had been  raped  and
    tortured at the hands of the Sri Lankan Army.  She concluded  that  the
    appellant was suffering from PTSD.

16.  At the hearing of the appeal  the  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant. In their  determination  they  set  out  their  findings  of
    credibility and fact in paragraphs 31 onwards.  They first made general
    comments in paragraph 31 stating  that  they  had  considered  all  the
    evidence presented in the appeal and giving the  proper  self-direction
    in the following paragraph regarding the burden and standard of proof.

17.  In paragraph 33 onwards they dealt with the issue of the events in  Sri
    Lanka before  arrest,  in  paragraphs  36  onwards  they  detailed  the
    appellant's arrest and detention and in  paragraph  38  considered  the
    medical report starting that paragraph by stating that:-

         "We now address  the  medical  report  which  informs  our  overall
         assessment".


18.  The detailed findings of the Tribunal in paragraph  33  through  to  41
    are set out as follows:-

         "33. The appellant has given an account in her  asylum  interviews,
             her statement, her medical report and at the  hearing  of  the
             events in Sri Lanka that  happened  before  her  arrest.   She
             gives an account that she was an active and robust young woman
             who was active in studying and in public life as secretary  of
             the local Rotary club (which  she  describes  as  'Rotoract').
             Her  family  lived  in  Jaffna.   She  was  unaware   of   any
             connections which her family  might  have  to  the  LTTE.   In
             particular she and her family were not aware that her maternal
             uncle was a senior member of the intelligence arm of the LTTE.
              It was put to her that this was not plausible  as  her  uncle
             and her mother had been brought up by the LTTE.  She says  she
             and her organisation were used by her uncle in giving  aid  to
             injured persons (she describes some of these as being  without
             limbs).  She says that she only realised that  her  uncle  was
             connected to the LTTE when he was arrested in  December  2009.
             At about the same time the government banned the  Rotoract  in
             Jaffna as they became aware of the pro-LTTE work that  it  had
             undertaken.  Some time before in October  2007  she  had  been
             handed a package by her uncle to deliver but she had given  it
             to another man to do so and this man was  sot  dead  the  same
             evening by army officers.  We find this account to be  lacking
             in credibility.  We find that the appellant was  either  aware
             of, or at best was wilfully blind to, the possibility  of  her
             uncle being involved in the LTTE.  She knew that he  had  been
             brought up by the LTTE; she must have had her suspicions  over
             the parcel if a friend was shot and killed after  having  just
             been given it; and she must we find have  suspected  that  her
             uncle in directing her organisation to help obviously  injured
             people was using it to help the LTTE.  We also find it not  to
             be credible that her uncle would have  wished  to  expose  his
             niece to danger in this way when there might have  been  other
             volunteers willing to do the same work.  Equally we find it is
             not credible against the totality of her  whole  account  that
             she would have declined to do what her uncle asked her  to  do
             when she had undertaken other work for him  without  question.
             Her own mother is not said to have  experienced  any  interest
             from the authorities,  yet  if  she  had  been  so  profoundly
             affected by the death of her son we find it not to be credible
             that she would have allowed her daughter to run the risks  she
             claims.


         34.  She says that earlier  in  July  2006  her  brother  had  been
             injured in a grenade blast and was questioned by the army.  He
             was released.  The appellant says that she and her family were
             under surveillance by the army after  this  but  there  is  no
             evidence of this and we find that it is mere supposition.   In
             September 2006 her brother was abducted (she suspects  by  the
             army) and a week later his body was found on the road.   Again
             we find  that  it  is  mere  supposition  that  the  army  was
             involved, and no reason is given as to why the army could  not
             just arrest her brother (as he  had  been  questioned  before)
             rather than abducting him.  There is no evidence that the army
             killed him.  We note that this  incident  did  not  cause  the
             family any difficulties (they were not for instance taken into
             custody themselves) and the appellant was  able  to  carry  on
             working for Rotary and to study.


         35.  Between 2007 and 2011 the appellant pursued her  education  in
             Sri Lanka.  It is evident that she is an intelligent woman and
             that she obtained good results in her examinations.  She  told
             us that she completed her studies in 2009 and  thereafter  had
             to submit coursework.  She says in her  statement  that  after
             her uncle's arrest in December 2009 that  she  became  fearful
             for her life, relocated to  Colombo,  and  stayed  inside  the
             house apart from attending English language lessons.  She says
             she kept a low profile in all this time.  She  was  questioned
             closely about this by Miss Lewis, who  asked  pertinently  why
             she needed to undertaken English language studies if  she  had
             already completed a  Diploma  Certificate  at  Jaffna  College
             through the medium of English (Certificate at page 118 of  the
             bundle) and had obtained a credit in the four  subjects  taken
             including English I and II.  We find that this point  is  well
             made.  The appellant would have had no need to risk  detection
             by leaving the house to undertake an  English  course  as  she
             describes with  her  background  and  proven  ability  in  the
             subject.  We find  this  not  to  be  credible.   We  find  in
             addition that her account as in her statement of keeping a low
             profile between 2010 and 2011 is not in keeping with her other
             accounts and indeed  with  the  objective  evidence.   In  her
             interview at the British High Commission on 2nd June 2011  she
             was asked at Question 6 'What do you do now' and she responded
             'Just I finished software engineering'.  She went  on  to  say
             that she had been doing this for two years.   The  purpose  of
             her British education was relating  to  her  earlier  software
             engineering course (Question 14).  The appellant has  produced
             a letter  from  IIS  City  Campus  dated  11th  December  2010
             confirming that  she  had  followed  the  course  of  BTEC  in
             software engineering and had completed it in  September  2010.
             This contradicts her account in her asylum interview that  she
             had ended all her studies in January 2010.  She  has  produced
             the relevant certificate which show (at pages 105 - 107 of the
             bundle) that she had passed in no less than 25 modules at  IIS
             City Campus.  According to this certificate she qualified  for
             this award in August 2010 which again contradicts her  account
             in her statement and asylum interview.  We find  that  she  is
             not credible when she says that she was keeping a low  profile
             and only going out to do an English course.  This  account  is
             contradicted by her  own  answers  in  interview  and  by  her
             certificates.  We find it is not credible that she could  have
             passed 25 modules at IIS City Campus in  August  2010  without
             ever attending any course or examination there,  yet  this  is
             the implication of her account in her statement.  We find that
             she was fully engaged in  this  course  as  she  says  in  her
             admission interview and was not in hiding  or  keeping  a  low
             profile in the period between January 2010 and September 2010,
             or indeed up to her admission interview on 2nd June 2011.   We
             note further that the copies of her  examination  results  are
             stamped 'Ministry of Foreign Affairs 15th December  2010'  and
             are endorsed to the effect that 'this statement is issued  for
             use outside Sri Lanka'.  If the appellant was fearful  of  the
             Sri Lankan Authorities it is not  consistent  with  that  fear
             that she (even through an agent)  would  have  approached  the
             Ministry of Foreign Affairs for such a certificate as it would
             have indicated her intention of moving abroad.


         Her arrest and detention


         36.  The appellant in her asylum interviews, her statement, and her
             medical report gives a very consistent account of her  arrest.
             She says in her statement that she was arrested on Friday  6th
             May 2011 and that she remembered this  date  very  well.   She
             says that after her arrest her father  took  her  brother  and
             sister back to Jaffna - in the light of the  country  evidence
             as to conditions in Jaffna at that time we find that  this  is
             not credible.  She anchors the date of 6th May 2011 by  saying
             it was the day after the 5th May 2011 when she applied to  the
             University of Northumbria.  At the hearing  she  confirmed  to
             Miss Lewis that what she had said in her interviews about this
             date was correct.  The 6th May  is  specified  in  her  asylum
             interview, her statement and in her  medical  report  (in  her
             screening interview she says it was the 5th  May  2011).   She
             also said in evidence that after her arrest on this  date  she
             was kept continuously in prison until she escaped in September
             2011.  Miss Lewis put to her that her account was not  correct
             as she had attended at the British High Commission on 2nd June
             2011 for interview.  We have noted the precautions  which  the
             British High Commission take to ensure  they  have  the  right
             person at interview and indeed the appellant admitted that she
             had attended at the interview.  We found  that  the  appellant
             was not credible in her attempts at  the  hearing  to  resolve
             this contradiction.  She firstly said that she  may  have  got
             the date in May wrong, which does  not  sit  easily  with  her
             earlier insistence that 6th May was the date  of  her  arrest.
             She then said that she had relied on her family for the dates,
             but was unable to answer the point made by Miss Lewis that  at
             Question 82 of her asylum interview  she  had  said  that  her
             family did not know she was in  detention.   She  changed  her
             account at the hearing to say that her family knew she was  in
             detention but did not know where.  Ms Dipnarain in her closing
             submissions pointed out that the Asylum interview is not  tape
             recorded and that this allows the respondent  to  take  things
             out of context.  While we acknowledge that this may  sometimes
             happen we find that it has not happened here.   The  appellant
             has given a clear date and also a clear  indication  that  her
             family did not know  about  her  detention.   She  cannot  now
             suggest that  she  got  the  wrong  date  because  her  family
             misinformed her.  We  find  that  the  appellant  was  not  in
             detention on 2nd June 2011 and that her account that  she  was
             taken into detention on the 6th May 2011 is not true.


         37.  We note the account of her detention in her asylum  interview.
             She  says  that  she  was  mistreated  but  that  this  mainly
             consisted of  verbal  abuse  and  humiliation.   She  in  fact
             specified that they kept her in water so that no  scars  would
             be shown.  She says that the guards did not beat her and  that
             they were unable to rape her.  She was  kept  naked  and  they
             pulled  her  breasts  but  she  does  not  specify  any  other
             mistreatment.  It is an important part of her account that she
             was in fact saved from  torture  by  the  intervention  of  an
             officer who said he was not going to  stand  by  and  see  her
             tortured.  It was this 'High Officer' who saved her from rape.
               He  then  arranged  for  her  escape.   We  note  that   the
             interviewing officer was a woman and the interview record does
             not  indicate  any  reluctance  to  give  this  account.   The
             appellant at the hearing said that she had been  detained  for
             three months but could not remember the dates.  We have  found
             that the  start  date  for  the  detention  as  given  by  the
             appellant cannot be correct and we find  this  undermines  the
             credibility of her whole account of detention.  We  find  that
             the account itself is inherently not credible  in  several  of
             its aspects.  To begin with it is not apparent from the Asylum
             interview that the army asked her  any  questions  about  LTTE
             involvement of her uncle which calls in question  the  purpose
             of her confinement.  More fundamentally we do  not  accept  as
             credible her account as to how she came  to  leave  detention.
             She says it was a 'High Officer' who in some way took pity  on
             her.  She gives no reason why he would single her out  of  the
             many detainees to take pity  on.   It  is  not  credible  that
             someone of such a high position would risk  that  position  by
             taking the initiative to help her escape.  After that she says
             he sheltered her in his house and then arranged for her to get
             through  the  airport  safely.   We  find  that  this  is  not
             credible.  She says that a bribe had been paid by  her  father
             but on her own account  this  officer  intervened  before  any
             bribe was  paid  as  her  family  did  not  know  she  was  in
             detention.  Even if a bribe had been paid we find it not to be
             credible that a senior officer would have harboured her in his
             house and then arranged for her to get  through  the  airport.
             We are on our guard against ethnocentricity but even in a  Sri
             Lankan context we cannot accept that a  senior  officer  would
             take these risks on behalf of an LTTE suspect held in prison.


         The medical report


         38.  We now address the medical report which  informs  our  overall
             assessment.  The medical expert approached was a Dr  Applebee,
             who is a GP rather than a consultant.   We  find  nevertheless
             that she can be regarded as an expert given her experience and
             specialist training.  We note that Dr  Applebee  was  provided
             with the appellant's statement (dated 4th March which was  not
             supplied to us) and her interviews, as well as the  notice  of
             decision.  She was, we find, thereby in  a  good  position  to
             understand the progress  of  the  claim  and  the  appellant's
             earlier accounts.  In her section  on  'History'  Dr  Applebee
             summarises  her  account  and  adds  the  comments  that   the
             appellant made to her.  She says boldly at paragraph 14 'Ms  K
             was not able to tell me about the torture she  had  suffered'.
             We find this comment surprising as it is evident at this stage
             of the examination that Dr Applebee had not been told anything
             about events in Sri Lanka and  yet  Dr  Applebee  was  already
             proceeding on the basis that she  had  been  tortured.   While
             this may have been her account  in  her  statement  dated  4th
             March 2014 Dr Applebee does not appear to have registered that
             her account in her Asylum interview is  quite  different.   At
             paragraph 33 she accepts the appellant's account that she  had
             been raped without enquiry or question.  This is  particularly
             surprising not only in terms of what is  said  in  the  Asylum
             interview but also because of what the appellant  told  us  at
             the hearing.  She said  that  she  had  not  mentioned  to  Dr
             Applebee that she had been raped and did not know how this had
             got into the report.  In her asylum interview she denied  that
             she had ever been raped.  Dr Applebee then goes  on  to  state
             that she did not examine the appellant intimately in  view  of
             her reluctance.  While we accept Dr  Applebee's  opinion  that
             physical examination very rarely can reveal a  rape  the  fact
             remains that Dr Applebee comes to a conclusion about  rape  in
             the absence of any physical examination when the appellant  at
             the hearing denied ever telling her about rape,  and  when  at
             least some of the evidence stated that it did not happen.   We
             of course have not been given access by the appellant  or  her
             representatives to the statement dated 4th March 2014 which Dr
             Applebee refers to (we cannot speculate as to the reasons  for
             this  and  it  is  entirely  for   the   appellant   and   her
             representatives to choose what evidence to submit), and so  we
             cannot say whether there was any reference to  rape  in  that.
             From what the appellant told us at the  hearing  this  appears
             unlikely but this  cannot  be  excluded.   What  can  be  said
             however is that on the evidence before us there appears to  be
             no basis on which  to  justify  Dr  Applebee's  conclusion  at
             paragraph 89 that 'Ms K is a young Tamil woman  who  has  been
             raped ... at the hands of the Sri Lankan army'".   She  should
             have specified on what evidence this conclusion was based  and
             did not.  At the  very  least  there  should  have  been  some
             acknowledgment  of   the   contradictory   evidence   in   the
             appellant's account.  We find this to be a serious flaw in the
             medical report.


         39.  Dr Applebee makes further observations in the report about the
             physical injuries suffered by the appellant.  We  accept  that
             the appellant bears the scars which  she  describes,  although
             her examination was limited to those parts of the  body  which
             the appellant permitted her to see.   She  drew  attention  at
             Para 69 to scars which  she  finds  'highly  consistent'  with
             cigarette burns, at Para 70  scars  'highly  consistent'  with
             being beaten with a blunt object, and at Para 71 a  horizontal
             scar at the level  of her pubic bone which  was  'typical'  of
             her attribution of having  been  slashed  with  a  knife.   Dr
             Applebee finds that this scar was not self-inflicted  as  such
             self-inflicted scars  tend  to  fade  towards  one  end.   She
             concludes at Para 72 that  the  appellant  would  not  inflict
             injuries on  herself.   She  also  conducted  a  psychological
             assessment in which she concludes that 'the above symptoms and
             signs provide clear evidence  that  Ms  K  is  suffering  from
             PTSD'.  We  note  however  that  there  is  no  other  medical
             evidence produced (e.g. from her GP) to this effect.   In  her
             statement she says at Para 39 that she is not on medication or
             undergoing   counselling.    Dr   Applebee   summarises    her
             conclusions 'she was beaten, burned with  cigarettes,  slashed
             with a knife, and repeatedly raped'.  The circular  scars  are
             diagnostic of multiple cigarette  burns.   She  speculates  'I
             could not help wondering what other scars would be revealed if
             she had allowed me to examine her torso' but we find that this
             is supposition only and not a basis on which we can find  that
             there are other marks on the appellant's body apart from  what
             Dr Applebee has seen.  As we observe below it may  equally  be
             an indication that the appellant has no  other  marks  on  her
             body.


         40.  The respondent referred us to the authority of KV (scarring  -
             medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014]  UKUT  00230  (IAC).   This
             concludes that where there is a presenting feature of the case
             that raises self-infliction by proxy (SIBP) a  medical  report
             will be expected  to  engage  with  that  issue.  Similarly  a
             judicial fact finder will be expected to address the matter in
             deciding whether,  on  all  the  evidence,  the  claimant  has
             discharged the burden of proving that he or she was reasonably
             likely to have been scarred by torturers against her will.  KV
             (scarring) reminded decision makers that medico-legal  reports
             'cannot be equated with an  assessment  to  be  undertaken  by
             decision makers in a legal context  in  which  the  burden  of
             proof rests on the claimant and when one of  the  purposes  of
             questioning is to test a claimant's evidence so as  to  decide
             whether (to the lower standard) it is credible'.  At paragraph
             286 and following KV (scarring) engaged with the issue of when
             it was proper for a  medical  report  to  consider  SIBP,  and
             concluded that this was appropriate 'when there is  a  tension
             or mismatch between what is revealed by a physical examination
             of the scarring and the patient's account of how  he  came  to
             have it'.  We find that there  was  such  a  mismatch  in  the
             present case.  The Asylum Interview with which Dr Applebee was
             provided does not mention cigarette  burns,  denies  that  any
             rapes took place, and states that the appellant  was  held  in
             water so that bruises should not  show.   Dr  Applebee  should
             have realised that  this  account  did  not  square  with  the
             account she was being given (or assumed she was being given in
             respect of the rapes).  She was therefore obliged we  find  to
             grapple with the issue of SIBP, to indicate that SIBP  was  as
             possible cause and then comment  on  the  presenting  features
             which might make it more than a mere possibility (for  example
             we note from KV (scarring) that SIBP injuries  are  likely  to
             occur in certain parts of the body but  not  in  others).   Dr
             Applebee however makes no mention  of  SIBP  anywhere  in  her
             report.  We find this is a serious flaw.  Ms Dipnarain in  her
             submissions suggested that  she  had  done  so,  pointing  for
             example to paragraph 72 of the report 'Ms K would not  inflict
             injuries on herself'.  With respect to Ms Dipnarain's argument
             we find that these  passages  are  only  talking  about  self-
             infliction - they are not talking  about  SIBP.   The  comment
             about the scar  (no  57)  at  paragraph  71  not  being  self-
             inflicted because it did not fade  away  towards  one  end  is
             deprived of much of its force if SIBP was involved as  another
             person would not have suffered the  pain  which  such  slashes
             cause.  Ms Dipnarain in her closing submissions suggested that
             'Given the location of  the  scar  it  is  unlikely  that  the
             appellant would allow such a scar in a  private  area  of  her
             body' and 'She is distressed by the scars and if the appellant
             is worried about  showing  the  doctor  the  scars  and  shows
             symptoms of embarrassment it is unlikely that she  would  have
             inflicted them by proxy or by herself'.  We  find  that  these
             conclusions do not follow.  If SIBP was involved the appellant
             may have allowed injury to a private part of her body and  may
             not have been embarrassed in this process.  We  come  back  to
             the reluctance of the appellant to show  Dr  Applebee  certain
             parts of her body (e.g. her torso).  There  is  a  possibility
             that this reluctance was because she had  no  scars  in  these
             areas of her body and did not want the doctor to pick this up.
              At the very least Dr Applebee  should  have  considered  this
             possibility.  Furthermore Dr Applebee gives  no  aetiology  on
             the knee scars which are of a much older vintage  (2007)  than
             the ones the appellant claims were acquired under more  recent
             ill-treatment.  There is no comparison or analysis of these by
             Dr Applebee, and  the  lack  of  any  such  analysis  (at  her
             paragraph 68) undermines the credit which  she  attributes  to
             the appellant therein.  We note the OGN as to the weight which
             should be given to such medical reports  but  find  that  this
             does not  affect  our  overall  analysis  of  this  particular
             medical report.


         41.  Under KV (scarring) we are not obliged to make any  definitive
             finding as to whether scarring is the  result  of  SIBP  (Para
             295).  We are obliged however to say  whether  we  think  that
             SIBP is a real possibility.  We find that  there  are  several
             presenting features  of  the  case  that  makes  SIBP  a  real
             possibility.  We have found that  the  appellant  was  not  in
             detention when she says she was in detention (on the 2nd  June
             2011) and that she has therefore given an  untrue  account  of
             that detention, and we also have found that her account of her
             treatment in detention in her asylum interview  has  radically
             changed  by  the  time  of  the  hearing.   We  consider   the
             implications  of  this  in  our  holistic  assessment  of  the
             evidence below".


    They then dealt with the appellant's flight  from  Sri  Lanka  and  the
    issues relevant to a consideration of the provisions under Section 8 of
    the 2004 Act.  In paragraph 44 they set out their  "global  conclusions
    on credibility" as follows:-

         "44. We undertake a holistic assessment  of  all  the  evidence  in
             assessing  the  appellant's  credibility.    Considering   the
             evidence  as  a  whole,  including  the   background   country
             evidence, the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  the  medical
             evidence, we find that her account is not credible and we  are
             not satisfied even on the lower standard that she had made out
             her claim.  We find that her account of events  up  until  her
             alleged arrest cannot be accepted, and find  that  she  was  a
             normal student undertaking computer software studies  and  not
             of any adverse interest to the authorities.  We find that  her
             account of arrest and detention  cannot  be  accepted  as  the
             truth, in that it has been demonstrated that at  a  time  when
             she says she was in detention she was in fact attending at the
             British High Commission for an interview.  She has changed her
             account of her treatment in detention markedly as between  her
             asylum interviews and her evidence at the hearing and we  find
             that these changes  undermine  its  overall  credibility.   In
             relation to the medical evidence it  left  us  with  only  two
             possibilities - either that  the  appellant  was  tortured  as
             claimed or that her scarring was SIBP.  Of these possibilities
             we exclude on a holistic assessment the former and have  found
             when all the evidence is taken into account that it  does  not
             stand scrutiny.  SIBP is left as  the  only  real  possibility
             that is left to us, given that we are satisfied that  she  has
             not shown that her account is reasonably likely  to  be  true.
             We find that she never came to the attention of the Sri Lankan
             authorities and was able to come to the UK to study on her own
             passport without any problems.  Although there is evidence  of
             burns and scars  to  her  body,  and  evidence  of  PTSD,  and
             although we apply the lower standard of proof,  we  find  that
             the appellant has not shown that  the  burns  and  scars  were
             acquired as she has claimed.  We do not accept her account  of
             detention and torture by the Sri Lankan State".


19.  Having applied the law as set out in GJ and  Others  (Post  civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) the Tribunal  concluded
    that the appellant  did  not  come  within  any  of  the  risk  factors
    identified in that determination pointing out that  not  only  had  the
    appellant never given evidence to the commission, that  there  were  no
    extant court orders or arrest warrants in force for her nor  was  there
    any evidence that her name would appear on a "stop" or "watch" list  as
    they had found that she had  been  able  to  leave  Sri  Lanka  without
    problem, that she had never had any role in relation to  post  conflict
    Tamil  separatism  within  the  Diaspora  and  she  had  not  described
    attending any demonstrations or meeting Tamil groups while  in  Britain
    nor, they concluded would she be perceived of any significant  role  in
    respect of renewal of hostilities in Sri Lanka.  They stated  "Even  on
    her own account she only had a low level role  in  assisting  the  LTTE
    during the conflict".  They concluded, in paragraph 47 by stating:-


         "Applying GJ (Sri Lanka) we  have  to  say  that  even  if  we  are
         incorrect in our assessment of the appellant's credibility and that
         she was detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities as  she
         claims she would still not appear to come within any  of  the  four
         risk factors that are defined there".

20.  The grounds of appeal argue that the way  in  which  the  Tribunal  had
    approached the medical evidence was unfair.  They argue that the  judge
    should have given first consideration to the  medical  evidence  before
    considering the evidence as what had happened to the appellant  in  Sri
    Lanka and it was clear from the determination  that  the  Tribunal  had
    reached their findings on credibility before  considering  the  medical
    report.  It was also suggested the criticisms  of  the  medical  report
    were unreasonable and failed to have regard  to  the  totality  of  the
    report.

21.  They state that the Tribunal should not have criticised the doctor  for
    proceeding on the basis that the applicant had  been  tortured  or  for
    accepting that she had  been  raped  and  that  they  should  not  have
    rejected the conclusion that the appellant was suffering from PTSD.  It
    was also stated that neither the applicant nor her representatives were
    put on notice that the expertise of the doctor was in issue.   Moreover
    it was argued that the Tribunal should not have considered the issue of
    scarring being inflicted by proxy because that matter was dealt with in
    a determination which had come out after the doctor had  met  with  the
    appellant.  Finally it was argued that given what had happened  to  the
    appellant in the past she would be at risk in the future -  it  was  of
    note that her injuries were inflicted after the  end  of  the  conflict
    rather than before.

22.  Although permission was  refused  in  the  First-tier,  Upper  Tribunal
    Chalkley granted permission on the basis that the Tribunal  had  failed
    to deal first with the medical evidence and to make  findings   on  the
    basis of it rather than making findings first.  He did not however seek
    to limit the grounds.

23.  At the hearing before me Ms Physsas relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal
    and stated that clearly the Tribunal had dealt with the medical  report
    separately having made credibility findings -  these  indeed  had  been
    made in a  vacuum  before  the  medical  report  had  been  considered.
    Moreover she stated that the Tribunal had not taken  into  account  the
    fact that  the  first  interview  had  ended  when  the  appellant  was
    distressed and that then a second and third interview had taken place.

24.  She stated that the Tribunal were wrong to place  weight  on  the  fact
    that rape had not been mentioned in interview stating  that  there  was
    clear evidence in the interview that the appellant had stated that  the
    guards had been unable to rape her but said that this  had  been  dealt
    with in the witness statement by the appellant where the appellant  had
    said that she had been embarrassed by the torture had revealed that she
    was sexually assaulted.  Indeed the witness statement dealt fully  with
    the way in which the appellant had been ill-treated.  She  went  on  to
    refer to the fact that Dr Applebee had recorded quite clearly that  the
    appellant had not wanted to talk about what had happened to  her.   The
    reality was that  the  doctor  was  more  likely  to  obtain  from  the
    appellant evidence of what had happened  rather  than  an  interviewing
    officer.  She stated that the Tribunal had been unfair to refer  to  Dr
    Applebee being a GP rather than a consultant stating that  was  not  an
    issue taken at the hearing.  Moreover the  appellant  was  recorded  as
    saying she felt she had been let down by her GP who  had  not  referred
    her for counselling.  She again emphasised that what  had  happened  to
    the appellant had happened post conflict and therefore  was  likely  to
    happen again.

25.  In reply  Mr  Whitwell  took  me  through  the  various  parts  of  the
    determination which the Tribunal had  made  it  clear  that  they  were
    looking at the evidence holistically and placed weight on the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in S v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1153 at paragraph 21
    where the judgment in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 was distinguished and
    at paragraph  32  the  Tribunal  in  HH  (Medical  evidence  effective,
    Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164 was endorsed.  He  said  that  the
    Court of Appeal could not be regarded as laying down any rule of law as
    to the order in which  judicial  fact-finders  should  deal  with   the
    evidential material before them.   He  argued  that  the  Tribunal  had
    properly considered the medical evidence  and  the  way  in  which  the
    evidence of the appellant had changed and that in any  event  they  had
    properly  considered  the  risk  on  return  now.   They  had  properly
    considered relevant country guidance.  Moreover it could not be  argued
    that the appellant was a "lone female".  He referred  to  other  points
    relating to credibility of the appellant including the  date  on  which
    the visa was obtained when she had claimed she was in prison.

26.  In reply Ms Physsas stated that it was clear  that  the  appellant  had
    had difficulty with concentration and argued that they had not properly
    considered the witness statement or taken into account the  appellant's
    distress.  That she argued was procedurally unfair.

Discussion

27.  The principal arguments in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  made  by  Ms
    Physsas before me was that the Tribunal had  erred  in  that  they  had
    reached findings and conclusions on the credibility  of  the  appellant
    before considering the medical report and then  had  wrongly  dismissed
    the conclusions of the judge therein.  I  consider  that  there  is  no
    merit in the argument that the Tribunal had reached  their  conclusions
    before  considering  the  medical  report.   It  is  clear   from   the
    determination that they, for the sake of clarity, divided into sections
    their consideration  of  the  appellant's  evidence  dealing  with  the
    matters raised chronologically.  That is a  perfectly  logical  way  to
    proceed.  The reality is moreover that they made  it  clear  throughout
    the  determination  that  they   were   dealing   with   the   evidence
    holistically.  In paragraph 31 they state that they had considered  all
    the evidence.  In paragraph 32 they refer to taking  into  account  all
    relevant  factors.   In  paragraph  38  they  stated  that  they   were
    considering the medical report "which informs our overall  assessment".
    In paragraph 44 they refer to holistic assessment of all  the  evidence
    in assessing the appellant's credibility.  It  simply  cannot  be  said
    that they did not have in mind the medical  report  when  they  reached
    their findings and conclusion and indeed the reality is that during the
    hearing the appellant was asked about various  matters  raised  in  the
    medial report and indeed she  made  comment  thereon  relating  to,  in
    particular how the doctor had known  about  the  allegations  of  rape.
    They specifically referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in JT
    (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878 with regard to the application of
    Section 8.

28.  The Tribunal did consider in detail  all  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    story.  They were entitled to place weight on the fact that it was  the
    appellant's evidence that neither she nor her family had known  of  any
    involvement of her uncle with the  LTTE.   Their  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's mother and father would not have allowed her  to  undertake
    any or have any involvement with the LTTE was clearly open to them  and
    indeed they were entitled to take into account the appellant's evidence
    that the family was largely apolitical.  The appellant's own  work  for
    the Rotary was not in any way contentious consisting, it appears in the
    delivery of humanitarian aid.  They were entitled to  place  weight  on
    the appellant's claim that what had happened to her had happened  after
    the ceasefire.

29.  They took into account the fact  that  the  appellant  was  clearly  an
    intelligent young woman who had passed exams both in Sri Lanka and here
    and had been able to study successfully in this  country.   Again  they
    were entitled to place weight on the fact the appellant had not claimed
    asylum on arrival and indeed had only claimed when she decided that she
    wished to go to France and had been  found  travelling  on  a  passport
    which was not her own.  Moreover, the Tribunal were entitled  to  place
    weight on the fact that the appellant's story had varied over time.  It
    is simply impossible to accept that this intelligent young woman  would
    state that the guards had been unable to rape her when interviewed  but
    then went on at a later  stage  to  claim  that  she  had  been  raped.
    Moreover she had obtained a visa after an interview at the embassy at a
    time when she claimed she was  detained.   I  also  consider  that  the
    Tribunal did properly analyse in detail the report of Dr  Applebee  and
    their comments thereon are apt.  I consider that the  reality  is  that
    the Tribunal were entitled to find that the  appellant's  story  lacked
    credibility and gave clear reasons for their conclusions.

30.  Finally the reality is that the Tribunal did apply  up-to-date  country
    guidance  properly,  considering  all  relevant  factors.   They   were
    entitled to conclude on the basis of those factors that this  appellant
    whose involvement with the LTTE, even taken at its highest was minimal,
    who had not been served with an arrest warrant, who had  been  able  to
    leave Sri Lanka without difficulty, had not taken part in any  Diaspora
    activities and whose family remain living in Sri Lanka  would  have  no
    difficulty on return.

31.  In all I consider that there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the  Tribunal  and  their  decision,  dismissing  this
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds shall stand.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


