
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01356/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2016                   |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               J --- M--- M---
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms M Knorr, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant (the present Respondent). This direction applies to,
    amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction
    could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  make  this  order
    because the case concerns the welfare of the  Appellant's  minor  child
    and the child is entitled to privacy.

 2. The respondent, hereinafter "the Claimant", is a citizen of Jamaica who
    was born in June 1970.  She appealed  successfully  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal a decision of the appellant,  hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of
    State", on 17 June 2013 to deport her under Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  "under  EU  law".   The
    Secretary of State was given permission to appeal on many grounds which
    will be considered in detail below.  There is also a cross appeal  from
    the Claimant because the First-tier Tribunal did not consider her  case
    on Article 8 grounds.

 4. At the risk  of  oversimplification  and  solely  for  the  purpose  of
    introducing my  analysis  of  the  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decided that deporting the claimant would require her daughter to leave
    the United Kingdom and that would be contrary to her rights  as  an  EU
    national with the consequence that, on  the  particular  facts  of  the
    case, the mother could not be deported.

 5. The Claimant's immigration history is undistinguished.  She first  came
    to the United Kingdom as a visitor in December  1998  and  returned  to
    Jamaica in the currency of  her  visa.   She  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom in December 2002.  Her child, T, was born in May 2003  and  the
    Claimant made no effort to return after her visa expired in June 2003.

 6. In June 2007 she was given a five year EEA residence card but that  was
    based on a marriage later found to have been a marriage of convenience.

 7. In 2007 she returned to Jamaica and accepted an offer  to  carry  drugs
    into the United Kingdom.  She was caught on arrival, pleaded guilty  to
    appropriate  criminal  offences  and  was  sentenced  to  seven  years'
    imprisonment.

 8. The child T became a British citizen in December 2013.

 9.  Paragraphs  33  to  37  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  are
    particularly apt and I set them out below:

         "33. In the light of the jurisprudence I have quoted from above, it
         is important for me to make findings in relation to  the  practical
         effect of the  deportation  of  the  [Claimant]  in  terms  of  the
         consequences for T.  The [Secretary of State] has argued  that  the
         options available would include for T to accompany  her  mother  to
         Jamaica, for T to remain in the UK in  foster  care,  and  for  the
         [Claimant] to apply to accompany T to another EEA country.

         34.  The [Claimant] herself has made  it  very  clear  in  her  own
         evidence  and  also  in  her   conversations   with   Mr   Horrocks
         [independent social worker] that if she were deported, her daughter
         would have to accompany her to Jamaica as she could not contemplate
         the prospect of renewed separation between the two  of  them.   The
         letter from T herself (which the [Claimant] assured me were T's own
         words and not what she had been told  to  say)  makes  clear  that,
         whilst she would be 'upset' at having to relocate to  Jamaica,  she
         would be 'devastated' and heartbroken  to  be  separated  from  her
         mother again.  Although she is only 11 years old,  her  wishes  and
         feelings would  have  to  be  taken  into  account  by  those  with
         responsibility for making decisions about her future care.  In  his
         report Mr Horrocks refers to the vulnerability  stemming  from  T's
         unsettled early childhood involving multiple carers, disruption  of
         her education and separation from her mother and the impact of this
         on her emotional and behavioural  state,  which  has  in  the  past
         required the intervention of the  Child  Adolescent  Mental  Health
         Service (CAMHS).  She is now in a far better state both emotionally
         and educationally but, in Mr Horrocks' opinion,  if  there  were  a
         further lengthy separation from her mother, this would all  be  put
         in jeopardy and would be likely to result in 'significant harm'  to
         T.

         35.  In her latest witness statement, the  [Claimant]  referred  in
         considerable detail to the difficulties that would arise in finding
         foster  carers  for  T  in  the  UK  amongst   her   own   friends,
         acquaintances or extended  family.   I  accept  from  the  evidence
         before me that the various persons who took care of  T  during  the
         period of the [Claimant's] imprisonment are  very  unlikely  to  be
         able to resume such duties now and that there are no clear  options
         for any such long-term foster placement for T during her  minority.
         There is of course the possibility that the local  authority  could
         find professional foster carers for T but it  seems  to  me  highly
         unlikely that Social Services would take steps to  arrange  such  a
         placement, given the opposition of both mother and child to a long-
         term separation and the likely harm that would result.

         36.  As for the possibility of  T  and  her  mother  relocating  to
         another EEA country, this strikes me as highly implausible.  T  and
         her mother, so far as I am  aware,  have  no  links  with  any  EEA
         country and, as pointed out by Ms Knorr, in order to accompany  her
         to another EEA country, the [Claimant] would have to show that  she
         is economically self-sufficient under the  Chen  principles  (which
         from the evidence before me she is unlikely to be able to show).

         37.  It is for the above reasons that I reach the clear  conclusion
         that the practical consequence of the [Claimant's]  deportation  of
         the [Claimant] would be that her British national daughter would be
         compelled to join her in Jamaica and thus leave  the  territory  of
         the EU.  This would constitute an interference with her  rights  as
         an EU citizen under Article 20 of the TFEU.  I find that  it  would
         therefore infringe the Zambrano principle for the [Claimant] as her
         daughter's primary carer, to be deported from the UK to  a  non-EEA
         state, thus amounting to a breach of EU law."

10. I remind myself that it is not my function to decide  if  the  Claimant
    should be deported but to decide if the Secretary of  State  has  shown
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding that  her  deportation
    would be unlawful for the reasons given.

11. The Secretary  of  State's  grounds  run  to  34  paragraphs.   I  will
    endeavour to summarise them.

12. Ground 1 is  headed  "Making  a  material  misdirection  of  law".   It
    complains that the sentence of seven years' imprisonment  was  so  long
    that it did not qualify for an exception to deportation on the basis of
    a parental relationship with a child in accordance with 399(a)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  there  was  no  finding  of  "very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above the requirements of 399(a)".

13. The grounds also  contend  that  the  offending  was  so  serious  that
    deportation was "overwhelmingly in the public interest" and  so  was  a
    justifiable consequence.  The  same  ground  contends  that  Case-34/09
    Zambrano v Office national de l'emploi [2012] QB  265  does  not  apply
    directly  to  cases  of  deportation.   They  prayed  in  aid  of  this
    contention Regulation 21A of the EEA Regulations which provided that  a
    person who would  ordinarily  have  a  derivative  right  of  residence
    following Zambrano  can  be  denied  that  right  when  deportation  is
    conducive to the public good.  The  same  ground  also  said  that  the
    Tribunal erred  in  finding  that  the  Claimant's  daughter  would  be
    compelled to join her in Jamaica.

14. Ground 2 is headed "Failing to give adequate reasons for findings on  a
    material matter".  The grounds are not as clear as they  might  be  but
    the point being made is that, according to the Secretary of State,  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not ask itself if the child could not be  cared
    for in the EU and that the Tribunal had wrongly elevated the claimant's
    intention of taking her  child  with  her  to  Jamaica  to  a  decision
    requiring the child to leave the EU.

15. Ground 3 is headed "Making a material misdirection in law - failure  to
    apply  the  Immigration  Rules".   There  is  a  clear  complaint  that
    paragraph 399(a) was not followed.

16. The ground also maintains the First-tier Tribunal did not  have  proper
    regard to the strong public interest in deporting people  such  as  the
    Claimant.

17. Ground 4 is headed "Failing to give reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for
    findings on a  material  matter  -  'Zambrano  principle'".   Here  the
    Secretary of State drew  attention  to  the  awaited  decision  of  the
    European Court of Justice in referrals known as "Marin v Administracion
    del Estado and  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  CS
    (Articles 20 TFEU and 21 TFEU - Directive 2004/38/EC) Joined  Cases  C-
    165/14 and C-304/14".

18. The decisions in those referrals are still awaited but  on  4  February
    2016, the day before the  hearing,  the  opinion  of  Advocate  General
    Szpunar was published.

19. Mr Whitwell asked me to adjourn the hearing  of  this  appeal  for  two
    reasons; to await the decision of the  European  Court  of  Justice  in
    those cases and to digest the opinion of the Advocate General.

20. I declined to adjourn.  In my experience adjourning decisions  awaiting
    decisions of other courts rarely work smoothly.  I must apply  the  law
    as I understand it to be.  I will endeavour to do that in a way that at
    least lends itself to easy correction if it turns out that I  have  got
    it wrong. The decision in CS does not change the law. It  clarifies  it
    and I respectfully adopt and apply the reasons of the Advocate General.

21. The Claimant's grounds of appeal are much  more  straightforward.   She
    raised a claim under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and this was not determined by the Tribunal.  She says that as a
    matter of law it should have been determined.

22. I have in the papers a notice of decision dated 19 June 2013 which is a
    "decision that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007  applies".   I
    also have a supplementary letter maintaining  our  decision  to  deport
    dated 19 June 2013 which is dated 29  January  2015.   That  letter  is
    written in acknowledgement of the fact that the claimant's daughter had
    become a British citizen and  therefore  could  not  be  removed.   The
    letter purported to deal with Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights and a series of passages headed "Consideration of  Zambrano  and
    Sanade".  These paragraphs deal with the Secretary of State's  decision
    that the claimant does not have a derived right of residence by  reason
    of being the parent of an EU national.  It is not clear to me how  this
    decision resulted in an appeal or what grounds are permissible but that
    is what has happened.  I can only assume that any irregularity has been
    waived.

23. I am not impressed by the Secretary of State's grounds.  The First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's finding that the claimant's  daughter  would  have  to
    leave the United Kingdom to be with her mother  is  unimpeachable.   He
    has given reasons for accepting the  evidence  about  this.   The  core
    reasons are that he believed  the  evidence  of  those  who  said  that
    although they had offered such support as they could when the  claimant
    was in prison they  could  not  carry  on  doing  that  throughout  her
    daughter's minority, that the claimant's daughter wanted to be with her
    mother and it was important that she should be with her mother  and  if
    it was necessary  for  there  to  be  evidence  to  support  that  very
    uncontroversial proposition it was found in the  expert  evidence  that
    the claimant's daughter risked harm if she was parted from her mother.

24. First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot applied a practical test by  which  he
    meant he had to decide what will happen to the daughter in the event of
    the Claimant's deportation and he decided that the claimant's  daughter
    would leave the United Kingdom and therefore the EU.

25. The grounds hunt to find differences on the facts between  the  present
    case and the decision in Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09).  They do  not  change
    the ratio of the decision which  is  that  the  EU  citizen  cannot  be
    compelled to leave the Union.  Judge Talbot considered the  possibility
    of the claimant living in a different part of the EU and rejected  that
    possibility for good reasons.

26. Contrary to the grounds he  gave  reasons  for  his  decision  and  his
    decision is clear.  The ruling in Zambrano does not permit any decision
    which has the effect of requiring an EU national to  leave  the  union.
    Regulation 21A of the EEA Regulations cannot operate  to  prevent  that
    fundamental right.

27. There is a technical error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    in failing to explain the operation of the Immigration Rules.  I do not
    agree that the judge failed to apply  them.   The  Secretary  of  State
    refers to paragraph 399(a) of HC 395 but this Rule applies when Article
    8 is considered in the context of deportation.  The judge  did  not  do
    that.  This requires that there are "very compelling circumstances over
    and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".  However this is
    something for the Secretary of State  to  decide.   Where  a  court  or
    Tribunal is required to determine an Article 8 breach in the case of  a
    person sentenced to at least four years'  imprisonment  there  must  be
    "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2".  Exception 1 relates to integration and  residence
    in the United Kingdom, and Exception 2 applies where there is a genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child.

28.  Here  the  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above   those
    described" is the finding that  deportation  will  interfere  with  the
    child's EU rights.  The judge chose not to consider an Article 8  claim
    because, in his view, there was no need because  the  appeal  had  been
    allowed for more compelling reasons.  I cannot avoid finding  that  the
    judge was wrong not to decide the point because all grounds  of  appeal
    have to be decided.  However if the  judge  had  considered  Article  8
    outside the Rules he would  have  stopped  early  on  in  his  analysis
    because his decision meant that removal was not in accordance with  the
    law.  His clear findings would have meant that he  would  have  allowed
    the appeal on this point if he had considered the ground.  No  material
    error is unearthed there.

29. I considered Mr Whitwell's submissions along with  the  other  material
    before me.  They do not get round the clear finding of the consequences
    of removal on the EU national and therefore they do not  undermine  the
    decision.

30. I did, of course, consider the decision in CS.  It  may  be  that  that
    does not go quite as far as the  decision  in  Zambrano  but  there  is
    nothing there to assist the Secretary of State.

31. We will have  to  see  if  the  final  decision  accepts  the  Advocate
    General's contention that removal of  the  non-EU  national  should  be
    taken with strict regard to the Rules as if the person  to  be  removed
    was in fact an EU national.

32.  Here  the  Claimant  has  been  praised  for  her  resolve   to   live
    industriously and without committing criminal offences in  the  future.
    Given that the counterbalance to the  public  interest  in  removing  a
    serious criminal is the right of a British citizen child to  live  with
    her mother in her country of nationality I can see no basis for finding
    that the Claimant's removal is necessary even if the  Advocate  General
    has gone too far in codifying the non EU national's rights  as  clearly
    as been done in the opinion.

33. Clearly if the opinion is followed then the Secretary of  State's  case
    is entirely hopeless.  There is no way that the  evidence  relied  upon
    would support a finding the claimant was a present threat but even if a
    lesser test applies  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  get  round  the
    decision in Zambrano.

34. It should be remembered that this appeal was not allowed because of the
    conduct of the claimant but because the judge found, I find  correctly,
    that EU law recognises the right of  this  EU  national  child  in  her
    particular circumstances to live  with  her  mother  in  the  EU.   The
    decision does not mean that the claimant can never be removed but it is
    hard to see how she can be removed lawfully  in  the  minority  of  the
    claimant's daughter unless the law changes.

35. In all the circumstances I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal  and
    I dismiss the cross appeal because it shows no material error.

    Decision

36. The Secretary of State's appeal  is  dismissed.  The  claimant's  cross
    appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 February 2016               |

