
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01308/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 1 December 2015                    |                 On 4 January 2016    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                   Mr S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
As a protection claim, it is appropriate to make a direction.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, Counsel instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who entered the United Kingdom
    on 29 May 1998 and  claimed  asylum.   He  had  an  earlier  appeal  in
    relation to his asylum claim in 1999 which was ultimately  refused  and
    he became appeal rights exhausted.  In 2005 he submitted a human rights
    claim which was similarly refused and a further appeal was dismissed.

 2. Following the commission of a number of offences on  6  September  2010
    the appellant was notified of his liability to deportation under the UK
    Borders Act 2007.  He claims that his  case  is  an  exception  to  the
    automatic deportation regime on the basis that removal would breach his
    human rights and that he is entitled to protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.

 3. The Appellant was subsequently notified formally of  his  liability  to
    deportation with his asylum claim being certified under Section  72  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   That  certification
    has led to the main error of law which is alleged in  relation  to  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Judge's approach to the  appeal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Thanki  on  19  December  2014  and
    dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  13  January   2015   ("the
    Decision").  At [76] to [88] of the  Decision,  the  Judge  upheld  the
    certification.  There is no challenge to that finding.  However, having
    considered that by reason of section 72 of the 2002 Act, the  Appellant
    was rightly excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention, the
    Judge failed to go on to consider whether there  would  be  a  risk  on
    return such as to engage Article 3 of the ECHR.

 4. Mr Deller very properly did not submit strongly that this  was  not  an
    error of law.  It appears from [28] of the Decision that the Judge  was
    aware  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  included  a  challenge  to   the
    Respondent's decision on the basis of humanitarian  protection  and  it
    was incumbent on him to go further and to consider whether there  would
    be a risk on return.

 5. Ms Pinder properly accepts that following Devaseelan the starting point
    for the First-tier Tribunal Judge is the decision of  the  Tribunal  in
    relation to the earlier asylum appeal but as  she  rightly  points  out
    that was some considerable time ago and events in Sri Lanka have  moved
    on apace since then.

 6. When granting permission to appeal, First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    noted that there did appear to be an error of law in  relation  to  the
    Article 3 risk and observed that  the  other  grounds  probably  lacked
    merit.  I certainly agree with that assessment in terms of  the  ground
    relating to Article 8 ECHR.  However, Mr Deller accepts that Article  8
    would need to be looked at as at the date of any further hearing in any
    event and there would be no  point  in  preserving  findings  for  that
    reason.

 7. In relation to the statelessness ground, Ms Pinder may  have  a  better
    argument that there is an error of law in the Decision at [89] to  [96]
    because it does appear that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    consider the Appellant's own evidence on this  point.   The  Judge  may
    also have erred (and I would put it no higher than that),  in  relation
    to the burden of proof. However, Mr  Deller  accepted  that  there  was
    little point in seeking to preserve the  statelessness  findings  given
    the overlap with the risk on return issue.  As he rightly  points  out,
    however, since this  is  a  criminal  deportation  case,  even  if  the
    Appellant could establish that he was stateless as a  matter  of  fact,
    that may not lead to a grant of leave.

 8. Both parties were agreed that, having found an error of law,  I  should
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  it  to  be  considered
    afresh.  As indicated, no findings are preserved.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.
I set aside the Decision
I remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal for re-hearing.   No  findings
are preserved



Signed[pic]                     Date 18 December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


