
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01706/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2019                   |On 02 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                     D L
                        (by his litigation friend BD)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:
For the Appellant/Respondent:       Ms G. O'Riley, Kesar & Co Solicitors
(Bromley)
For the Respondent/Appellant:       Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This case involves appeals to the Upper Tribunal by both parties.  As
such, it is convenient to refer to them as they were before the First-tier
Tribunal.

2.   The appellant (DL) appealed the respondent's (SSHD) decision dated 22
August 2014 to refuse a protection claim and to refuse a human rights claim
in the context of an application to revoke a deportation order.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Welsh ("the judge") promulgated a decision on 8 March 2019
in which she dismissed the appellant's appeal insofar as it relied on
Refugee Convention grounds but allowed the appeal insofar as it relied on
human rights grounds. Both parties appeal those respective parts of the
decision.

Error of law (human rights)

3.   We begin with the Secretary of State's appeal against the human rights
aspect of the decision.  The grounds of appeal essentially make a single
point.  The respondent seeks to challenge the judge's findings relating to
the appellant's medical condition (schizophrenia).  There is no dispute
between the parties that the appellant suffers from a severe and enduring
mental illness.  The Secretary of State argues that this condition, taken
alone, was not enough to meet the particularly high threshold outlined in
the line of authorities including D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR, N v SSHD [2005]
UKHL 31, Bensaid v UK (2001) EHRR 205 and SSHD v MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA
Civ 279.

4.   The Secretary of State disagrees with the judge's conclusion in
relation to the medical claim. We find that it is not necessary to go into
any detail as to whether those conclusions amount to an error of law
because the judge made more than one finding relating to Article 3.  The
first finding related to the N line of authorities at [119] of the
decision.  The second finding at [141] appeared to relate to risk of
serious harm from others. A third discrete finding was made in relation to
Article 3 suicide risk from [142-148]. The Secretary of State's grounds
only go to the first aspect of the judge's assessment and did not challenge
any of the other findings relating to Article 3.

5.   Although we will have something further to say about the findings at
[141], there has been no challenge to the judge's findings relating to
suicide risk.  At [142] the judge referred to the correct authority in J v
SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  She concluded that there was a high risk that
the appellant was likely to commit suicide if he returned to the DRC and
that there would therefore be a real risk that removal would breach his
Article 3 rights.  The judge made the decision with reference to the
medical evidence, which supported her conclusion that the appellant was at
high risk of suicide if he returned to the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC).  The judge considered evidence relating to previous suicide
attempts.  She also considered the suggestion that this was learned
behaviour but rejected the submission at [147] with reasons that were amply
open to her on the evidence.

6.   At [148] the judge took a structured approach to the factors outlined
in the Court of Appeal decision in J.  She accepted the evidence of
Professor Katona and Dr Stevens that people with schizophrenia are at
markedly increased risk of suicide. She accepted the evidence which showed
that the appellant responded to stress by self-harming and attempts to
commit suicide.  The judge took into account the fact that the appellant
had a subjective fear of return because he believes that his mental health
problems would be seen as witchcraft or possession. She concluded that it
was a legitimate fear in light of the evidence which showed that there is a
widespread belief in the DRC that people who are suffering from psychosis
are possessed.

7.   The judge considered the fact that the appellant would have no family
to turn to in the DRC who would be able to support him or to assist him to
seek treatment.  The judge also found that if the appellant became unwell,
that it was highly unlikely that he would seek treatment, or there was a
possibility that he might reject treatment if it was offered.  She
concluded that the psychiatric facilities in DRC were not capable of
reducing the suicide risk. For reasons that were open to her make on the
evidence, she concluded that the appellant would be at risk of Article 3
treatment because he was at high risk of suicide if returned to the DRC.

8.   Mr Kotas accepted that the J line of authorities is a discrete Article
3 issue, which is separate to the line of authority relating to medical
cases. For this reason alone, any error in the assessment of the N line of
authorities would not have made any material difference to the outcome of
the human rights appeal.

Error of law (Refugee Convention)

9.   Turning to the appellant's appeal, he asserts that the judge failed to
adequately consider the risk on return insofar as it related to an
assessment of the likelihood of persecution under the Refugee Convention.
It seems clear from the decision that the judge, in assessing the Refugee
Convention element of the claim, only considered the risk as it related to
serious harm from traditional healers [114].  Although the judge only
considered that narrow issue under the heading of the Refugee Convention,
she went on to consider wider issues that might relate to the risk on
return under the heading relating to Article 3.  There may well be an
overlap in those assessments.

10.  We find that the judge's findings relating to risk on return from
others and/or as a result of the cumulative effect of discrimination
because of mental illness were unclear and contradictory. At [118] of the
decision under the heading "Article 3: destitution/mental health" the judge
concluded that there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that people
with schizophrenia are the targets of discrimination. Nor was there any
evidence that people who were mentally ill were deliberately targeted for
abuse by the rest of society.  She considered the expert report of Dr Kodi,
who referred to people who were mentally ill being beaten and chased in the
streets. She concluded that the evidence suggested that those who were
mentally ill were more likely to become homeless and destitute. It was not
because of their illness but because of their social position that they
became isolated and therefore vulnerable to abuse. At [141] the judge
found:

"I accept the evidence of Professor Katona in his report of 8 April 2018
that the appellant's seriously declining psychiatric situation in the DRC
would be obvious to anyone who saw him because his behaviour would be
'floridly abnormal'.  For example, prior to being sectioned in September
2017 he had been smashing cars because he believed God had told him to do
so.  Once in detention, he was placing his hands on strangers believing
that he was healing them.  Prior to being sectioned in the psychiatric
intensive care ward at Newham University Hospital, where he was interviewed
by Professor Katona in April 2018, he had been arrested having attended
City Airport in London, stripped naked and was shouting 'I belong to
Christ.  Will anyone accept me'.  I accept the evidence of Professor Katona
that this would make him vulnerable to abuse.  Indeed, in my view, expert
evidence on this point is not necessary.  He would be behaving in an
overtly bizarre way and living on the streets.  In those circumstances, I
consider it obvious that he would be at great risk of serious harm from
others."

11.  The use of the phrase 'serious harm' implies that the judge was
applying the relevant test for Article 3 but her conclusion in [141]
appears to conflict with her finding at [118] that there was no evidence to
suggest that people who suffered from schizophrenia were subject to
discrimination or targeted for abuse. Combined with the absence of any
cumulative assessment of persecution on human rights grounds in the section
of the decision relating to the Refugee Convention, which was confined
solely to an assessment of whether he would be at risk from traditional or
church healers, we conclude that the judge's findings in relation to risk
on return insofar as they related either to persecution or to serious harm
under Article 3 were sufficiently unclear to amount to an error of law.
Those findings must be set aside.

12.  It follows that the judge's findings relating to the assessment of
humanitarian protection is also unsustainable.  Having failed to make
sustainable findings relating to risk on return, the issue of whether the
judge made an error of law in relation to her assessment of whether any
risk arose as a result of the appellant's membership of a particular social
group for the purpose of the Refugee Convention might not seem relevant.
However, in considering the scope of the issues that the Tribunal might
need to remake we find that we do need to determine whether there was an
error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

13.  The judge concluded at [102] that mental illness did not amount to a
particular social group for the purpose of the Refugee Convention.  She
gave two reasons for doing so.  We find errors in both of those reasons.
The first reason, was that the category of mental illness was too broad,
encompassing as it does, many different conditions which might have
different causes.  In doing so the judge failed to take into account the
evidence that she had already considered, most notably at [114], which
indicated that people who exhibited the kind of bizarre behaviour arising
from psychotic illness are widely held to be possessed.  In dismissing
mental illness as too broad a category, the judge failed to consider that
psychotic illness is likely to be a more readily identifiable category of
mental illness.

14.  The second reason given for concluding that mental illness did not
constitute a particular social group, was that a mental health condition is
not immutable, and that some conditions could be controlled or managed, at
least in part, by medication and therapy.  However, in making the second
finding the judge failed, in our assessment, to adequately consider the
evidence that she had already accepted, which showed that the appellant
suffers from a severe and enduring mental illness and that it is unlikely
he will ever recover. Even in receipt of treatment in the UK his condition
is severe, and his behaviour is overtly abnormal. He needs the assistance
of a litigation friend to conduct these proceedings. Nor did the judge
consider her own finding that the appellant was unlikely to seek treatment
in the DRC and was likely to exhibit bizarre behaviour that would come to
the attention of others.

15.  For these reasons, we conclude that the judge's findings relating to
the assessment of whether people suffering from severe and enduring
psychotic disorders could amount to a particular social group for the
purpose of the Refugee Convention was flawed and must also be set aside.

Conclusion (error of law)

16.  In relation to the respondent's appeal, we  conclude  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of  law
    that would have made any material difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal insofar as it related to Article 3 of the European Convention.

17.  In relation to the appellant's appeal, we conclude that the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of errors of law regarding to the
    assessment of risk on return from others and whether such risk might be
    for a Convention reason. Those parts of the  decision  are  set  aside.
    Where we refer to the judge's findings in our remaking  decision,  they
    are preserved, unless stated otherwise.

Remaking

18.  The appellant is a citizen of the DRC who left the country when he  was
    four years old. The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  he  is
    socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK  and  that  he  has  no
    experience of living in the DRC as an adult. The  judge  was  satisfied
    that he has no family or friends to turn to for practical or  emotional
    support. He is unable to read or write in French or Lingala and  claims
    that he does not speak Lingala or any other local language. The  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the necessary medical treatment would  not  be
    available in the DRC, and even if  it  was,  without  family  or  other
    support the appellant was unlikely to access it, or he  was  likely  to
    refuse treatment. We bear in mind that, even in the UK where  treatment
    is available, the appellant's condition is  severe  and  enduring.  The
    appellant  still  requires  periods  of  hospitalisation  to  safeguard
    himself and others. In other words, his condition is so severe that  he
    can still become overtly unwell even with family support and  treatment
    in the UK. The medical evidence and the background evidence relating to
    the conditions that people with psychotic disorders  face  in  the  DRC
    supported the judge's conclusion that there was a real  risk  that  the
    appellant's condition would worsen significantly  on  return  and  that
    this in turn would lead to a real risk that he would  become  homeless,
    isolated and vulnerable to abuse.

19.  The background evidence shows that people suffering from  disabilities,
    including  people  who  suffer  from  severe  and  enduring   psychotic
    disorders, face a range of ill-treatment  in  the  DRC.  The  US  State
    Department report for  2017  states  that  the  constitution  prohibits
    discrimination against persons with disabilities,  but  the  government
    does not enforce the provisions effectively. People  with  disabilities
    often find it difficult to obtain employment, education and  government
    services. Disability groups reported extensive  social  stigmatisation,
    including children with disabilities being expelled  from  their  homes
    and being accused of witchcraft.

20.  A report from IRIN dated 05  January  2016  outlined  the  shortage  of
    adequate mental health  treatment  in  the  DRC.  It  states  that,  in
    addition to the  scarcity  of  service  provisions,  there  is  also  a
    prevailing social stigma associated with mental health  problems.  When
    confronted with symptoms of mental disorders, many believe them  to  be
    associated with witchcraft and sorcery.  Rather  than  seek  treatment,
    people turn to traditional healers. The fact that  psychotic  disorders
    are commonly seen to be caused by witchcraft or sorcery in the  DRC  is
    consistent with many other reports contained in the bundle and with the
    expert evidence of Dr Kodi, whose expertise has not been disputed.

21.  The bundle contains an article  entitled  "Barriers  to  Mental  Health
    Treatment within the Congolese Population" by Stephanie Espinoza  dated
    October 2016. The source of the article and the expertise of the author
    are unclear. Nevertheless, the information is broadly  consistent  with
    Dr Kodi's evidence. The article  discusses  some  of  the  barriers  to
    mental health treatment in the context of ongoing conflict in the  DRC.
    The article considers a study undertaken in North Kivu about  attitudes
    to mental illness. The study suggested  that  people  in  the  DRC  are
    likely to distinguish between bizarre and unusual behaviour  associated
    with  psychotic  disorders,  which  is  usually  viewed  as  having   a
    supernatural cause, and other  types  of  non-psychotic  mental  health
    disorders, such as depression, which are more likely to  be  viewed  as
    social or spiritual problems.  In  the  case  of  psychotic  disorders,
    traditional or church healers are likely to be approached. In the  case
    of non-psychotic disorders, it is more likely  that  medical  treatment
    would be sought, or such conditions were expected  to  improve  through
    social and emotional support from the community.

22.  In his most recent report dated 06 January  2019,  Dr  Kodi  emphasised
    the lack of mental health services in the DRC. As a  result,  the  vast
    majority of people with mental health problems are  left  to  fend  for
    themselves on the streets and run the risk of being victimised  by  the
    public. As in other countries, society recognises mental health  issues
    by a person's abnormal behaviour. He says that the appellant is  likely
    to "face deep-seated stigma, discrimination and vilification in the DRC
    because of his mental health condition". He is likely  to  suffer  ill-
    treatment and even the risk of being killed. In the  footnotes  to  the
    report he cites the case of a 15-year-old Congolese boy who was  killed
    in the UK by his older sister and her boyfriend because  they  believed
    that he was bewitched, as an example of societal attitudes  that  might
    endure in the Congolese community even outside the DRC.  He went on  to
    say:

         "23. ... A person exhibiting signs of  psychiatric  problems,  like
         [DL], is indeed considered to be bewitched and a  potential  menace
         to  the  whole  society.  Such  a  person  is,  therefore,  usually
         subjected to inhuman treatment. They could be chained,  beaten  and
         undergo other violent treatment to cast the devil out of them.

         24.  People with mental health  problems  are  usually  ostracized,
         even by their own families, because of the stigma that is  attached
         to mental problems. They are left to fend for themselves and end up
         wandering and sleeping in the streets where  they  are  beaten  and
         chased by the public. In rare cases, those with caring parents  are
         taken to churches where prayers are said for them to  overcome  the
         devil in them."

23.  In considering whether the DRC authorities might be able to  offer  the
    appellant protection, Dr  Kodi's  evidence  is  consistent  with  other
    background evidence. He said:

         "40. There are no government agencies or non-state actors that  can
         offer meaningful assistance and protection to civilians, let  alone
         destitute and vulnerable people....

         41.   Against  this  background,  it  is  unlikely  that  the   DRC
         government would provide assistance or protection to somebody  like
         [DL], who would very likely be perceived as hostile to  the  ruling
         regime of President Joseph Kabila because of his  association  with
         the UDPS through his father, as explained  above.  In  my  opinion,
         even if he is not arrested  on  arrival  at  the  airport  and  was
         allowed to pass through - which, as  explained  above,  I  consider
         would be unlikely in the current climate - he would be left to fend
         for himself in the context of  this  [increasing]  instability  and
         rising levels of generalized violence and conflict. I consider that
         he would be at significant  risk  of  being  subjected  to  serious
         abuses by the police, the public and the numerous street  gangs  in
         Kinshasa given his mental illness. Because of his lack  of  fluency
         in any of the national languages of the DRC, his lack of family  or
         other support network and his mental conditions,  he  would  likely
         have less access to assistance than the IDPs.

         42.  The police and other national security forces of the DRC have,
         for decades, been responsible for all kinds  of  crimes  and  human
         rights abuses, including rape, which largely  go  unpunished.  They
         have regularly been accused of committing horrendous  human  rights
         violations against civilians. There is a long and  enduring  legacy
         of impunity going back several decades to  the  days  of  President
         Mobutu's regime (1965-1997). The justice  system  is  weak,  under-
         resourced and notoriously corrupt ..."

24.  Dr Kodi's overall conclusion was:

         "53.  Although  limited  treatment  of  rather  poor  quality   for
         psychiatric problems is available, according to  the  World  Health
         Organization (WHO), its cost is  extremely  high  compared  to  the
         average earnings of the Congolese people.  It  would  therefore  be
         unlikely  that  [DL]  would  have  access  to  adequate  level   of
         healthcare that he would  badly  need,  especially  if  his  mental
         conditions deteriorate. Instead, I consider he would  face  a  real
         risk of violence and abuse by reason of his  mental  illness,  from
         the general public in DRC  due  to  the  strong  stigmatisation  of
         mental health issues  and  widespread  beliefs  that  it  indicates
         demonic possession etc. There is no effective state protection from
         such violence as set out above. Indeed,  I  consider  that  if  his
         mental health issues drew him to the attention of the police as  it
         has done in the UK, there is a high risk of him being detained  and
         ill-treated. Additionally, there is a real risk that he would  face
         being  beaten,  chained  and  otherwise  ill-treated  as  part   of
         traditional "treatments" for  mental  illness  which  are  commonly
         imposed  by  religious  leaders  and  shamans  in  DRC  given   the
         prevalence of such practices  and  belief  in  it,  which  is  also
         approved by the Congolese government, as set out above.  I  further
         consider that the stigmatisation of mental illness  in  combination
         with the severity of symptoms [DL] is recorded  as  suffering  will
         lead to  him  being  ostracised  from  society,  unable  to  access
         employment or basic resources including shelter and  food,  and  so
         becoming destitute. In the context of the increasing  tensions  and
         violence in the country at present, as set out  above,  I  consider
         this would be an extremely dangerous position for him to be in."

25.  We are satisfied that the evidence shows that  there  is  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that the appellant would be  returned  to  DRC  in
    circumstances where he is unlikely to  receive  the  necessary  medical
    treatment, which would in turn lead to a marked  deterioration  in  his
    mental health. There is a real risk that he would be rendered destitute
    and homeless in the absence of any familial or  state  support.  It  is
    likely that the behaviour that he would exhibit  as  a  result  of  his
    psychotic disorder would bring him to the attention of the  police  and
    other members of society. The evidence shows there  is  a  widely  held
    belief in the DRC, which is  likely  to  extend  to  the  attitudes  of
    members of the authorities, that people who exhibit abnormal  behaviour
    arising from psychotic disorders are possessed  or  bewitched.  We  are
    satisfied that the evidence shows on the low standard of proof that the
    appellant is likely to be vulnerable to arrest  and  detention  by  the
    authorities. Indeed, he has been arrested on several occasions  in  the
    UK when he has  been  floridly  unwell,  which  is  what  prompted  the
    respondent's decision to deport. The background  evidence  relating  to
    the conditions in the DRC continues to show that detention carries with
    it a real risk of serious ill-treatment.

26.  Even if the appellant's behaviour did not attract arrest and  detention
    by the authorities the evidence indicates that there is real risk  that
    he would face a range of possible ill-treatment  from  members  of  the
    public   including    physical    abuse,    exploitation,    ostracism,
    discrimination and severe stigmatisation.

27.  We turn to consider how these  facts  fit  within  the  relevant  legal
    framework. It is trite law  that  the  threshold  for  persecution  may
    depend on the individual characteristics of the person  concerned.  The
    more vulnerable the person the more readily the threshold will be  met.
    The appellant is a particularly vulnerable individual who has expressed
    a fear of ill-treatment if returned to the DRC where he believes people
    will view him as possessed. His fear is well-founded and  supported  by
    the background evidence.

28.  Acts of persecution must be sufficiently serious  by  their  nature  or
    repetition as to constitute a severe violation of basic  human  rights.
    We are satisfied that the evidence shows that the risk  of  arrest  and
    detention carries with it a risk of ill-treatment that is  sufficiently
    serious to amount  to  persecution  for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee
    Convention or serious harm for the purpose of Article 3 of the European
    Convention. We are also satisfied that the  ongoing  risk  that  he  is
    likely to face  as  a  result  of  societal  attitudes  towards  people
    suffering from psychotic disorders,  in  particular,  are  sufficiently
    serious, when taken together, to amount to a  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm. The appellant is at  risk  of  physical  abuse,  but  the
    cumulative effect of ongoing discrimination, ostracism and  deep-seated
    stigmatisation is also capable of amounting to a serious  violation  of
    the appellant's human rights.

29.  We are satisfied that the evidence shows that there is likely to  be  a
    risk  of  arrest,  detention  and  ill-treatment  by  members  of   the
    authorities if the appellant is unwell and behaving in an abnormal way.
    Even if the risk only emanated from  non-state  actors  of  persecution
    within Congolese society, the evidence shows that  the  authorities  do
    not enforce laws relating to discrimination and are likely to be unable
    or unwilling to  provide  effective  protection  to  a  person  in  the
    appellant's position. Widespread societal discrimination towards people
    who suffer from psychotic disorders is likely to extend to many members
    of the authorities.

30.  For the reasons given above, we conclude that the appellant has a well-
    founded fear of persecution or serious harm if returned to the DRC.

31.  We turn to consider the thornier issue of whether  there  is  a  causal
    link between the treatment that the appellant is likely to  suffer  and
    one of the five  Convention  reasons.  We  were  not  referred  to  any
    authorities, and are not aware of any reported decisions,  in  which  a
    person who is suffering from a mental health issue has been found to be
    a member of a 'particular social group' for the purpose of the  Refugee
    Convention.

32.  Article 10(1)(d) of the Qualification Directive  states  that  a  group
    shall be considered to form a 'particular social group' if  members  of
    the group share an innate  or  unchangeable  characteristic,  a  common
    background that cannot be changed or a shared characteristic or  belief
    that is so fundamental to a person's identity that  the  person  should
    not be forced to renounce it.  In  addition,  the  group  must  have  a
    distinct identity in the relevant country, because it is  perceived  as
    being different by the surrounding society.

33.  The House of Lords in Islam v SSHD and R (ex parte  Shah)  [1999]  INLR
    144 made clear that the concept of discrimination in matters  affecting
    fundamental rights and freedoms is central to a proper understanding of
    the Refugee Convention. The court found that a particular social  group
    did not need to be cohesive  nor  its  members  interdependent.  It  is
    distinguished by an immutable characteristic and should not be  defined
    by reference to shared persecution.

34.  The First-tier Tribunal judge touched on why it might be  difficult  to
    define a social group with reference to mental illness. There is a wide
    range of mental health conditions. Some will not be apparent  to  other
    members of society. Others might be treatable  and  constitute  limited
    periods of illness. A short period of illness could not be described as
    an innate characteristic. To this extent she was right to conclude that
    people suffering from mental illness was too broad  a  category  to  be
    defined as a particular social group for the  purpose  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.

35.  The House of Lords made clear that one must first consider the  society
    in which the social group is  said  to  be  drawn.  In  this  case  the
    evidence relating to the DRC makes clear that the essential element  of
    discrimination  and  stigmatisation  against  people  who  suffer  from
    disabilities, including mental illness, is present.  In  particular,  a
    distinction can be drawn between those who exhibit  abnormal  behaviour
    as a result of  psychotic  illness,  who  are  seen  to  be  possessed,
    requiring intervention by traditional healers,  and  those  who  suffer
    from other forms of mental illness with less overt  symptoms,  such  as
    depression, who are more likely to be seen as unwell, requiring medical
    treatment or social support.

36.  We recognised that a potential social group of people who  suffer  from
    psychotic illness might still include a wide range of  characteristics.
    Some people may suffer from an episode of psychotic illness and make  a
    full recovery. Others may have an enduring psychotic disorder which can
    be controlled to some extent by treatment. Others, like the  appellant,
    may  have  severe  and   enduring   psychotic   disorders   which   are
    characterised  by  repeated  psychotic  episodes   involving   abnormal
    behaviour even when treatment is available.

37.  The evidence relating to attitudes towards  psychotic  illness  in  the
    DRC shows that discriminatory attitudes are likely to be  prevalent  in
    any case where a person is unwell and  exhibiting  abnormal  behaviour.
    From  a  societal  perspective,  the  perception  is  that  all  people
    suffering  from  psychotic  episodes  are  likely  to  have  an  innate
    characteristic i.e. the perception that the illness is associated  with
    witchcraft or has some other supernatural cause.

38.  However, due to the difficulty in defining a social  group  that  might
    include  some  members  that  do  not  have  an  innate  and  immutable
    characteristic, for the purpose of  this  case,  a  narrower  group  of
    'people suffering from a severe and enduring psychotic disorder' can be
    defined. People like the appellant, who will never recover  fully  from
    their illness, can be described  as  having  an  innate  and  immutable
    characteristic. They are perceived  as  an  identifiable  social  group
    which is discriminated against in the DRC in a way  that  goes  to  the
    core of their fundamental human rights.

39.  The appellant's condition is likely to deteriorate if  he  is  returned
    to the DRC where he would be unable to access treatment and  is  likely
    to become floridly unwell. It is likely that he will exhibit  the  kind
    of  abnormal  behaviour  that  would  attract  the  attention  of   the
    authorities or non-state actors of persecution. Unlike  the  First-tier
    Tribunal we do not agree that he will be  vulnerable  to  ill-treatment
    solely because he is likely  to  become  destitute  and  homeless.  The
    evidence shows that the reason why  he  would  be  vulnerable  to  ill-
    treatment is  because  he  would  be  perceived  as  a  person  who  is
    possessed. 'People suffering  from  a  severe  and  enduring  psychotic
    disorder' are subject to a range of possible ill-treatment in  the  DRC
    including  physical  abuse,  ostracism,   discrimination   and   severe
    stigmatisation. Even if people living on the street are more vulnerable
    to abuse it matters not if there are mixed motives for ill-treatment if
    at least one motive is for a Convention reason: see  Sivakumar  v  SSHD
    [2003] INLR 457. In another country, people  suffering  from  the  same
    illness may be viewed differently and  might  not  be  construed  as  a
    particular social  group.  However,  we  concluded  that  the  evidence
    relating to attitudes towards psychotic illness in the DRC  shows  that
    the persecution the appellant fears is likely to be for reasons of  his
    membership of a particular social group for the purpose of the  Refugee
    Convention.



Conclusion (remaking)

40.  The appellant was recognised as a refugee in line with  his  father  in
    2002. He was recognised as a refugee prior to the coming into force  of
    the Qualification Directive  (2004/83/EC)  and  was  therefore  granted
    'Convention status' as opposed to 'European refugee status':  see  Essa
    (revocation of protection status appeals) [2018] UKUT  00244  and  Dang
    (Refugee - query revocation - Article 3) [2013] UKUT 43. In a  decision
    dated 15 May 2012 the respondent found  that  the  appellant's  refugee
    status had ceased  for  the  purpose  of  Article  1C  of  the  Refugee
    Convention. On 30 May 2012 the respondent made a decision that  section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  ("UKBA  2007")  applied  and  made  a
    deportation order. The respondent concluded that the  appellant  failed
    to show that he had a current well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  The
    protection claim was not certified with reference to section 72 of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA   2002").   A
    subsequent appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.

41.  The decision that is the subject of this appeal is a decision dated  22
    August 2014 to refuse a  protection  and  human  rights  claim  in  the
    context of a decision to refuse to revoke the  deportation  order.  The
    issue of cessation was dealt with previously and formed no part of  the
    current decision. If the appellant can show a current well-founded fear
    of persecution, he would  fall  within  the  exception  to  deportation
    contained in section 33(2)(a) UKBA 2007.

42.  For the reasons given above we conclude that the appellant has a  well-
    founded fear  of  persecution  for  reasons  of  his  membership  of  a
    particular social group. His removal in  consequence  of  the  decision
    would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.

43.  For the same reasons, we also conclude  that  the  appellant's  removal
    would give rise to a real risk of serious harm within  the  meaning  of
    Article 3 of the European Convention. The First-tier  Tribunal  finding
    that the appellant is at real  risk  of  serious  harm  on  grounds  of
    suicide risk stands.  We  conclude  that  the  appellant's  removal  in
    consequence of the decision would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 ("HRA 1998").

DECISION

Parts of the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of  errors  of
law

The relevant parts of the decision are remade

The appeal is ALLOWED on Refugee Convention and human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]    Date 27 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
