
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01544/2014

                                DA/01523/2014

                                DA/01524/2014

                                DA/01525/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 February 2016 & 8 April 2016       |On 27 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            SRB (FIRST appellant)
                            Ng (SECOND appellant)
                           SAHB (THIRD appellant)
                           SHB (FOURTH appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  On  11  May  2012  the  first
    appellant was  convicted  at  the  Manchester  Crown  Court  for  money
    laundering and a fraud offence and sentenced to   four  years  and  six
    months' imprisonment. The second appellant  is  the  first  appellant's
    wife and the third and fourth appellants are their children.

 2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  20  September  2001
    with leave to remain as a student.  The remaining appellants (and their
    two elder children) joined the  appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2001.  As at the date of the hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    the third appellant has been granted indefinite leave to remain by  the
    Secretary of State whilst leave to remain for a period of two years has
    been granted to the third appellant (it appears that  indefinite  leave
    was not granted because the third appellant had not undertaken  a  Life
    in the United Kingdom test).

 3. The second appellant claims that she has resided lawfully in the United
    Kingdom for a period in excess of ten years (see paragraph 276B  of  HC
    395).   The appellants argue that, if the second appellant  should  not
    be deported because she has acquired a right  to  indefinite  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276B, then her status would, in turn, affect any
    consideration  of  the  circumstances  of  the  first   appellant,   in
    particular as to whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  first  and
    second appellants to be separated and for the  first  appellant  to  be
    separated by deportation from the third and fourth appellants.

 4. Paragraph 365 of HC 395 provides that the Secretary of State "will  not
    normally decide to deport the spouse or civil  partner  of  a  deportee
    under Section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971 where ... she has qualified
    for settlement in her own right."

 5. At the first hearing on 19 February 2016, I found that the panel of the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by failing to take  these  matters
    into account in its analysis.  The Secretary of State argues that these
    matters had not been raised before the First-tier Tribunal  but  it  is
    clear that they were apparent on the face of the papers.

 6. At the resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 8  April  2016,  Mr
    Malik, for the appellants, submitted that it was not necessary for  the
    Upper Tribunal to make findings as to the  entitlement  of  the  second
    appellant to remain living in the United Kingdom under the  Immigration
    Rules or, indeed, to make findings  as  to  the  merits  of  the  first
    appellant's appeal.  Rather,  in  remaking  the  decision  against  the
    original decisions of the Secretary of State, Mr Malik submitted that I
    should find that the deportation orders were not in accordance with the
    law because the Secretary of State had failed  to  address  the  issues
    arising out of the immigration status of the second, third  and  fourth
    appellants and how their status might, in turn, impact upon  the  first
    appellant's attempts to resist his deportation.

 7. Mr Whitwell, for the Secretary of State, argued that the appeal of  the
    first  appellant  could  be  separated  from  that  of  the   remaining
    appellants and should be dealt with now at the resumed hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 8. Whilst there is some force in Mr Whitwell's argument, I find  that  the
    most appropriate and pragmatic way to proceed, having found an error of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal determination, is for the Upper Tribunal
    to allow the appeals of all four appellants against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decisions to the limited extent that the matters  are  remitted
    to the Secretary of State for her to consider the  deportations  afresh
    in the light of the grants of  leave  made  to  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants and to the second appellant's claim  for  leave  to  remain.
    Such a course of action will enable the Secretary of State to  consider
    the matter and make fresh decisions on the basis of an accurate factual
    matrix.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  4
    November 2014 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.
    I remake the decisions.  The appeals of  the   appellants  against  the
    decisions of the Secretary of State are allowed to the  limited  extent
    that  these  matters  are  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    reconsideration and, if appropriate, for the making of fresh  decisions
    in the light of the immigration status/claimed  immigration  status  of
    the second, third and fourth appellants.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 26 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

