

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01991/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 June 2015                               |On 25 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                              DENNIS NOI NORTEY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Heybroek, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is  31  August
    1981.  He  appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  make   a
    deportation order under section 32 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  ("the
    UKBA 2007"). First-tier Tribunal Judge S.J. Clarke dismissed his appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 01 April 2015.

2.    The appellant was granted permission to appeal against  the  decision.
    The grounds of appeal argue that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred by
    starting her consideration of Article 8 with reference to  section  117
    of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002")
    rather than considering the case through the lens  of  the  immigration
    rules. The grounds go on to argue that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  then
    failed to  conduct  an  adequate  balancing  exercise.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal placed too much reliance on the respondent's guidance relating
    to the interpretation of the "unduly harsh" test contained  in  section
    117C and paragraph 399(a) and (b) of the immigration rules  and  failed
    to carry out  the  assessment  in  light  of  the  relevant  Strasbourg
    authorities. It was also argued that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    give adequate consideration to the relevant factors outlined in section
    117, the relevant case law relating to Article 8 or section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2007 ("BCIA 2007"). The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was wrong to apply a test of "excessively  severe",
    which was not supported by the wording of the immigration rules or  the
    relevant case law.

3.    The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to  determine  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law.

4.    I heard submissions from both parties, which have  been  noted  in  my
    record of proceedings and  where  relevant  are  incorporated  into  my
    findings.

Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve  the  making
    of an error of law.

6.    In this case the  First-tier  Judge  quite  clearly  stated  that  her
    starting point was section 117A-D rather than the exceptions  contained
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the immigration rules [14]. The appellant
    contends that this approach amounted to a material error  of  law.  The
    "unduly harsh" test is mentioned in section 117C(5) and the immigration
    rules. The wording of the exceptions contained in paragraph 399(a)  and
    (b)  of  the  immigration  rules  relating  to  relationships  with   a
    qualifying child or partner is slightly different but only in terms  of
    the  decision  maker  having  to  consider  additional  stages  of  the
    assessment. However, the exceptions contained in the immigration rules,
    certainly relating to  children,  are  in  essence  very  similar.  The
    central question that needs to  be  addressed  in  the  rules  and  the
    statute is whether the effect of deportation would be "unduly harsh" on
    a qualifying child.

7.    While there is authority from the Upper  Tribunal  in  Chege  (section
    117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 to suggest that it would
    be appropriate for a decision-maker to begin by considering whether  an
    appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the  exceptions  contained  in
    paragraph 399 of the immigration rules, for the reasons given above,  I
    find that the "unduly harsh" test contained in paragraph 399(a) and (b)
    and section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002 is likely to be  so  similar  that
    the mere fact that  the  First-tier  Judge  took  the  statute  as  her
    starting point did not amount to a material error of law.  In substance
    she applied the same test as the rules.

8.    I was not referred to, and am not aware of, any current  authority  on
    how the "unduly harsh"  test  should  be  applied  in  the  context  of
    deportation. The First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to paragraph  2.5.2
    of the Immigration Directorate Instructions  (Chapter  13:  criminality
    guidance in Article 8 ECHR  cases),  which  considered  the  dictionary
    definition of  the  words  "unduly"  and  "harsh".  Using  these  basic
    definitions the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that the  appellant
    had to show that the consequences of deportation would be  "excessively
    severe". Using the dictionary definition as an aid to interpretation is
    a proper approach to the initial  interpretation  of  a  provision  and
    discloses no material error on the  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

9.    It was argued that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  then  placed  undue
    weight on the respondent's interpretation of how  the  test  is  to  be
    applied as set out in paragraph 2.5.3 of  the  guidance.  The  guidance
    states:

           "The  effect  of  deportation  on  a  qualifying  partner  or  a
           qualifying child must  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the
           foreign criminal's immigration and criminal history. The greater
           the  public  interest   in   deportation,   the   stronger   the
           countervailing factors need to be  to  succeed.  The  impact  of
           deportation on a partner or child can be harsh, even very harsh,
           without being unduly harsh,  depending  on  the  extent  of  the
           public interest in deportation and of the family life affected."

10.   In addition  paragraph  3.5.2  of  the  guidance  also  sets  out  the
    following in relation to how the respondent interprets the term "unduly
    harsh":

           "When considering whether the effect on a child of  deporting  a
           foreign criminal is unduly harsh, the  strength  of  the  family
           life claim, including the best interests of the child,  must  be
           balanced against  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  As  a
           general principle, the greater the public interest in  deporting
           the foreign criminal, the more harsh the effect  of  deportation
           must be on the child before it is considered unduly harsh."

11.    The  respondent's  guidance  suggests  that  some  form  of   partial
    balancing  exercise  should  be  conducted  when  assessing  whether  a
    deportation decision would be "unduly harsh" on a partner or  child.  I
    say partial because the guidance indicates that the public interest  in
    deportation should only be balanced against the best interests  of  the
    child in assessing whether the effect on the child  is  "unduly  harsh"
    for the purpose of the rules or statute. It does not seem to  import  a
    global  balancing  exercise  which   takes   into   account   all   the
    circumstances of the case. Paragraph 6.6 of the guidance suggests  that
    it is only when the respondent moves on to consider whether  there  are
    "very compelling circumstances"  under  paragraph  398  that  she  will
    consider all the relevant factors:

           "When considering whether  or  not  there  are  very  compelling
           circumstances decision-makers must consider all relevant factors
           that the foreign criminal raises. Examples of  relevant  factors
           include:
            . the best interests of any children who will  be  affected  by
              the foreign criminal's deportation;
            . the nationalities  and  immigration  status  of  the  foreign
              criminal and his family members;
            .  the  nature  and  strength   of   the   foreign   criminal's
              relationships with family members;
            . the seriousness of the  difficulties  (if  any)  the  foreign
              criminal's partner and/or child would be likely  to  face  in
              the country to which the foreign criminal is to be deported;
            . the European Court  of  Justice  judgment  in  Ruiz  Zambrano
              (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09;
            . how long the foreign criminal has lived in the  UK,  and  the
              strength of his social, cultural and family ties to the UK;
            . the strength of the foreign criminal's ties to the country to
              which he will be deported and his ability to  integrate  into
              society there;
            . whether there are any factors which might increase the public
              interest in deportation - see section 2.3;
            . cumulative factors,  e.g.  where  the  foreign  criminal  has
              family members in the UK but his family life does not provide
              a basis for stay and he has a significant private life in the
              UK. Although under the rules family life and private life are
              considered separately, when  considering  whether  there  are
              very compelling circumstances, both private and  family  life
              must be taken into account."

12.   Unlike the clear wording of paragraph 398  of  the  immigration  rules
    the wording of the exceptions contained in paragraph 399(a) &  (b)  and
    section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002 does not, on the face of it, appear to
    import any particular wording that implies that even a partial form  of
    balancing  exercise  should  be  carried  out  when  assessing  whether
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" on a partner  or  child.  The  fact
    that wording of paragraph 398 of the immigration rules provides a  full
    balancing exercise where all the circumstances of a case  are  assessed
    is the reason why the Court of Appeal in MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA  Civ  1192  concluded  that  the  immigration  rules  relating  to
    deportation provided a "complete code" to Article 8 [44].

13.   I accept the appellant's submission that the  interpretation  set  out
    in the Immigration Directorate's Instructions is not to be  treated  as
    an aid to construction of the rules: see AH (Bangladesh) v  SSHD  [209]
    EWCA Civ 8. The way the judge sought to apply  the  admittedly  various
    and increasingly complex provisions relating to deportation does seem a
    little confused in places. In paragraph 16 she relied heavily  on  what
    the respondent says in  her  guidance  about  the  application  of  the
    "unduly harsh" test. But there would appear to  be  a  tension  between
    this and her later finding that the  "unduly  harsh"  test  requires  a
    "child focussed approach" [21]. It is also the case that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not specifically refer to relevant authorities  such
    as Uner v Netherlands [2006] ECHR 873 or Maslov v Austria  [2008]  ECHR
    546.

14.   I find that even if some criticism could be levelled at parts  of  the
    approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  relation  to  her
    assessment of the "unduly harsh"  test  it  would  not  have  made  any
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal because she did, as  a
    matter of fact, consider  all  the  factors  that  were  likely  to  be
    relevant to a  full  assessment  under  Article  8  that  was  also  in
    accordance with the relevant authorities. Even on the face of the plain
    wording the phrase "unduly harsh" imports a fairly stringent  test.  It
    is insufficient to show that the effect of deportation would merely  be
    "harsh" or even "very harsh" on a child and something more is likely to
    be required  to  show  that  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  such  that
    deportation would be unreasonable or disproportionate for  the  purpose
    of Article 8  of  the  European  Convention.  Although  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge asked  herself  if  deportation  would  be  "excessively
    severe" on the children it is quite clear from her concluding  line  in
    paragraph 22 that she was in fact applying the "unduly harsh" test.

15.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the  appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner and children.  She
    went on to consider the best  interests  of  the  children  within  the
    context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 and concluded that it would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to be brought up by both parents [20]. She took  into  account
    the serious impact that deportation would have on the children, and  in
    particular, the appellant's oldest child [21]. She  took  into  account
    the fact that they were British citizens [22] and gave  weight  to  the
    best interests of the children, which  were  "uppermost"  in  her  mind
    [22]. Alongside the sentencing remarks  [17]  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge also took  into  account  the  relatively  short  length  of  the
    sentence and the fact that it was not at the most serious  end  of  the
    scale of offences [22]. She also  took  into  account  the  appellant's
    young age when he came to the UK as well as  his  length  of  residence
    [22]. She gave adequate reasons to explain why she  didn't  think  that
    there were very significant obstacles to the appellant  being  able  to
    reintegrate in Ghana given that he still had family members there  [15-
    16].

16.   There is no current authority on how to interpret the  phrase  "unduly
    harsh" but even if  the  test  does  not  import  a  partial  balancing
    exercise it is  apparent  that  the  judge  considered,  on  the  plain
    wording, whether the effect of deportation would be "unduly  harsh"  on
    the appellant's partner and children. Even if some  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings are a little unclear in places I conclude  that  it
    makes no material difference to the outcome of the appeal.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  "very
    compelling  circumstances"  that  might  outweigh  the  strong   public
    interest in deportation of someone who had committed a criminal offence
    in the UK. She made clear that she  had  considered  all  the  relevant
    factors cumulatively but concluded that they were insufficient to  show
    "very compelling circumstances" that outweighed the public interest  in
    deportation [24]. In  other  words  she  conducted  a  full  Article  8
    proportionality assessment taking into account all the relevant facts.

17.   In light of the appellant's age on arrival in the UK,  his  length  of
    residence and his undoubtedly strong private and family ties to the UK,
    and in the context of the relatively low level of sentence and the non-
    violent nature of the crime, it is  possible  that  another  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge may have come to a different conclusion on the facts  of
    this case. However, the decision shows  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge took into account all  the  relevant  factors  and  after  having
    weighed them up concluded that the appellant's  personal  circumstances
    were not sufficiently compelling to outweigh the strong public interest
    in deportation. The  appellant  will  no  doubt  consider  it  a  harsh
    decision but I  find  that  it  was  within  the  range  of  reasonable
    responses that are open to a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  that  her
    findings could not be said to be irrational or to disclose  a  material
    error of law that might justify setting aside the decision.

18.   As such I conclude that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not involve the making of a material error on a point of law. The First-
    tier Tribunal decision shall stand.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 25 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
