

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01614/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|on 16 June 2015                       |            On 24 June 2015          |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MIROSLAW ANTONI DUL
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Knox, Hamilton Burns & Co, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Poland,  born  on  1  October  1975.   By
    notice dated 1 August 2014 the respondent decided to make an  order  to
    deport him to Poland.  Full reasons are set out in a letter of the same
    date.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge McGrade allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    determination promulgated on 6 January 2015.

 4. The SSHD's first ground of appeal to the UT is that the FtT  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for its finding that the appellant had  exercised
    treaty rights in the UK (that is to say, that he had  been  here  as  a
    worker) when there was only the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his
    partner and that had not been subjected to any scrutiny.

 5. The second ground of appeal is that the  Judge  materially  misdirected
    himself in law by finding the appellant's degree of  offending  not  to
    reach the threshold of  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of  society.   This  was
    inconsistent with the Judge's finding that he is a persistent  criminal
    who will not reform.

 6. The first ground of appeal relates to  a  point  not  critical  to  the
    outcome of the case.  The threshold for deporting the appellant is  the
    same whether he has been exercising treaty rights or not.  However,  as
    Mr Matthews pointed out, it is a  finding  based  on  only  very  vague
    assertions in the statements of the appellant and his partner  that  he
    had been working for unspecified periods for unspecified employers, not
    backed up by the evidence  which  might  have  been  expected  such  as
    employers' letters or wage slips, or relating to  payment  of  tax  and
    national insurance.  Mr Knox submitted that although the  evidence  was
    slender the Judge was entitled to find that the appellant had  been  in
    employment.  That is possibly so, and  any  error  here  would  not  by
    itself call for the determination to be set  aside.   However,  in  the
    context of my other conclusions I do not think this is a finding  which
    should be preserved for  future  proceedings,  where  findings  on  the
    appellant's employment history may have some relevance.

 7. The appellant's history of offending both  in  Poland  and  in  the  UK
    speaks for itself and need  not  be  fully  detailed  again  here.   Mr
    Matthews observed that the offending was ongoing, recent and  multiple.
    He said that the Judge failed to take into account  that  all  offences
    have victims, likely in this case to be property owners  and  insurance
    companies.  There is also extensive cost to the public in detecting and
    prosecuting offences, detaining the appellant, social work involvement,
    and so on.  The Judge thought that the appellant's offending in the  UK
    was less serious than in Poland but that might reflect the response  of
    the courts rather than the nature of  the  offences  which  were  of  a
    broadly similar nature.

 8. Mr Knox pointed out that the threshold of offending was  not  the  only
    issue which should have been considered.  There  was  evidence  of  the
    appellant being in the UK with his family comprising  his  partner  and
    their three children,  two  of  whom  were  born  here.   Even  if  the
    threshold had been reached there was a proportionality exercise  to  be
    carried out regarding the merits of his removal.  Such an exercise  was
    contained in the respondent's reasons letter.  It was disputed  by  the
    appellant but the matter was not analysed  in  the  determination.   Mr
    Knox submitted, somewhat hopefully, that it might be inferred from  the
    determination that the Judge had carried out the  proportionality  test
    and come to the conclusion  that  the  degree  of  integration  of  the
    appellant and his family in the UK outweighed the  public  interest  in
    his deportation.

 9. I reserved my determination.

10. The question posed  by  the  regulations  is  whether  the  appellant's
    conduct represents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

11. One of the fundamental interests of society must be its protection from
    offences of dishonesty.  Indisputably the threat the appellant presents
    is genuine and present.  The Judge's decision appears to  be  based  on
    finding the threat not to be "sufficiently  serious".   That  criterion
    must relate to the level of the threat.  It is not a  requirement  that
    the offending should be at the more serious end of the criminal scale.

12. There may be cases  where  minor  and  infrequent  offending,  although
    likely to be repeated,  does  not  amount  to  a  sufficiently  serious
    threat.  I do not see how that can be said of offences which are  above
    the trivial  level  and  where  convictions  are  incurred  on  several
    occasions  every  year:  most  recently,  in  2013,  convictions  on  7
    occasions of 10 offences; in 2014, a conviction on 24 January of a bail
    offence, sentence deferred; on 4 February, a bail offence,  admonished;
    on 10 April, possession of tools with intent to steal, imprisonment for
    three months; and on 16 May, theft by house breaking, sentence deferred
    to 24 June 2014,  outcome  unknown.   There  is  no  reasoning  in  the
    determination to justify a conclusion that such a history, coupled with
    a  finding  that  offending  would  continue,  did  not  amount  to   a
    sufficiently serious threat in terms of the Regulations.  The  findings
    point in the opposite direction.

13. Mr Matthews did not ask for the determination to be remade on the basis
    of the evidence led in the First-tier Tribunal.  He agreed that even if
    a finding of a threat at a sufficient level  were  to  be  made,  there
    would have to be a proportionality assessment which was entirely absent
    from the determination.  As noted  above,  Mr  Knox  concurred  on  the
    absence of such findings.  There is a considerable amount  of  relevant
    discussion in the respondent's decision which is not reflected  in  the
    determination.

14. The determination is set aside for absence or inadequacy  of  reasoning
    to justify its conclusion on the threat posed by the appellant, and for
    absence of consideration of further issues, including  proportionality.
    No findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)1 of the 2007 Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of  judicial  fact-finding
    necessary for the decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge McGrade.

            [pic]

            19 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




