
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01619/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 7th August 2015                   |on 16th November 2015                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              GAEL TAMUE KAMKI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tsalikis instructed by Middleweeks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge M Davies promulgated on the 5th  November  2014  in  which  the
       Judge dismissed the appellants  appeal  against  the  order  for  his
       deportation from the United Kingdom.

Background


    2. The appellant is a national of Cameroon born on the 20th May 1980. On
       26th January 2005 he made an application for entry  clearance  as  an
       EEA family member to join his wife,  a  Spanish  national  exercising
       treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

    3. Following his arrest the parties have separated and  this  is  not  a
       case in which there are issues regarding the ability of the  wife  to
       exercise her right of free movement if the appellant is removed.

    4. On 19th August 2010 the appellant was issued with a Residence Card in
       recognition of his having acquired a right of permanent residence  in
       the UK by virtue of Regulation 15 Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.
        Such status attaches to  the  individual  and  shall  only  be  lost
       through absence from the United Kingdom for a  period  exceeding  two
       consecutive years, according to the Regulations, although it has been
       suggested that in  Onuekwere  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2014] 1WLR, 30 the decision of the court was that even  a
       right of permanent residence given by  a  five  year  period  can  be
       brought to an end as a result of a criminal conviction.  This was not
       an issued explored before the Tribunal and appears  contrary  to  the
       clear provision in Article 16(4) that it was only  absence  from  the
       host Member State for a period of at least two years that could bring
       permanent residence to an end. The possibility of the removal of that
       right  by  virtue  of  conduct  serious  enough  to  justify  such  a
       consequence will have to be considered elsewhere.

    5. On 27th March 2012 the appellant was served with notice of  liability
       to deportation by reference to the EEA Regulations. In July 2014  the
       reasons of deportation letter was served. As the  appellant  and  his
       wife have separated it was conceded at  the  opening  of  the  appeal
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant  was  not
       relying on Article 8 ECHR.

    6. The deportation decision was made as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
       convictions for rape of a female over the age of 16,  sexual  assault
       on a female and sexual assault on a female  by  penetration.  In  his
       sentencing remarks His Honour Judge Smith stated:

           "Gael Kanki, you were convicted  by  the  jury  of  the  'Rape';
           'Assault by Penetration'  and  the  'Sexual  Assault'  of  Maria
           Amelia Lopez Eduardo.

           In May 2010, she was a Birmingham University student and she had
           come, with her boyfriend, to a party which you  were  having  to
           celebrate your birthday.  A great deal of alcohol  was  consumed
           by most people and in particular,  Maria  Eduardo  made  herself
           ill, with a  cocktail  of  different  drinks.   You  knew  that,
           because you were told that she had been sick and had to  be  put
           to bed.

           She was asleep and incapacitated by alcohol, when you saw her on
           the bed.  Which bed in the house it was, was of course in issue,
           but it doesn't matter.  You sexually  interfered  with  her  and
           then raped her while she was in an almost comatose state.

           You ejaculated inside her vagina, without any regard to the risk
           of her becoming pregnant. She woke  in  the  morning  and  found
           semen, which turned out to be your semen, near to her vagina and
           she  felt  completely  violated.   Her  reaction   is   entirely
           understandable; rape takes many forms and what you did,  was  to
           truly violate and use the body of a defenceless woman, for  your
           own sexual satisfaction."

    7. A sentence of six years imprisonment was passed for the Rape offence,
       a concurrent sentence of two years of the Assault by Penetration, and
       in respect of the Sexual Assault, no separate penalty.

    8. The Appellant has never accepted his guilt. It is not  disputed  that
       intercourse took  place  on  that  night  but  he  maintains  it  was
       consensual, hence the need for  a  jury  trial.  The  appellant  also
       appealed his conviction to the  Court  of  Appeal  Criminal  Division
       which is reported as Regina v Gael Tamue Kamki [2013] EWCA Civ  2335.
       It is said at paragraph 8 of that judgement: "The  ground  of  appeal
       that is raised relates to the  manner  in  which  the  learned  judge
       directed the jury on the issue  of  consent,  and  the  relevance  of
       intoxication to that issue".  The  appeal  was  dismissed  the  Court
       finding: "In our judgment, we agree with the written argument of  the
       Crown that the relevant propositions were extracted and  put  to  the
       jury in a correct  way.  The  directions  given  to  the  jury  fully
       satisfied the needs of the case  and  the  issues  the  jury  had  to
       decide".

    9. The appellant has since referred the case to the Criminal Case Review
       Commission but no outcome is known and it was accepted by Mr Tsalikis
       that the Tribunal has to approach this matter on the basis his client
       is a convicted sex offender, a rapist.

The First-tier Determination


   10. Having considered the evidence the Judge set out  the  findings  from
       paragraph 43 of  the  determination.  In  relation  to  the  risk  of
       reoffending the Judge found in paragraph 46:

           "46.   The judge's view  expressed  in  his  sentencing  remarks
                indicated that the Appellant was a low risk of  reoffending.
                What in my view is  different  now  is  represented  by  two
                stands of evidence. Firstly, for  reasons  which  have  been
                explained, the Appellant has seen fit  not  to  address  his
                offending behaviour to reduce the risk  to  members  of  the
                public.  The reason for that is that the Appellant does  not
                accept that he has committed the offences for which  he  was
                convicted.  Not only has  he  perused  an  appeal  from  his
                conviction and sentence at the Crown Court he  has  made  an
                application to the  Criminal  Cases  Review  Commission.  In
                those circumstances it is clear that  the  Offender  Manager
                was concurring with the view of the  sentencing  judge  that
                the Appellant  is  at  low  risk  of  reoffending,  properly
                concludes in my view, that whilst that risk is low the  risk
                in relation to committing  similar  offences  against  young
                females who are similarly vulnerable is high. I concur  with
                that view."

   11. In paragraph 51 it is found:

           "51.   The Appellant's relevant personal conduct  in  this  case
                was that he sexually assaulted and raped his  best  friend's
                girlfriend who was so drunk as to be unable to give any form
                of consent.  That personal conduct was carried out  for  the
                Appellant's own sexual gratification when he took  advantage
                of a woman who was particularly vulnerable.  Women  who  are
                similarly vulnerable have a right not be violated by men who
                seek to take advantage of them.  The aggravating features of
                the offence of rape which the Appellant  has  committed  was
                that he took no steps to have protected sex and  thus  there
                was a high risk to the victim that she would become pregnant
                or contract a sexually transmitted disease. The consequences
                of a pregnancy would of course be extremely severe  for  the
                victim.  She would be faced with having an  abortion  or  of
                bringing up a child which had been born after she  had  been
                violated.  There is no doubt in my mind that the Appellant's
                personal conduct represents a genuine threat as set  out  in
                the Rules. That threat at the  date  of  my  decision  is  a
                present threat taking into account  the  assessment  of  the
                risk posed by the Appellant to young vulnerable females. The
                fact that the Appellant does not accept his guilt makes that
                present threat even more  acute.  Taking  into  account  the
                nature of the offence the Appellant has  committed  and  the
                effects upon his victim that threat is sufficiently  serious
                to affect one of the fundamental interests of  society.   It
                is a fundamental interest of society that  young  vulnerable
                females who are not in  a  position  to  consent  to  sexual
                advances should be protected from being violated by men such
                as the Appellant who has been assessed as posing a high risk
                to such females."

   12. In paragraph 56 the Judge finds:

           "56.   I have concluded that whilst the Appellant may be at  low
                risk of offending any risk that does relate to him  is  high
                relating to vulnerable females."

Discussion


   13. Ground 2 of the appellants challenge seeks to argue that the decision
       to deport is based upon the rape conviction. It is  accepted  by  the
       appellant that there is nothing  erroneous  in  taking  this  as  the
       starting point but it is submitted that the Judge did not  understand
       that the decision could not be made on this conviction  as  it  is  a
       previous conviction.  Such a claim has  no  arguable  merit  and,  if
       correct, would mean it was impossible for the  respondent  to  deport
       any EU national or family member, as by definition  any  decision  to
       deport must be preceded by  a  qualifying  act  of  criminality  that
       occurred in the past. The word 'previous conviction' in this  context
       does not refer to the chronology of time but to the order of offences
       committed. It is accepted it is lawful to make a decision  to  deport
       an EU national on the basis of past offences. It must, however, be on
       the basis of the most  recent  offence  that  engages  the  power  to
       deport. In this case that was the conviction for rape  which  can  be
       properly described as being the current offence rather  than  a  past
       offence.

   14. The Directive by  Article  16  deals  with  the  right  of  permanent
       residence.  It provides by Article 16(1), so far as material:

           "Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period
           of five years in the host Member State shall have the  right  of
           permanent residence there ... "

   15. Article 16(2) refers  to  family  members  and  (3)  deals  with  how
       continuity of residence is to be affected by short absences.  We then
       come to (4) which provides - "once acquired the  right  of  permanent
       residence shall be lost only through absence  from  the  host  Member
       State for a period exceeding two consecutive years".

   16. So far as removal  is  concerned  Article  27,  so  far  as  material
       provides:

           (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter Member States  may
           restrict the freedom of movement and residence of Union citizens
           and their family members irrespective of nationality on  grounds
           of public policy,  public  security  or  public  health.   These
           grounds shall not be invoked to serve economic ends.

   17. Article 28 which is central to the  issues  arising  in  this  appeal
       provides,  under  the  heading  "Protection  against  Expulsion",  as
       follows:-

           '1.    Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds of  public
           policy or public security, the  host  Member  State  shall  take
           account of  considerations  such  as  how  long  the  individual
           concerned has resided on its territory, his/her  age,  state  of
           health, family  and  economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
           integration into the host Member State and

           2. The host Member State may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
           against Union citizens or their family members, irrespective  of
           nationality, who have the right of permanent  residence  on  its
           territory, except on serious grounds of public policy or  public
           security.

           3.  An  expulsion  decision  may  not  be  taken  against  Union
           citizens, except if the decision is based on imperative  grounds
           of public security, as defined by Member States, if they:

                (a)    have  resided  in  the  host  Member  State  for  the
                previous ten years; or

                (b)    are a minor, which of course does not apply  in  this
                case.'

   18. Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public  security  shall
       comply with the principle  of  proportionality  and  shall  be  based
       exclusively on the personal  conduct  of  the  individual  concerned.
       Previous criminal convictions  shall  not  in  themselves  constitute
       grounds for taking  such  measures.   The  personal  conduct  of  the
       individual  concerned  must  represent   a   genuine,   present   and
       sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of   the   fundamental
       interests of society,  justifications  that  are  isolated  from  the
       particulars of the case or that rely  on  considerations  of  general
       prevention shall not be accepted.

   19. The Appellant challenges the decision by reference to four grounds of
       appeal. The first asserts an error in assessing the appellant's  risk
       of reoffending. This is an important element for Mr Tsalikis  submits
       that if there is no risk  of  reoffending  the  appellant  cannot  be
       deported. Although he is not a citizen of an EEA state he has a right
       of permanent residence in the UK and  so  the  automatic  deportation
       provisions to be found in domestic law do not apply.

   20. Regulation 21(4) of  the  EEA  Regulations  states  that  a  relevant
       decision may not be taken in respect of a  person  with  a  permanent
       right of residence under regulation 15 except on serious  grounds  of
       public policy or public security. Regulation 21(5)(c) states that the
       personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a  genuine,
       present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of   the
       fundamental interests of society.

   21. In MG and VC (Ireland) [2006] UKAIT  00053  the  Tribunal  said  that
       "where regulation 21(3) applies to an individual (because  he  is  an
       EEA national with a permanent right of residence but not a  minor  or
       along term resident) he may be removed as previously on  the  grounds
       that there is a risk of his committing  further  offences,  with  the
       proviso that the risk of harm  must  constitute  serious  grounds  of
       public policy for his removal."

   22. In BF (Portugal) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 923 the Appellant, a  citizen
       of Portugal, arrived in the UK and had acquired permanent  residence.
       He was convicted of battery against his partner and sentenced  to  42
       months imprisonment.  He could only be removed on serious grounds  of
       public  policy  or  public  security.   The  Tribunal  first  had  to
       determine the claimant's relevant personal conduct; secondly  whether
       the conduct represented a genuine present  and  sufficiently  serious
       threat; thirdly whether that threat affected one of  the  fundamental
       interests of society;  and  fourthly  whether  deportation  would  be
       disproportionate in all the circumstances.  The  Tribunal  noted  the
       evidence that the claimant had a high propensity to re-offend against
       the same victim and any new partner, but went on  to  find  that  the
       SSHD had failed to prove that there were serious  grounds  of  public
       policy  or  security  which  made  deportation   proportionate.    In
       remitting the appeal, the Court of Appeal said  the  Tribunal  should
       have reached a conclusion as to whether the threat, which was clearly
       present at the time of the offence, was still present at the hearing.
        The Tribunal had to decide  whether  there  was  a  present  serious
       threat and if so the extent of that threat.

   23. Following the guidance provided in BF (Portugal), the Tribunal  first
       has to determine the claimant's relevant personal  conduct.  This  is
       his conviction for rape and the circumstances in which  that  offence
       was committed which are outlined above and in the sentencing remarks.
       This is a case in which the appellant has been found guilty  of  rape
       and sexual assault upon a female who was so  intoxicated  by  alcohol
       that she lacked the  ability  to  consent  to  intercourse,  yet  the
       appellant ignored this fact and proceeded  to  have  unprotected  sex
       with her. The NOM report describes it as a  'reckless  and  predatory
       offence on a victim who was very drunk'.

   24. In Commission v the Netherlands Case C-50/06 the Commission said that
       under article 3(1) of the Directive  64/221  measures  taken  on  the
       grounds of  public  policy  or  public  security  were  to  be  based
       exclusively on the conduct of the  person  concerned.   Article  3(2)
       specified that previous criminal convictions were not  in  themselves
       to constitute grounds for taking such measures.  They could be  taken
       into Account only in so far as the circumstances which had given rise
       to that conviction were evidence of personal conduct  constituting  a
       present threat to the requirement of public policy.

   25. In relation to  the  question,  whether  the  conduct  represented  a
       genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat,  this   element
       requires an assessment of the likelihood of the appellant reoffending
       for,  as  confirmed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v  Arturas
       Dumliauskas, Lukasz Wozniak and ME (Netherlands) [2015] EWCA Civ 145,
       at paragraphs 40 and 55,   if there is no real  risk  of  reoffending
       then the power to deport nationals of  other  Member  States  on  the
       grounds of public policy or public security does not arise.

   26. The First-tier Judge found  that  the  appellant's  personal  conduct
       represented a genuine threat as set out  in  the  Rules  taking  into
       account  the  threat  posed  to  vulnerable  young  females  by   the
       appellant. The fact the appellant had  no  previous  convictions  was
       noted and that he had never been previously cautioned. The Sentencing
       Judge when considering the question of the need for an  indeterminate
       sentence for public protection found:

           "I do not find it necessary to pass upon you  an  'Indeterminate
           sentence for public Protection'.  There is  no  suggestion  that
           you will present a danger in the future, to the public or indeed
           to women.  This from a sentencing guideline  perspective,  is  a
           single offence of rape, by a single  offender,  with  a  serious
           aggravating feature; arsing as I say, from the  fact  that  you,
           without contraception ejaculated into her vagina."

   27. Indeterminate sentences, which were abolished in 2012, were  intended
       to protect the public against criminals whose crimes were not serious
       enough to merit a normal life sentence but who were regarded  as  too
       dangerous to be released when the term of their original sentence had
       expired. They were composed of a punitive  "tariff"  intended  to  be
       proportionate  to  the  gravity  of  the  crime  committed   and   an
       indeterminate period which commences  after  the  expiration  of  the
       tariff and lasts until the Parole Board judges the prisoner no longer
       poses a risk to the public and is fit to be released.

   28. It is therefore a different test from establishing whether  a  person
       presents a genuine present and sufficiently serious  threat  for  the
       purposes of EU law. This being to ascertain whether there is  a  risk
       of further offending of a sufficient degree to warrant exclusion from
       the UK whereas the criminal test is to ascertain whether there  is  a
       risk and, if so, whether the person needs to be remain in custody  to
       protect the public, indicating a higher degree of risk.

   29. Sexual offences are those that provoke the  strongest  reaction  from
       the public especially if involving children or rape. In  addition  to
       the sexual element it is arguable rape is also  an  act  of  violence
       against the individual. There is considerable variation in  estimates
       of recidivism rates among convicted rapists (e.g., Furby, Weinrott, &
       Blackshaw, 1989; Hanson & Brussiere, 1998),  studies  that  use  long
       follow-up periods tend to show alarming rates of  sexual  reoffending
       among rapists. For example, Prentky, Lee, Knight,  and  Cerce  (1997)
       reported a 39% sexual reoffending rate over a 25 year follow-up among
       rapists who had undergone sex offender treatment. Quinsey, Rice,  and
       Harris (1995) reported a 20% rate of reconviction for sexual offenses
       after only a four year follow-up period that included only a two-and-
       a-half year period of offending "opportunity." Further, these figures
       are widely viewed as underestimates, because  a  high  proportion  of
       sexual crimes are never reported,  effectively  hiding  these  crimes
       from researchers.

   30. In assessing existence of a genuine present and sufficiently  serious
       threat the Judge was required to consider:

           .  What is the likelihood the appellant will  commit  subsequent
           sex crimes?

           .  Under what circumstances is this offender likely to reoffend?

           .  What can be done to reduce the likelihood of reoffending?

   31. The National Probation Service NOMS Report set the MAPPA  nominal  at
       Level 1. The level of risk of serious harm is said to  be  high.  The
       risk factors are identified as  lifestyle  and  associates,  thinking
       skills, attitudes. Those at risk are said to be young females at risk
       of further offences. In relation to the  likelihood  of  reoffending,
       the report finds this to be low.

   32. It is argued the Judge misunderstood the conclusion which is said  in
       paragraph 46 to be that although there is a low risk  of  reoffending
       the risk in relation to committing  similar  offences  against  young
       females who are similarly vulnerable is high, whereas the report  may
       be more accurately stating that although the risk of  reoffending  is
       low if such an offence is committed the risk of serious harm is high.

   33. It is not sufficient to say that just because the risk of reoffending
       is low there is no evidence of a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently
       serious threat. The second of the above questions is relevant in this
       respect.

   34. As the appellant does not accept his guilt he was not admitted to any
       of  the  sex  offender  programmes  whilst  in  detention  as  it  is
       recognised that unless a sex offender is willing to accept that  what
       they have done is wrong, and to genuinely  acknowledge  their  guilt,
       there is little purpose in  attending  such  courses  which  seek  it
       identify the reason(s) for offending and steps needed to prevent  re-
       occurrence in the future. The lack of  such  intervention  in  prison
       does not indicate there is no risk.  The  appellant  is  on  the  sex
       offenders register for life or until further order  of  the  criminal
       court although this was a compulsory requirement pursuant to  Section
       82 of the Criminal Justice Act  2003  and  does  not  show  that  the
       sentencing judge considered that he posed a continuing risk to women.



   35. The Judge found an ongoing risk as a result of the lack  of  evidence
       of steps being taken to address the issues that led to his offending.
       Whilst this may seem an alien concept to the appellant, whose  stance
       is that as he did nothing wrong there is nothing for him to do, there
       was insufficient material to explain why the appellant committed  the
       rape before the Judge, other than for his own personal gratification.
       The NOMS report  specifically  refers  to  his  thinking  skills  and
       attitude which clearly indicates an area  of  concern.  There  is  no
       evidence these elements have been addressed. These form part  of  who
       the appellant is, his personality, and an indication  of  how  he  is
       likely to react in certain situations. It was  his  personality  that
       meant that despite his victim being incapable of giving  consent  the
       appellant decided he would do as he did, because he  wanted  to.  The
       Judge was concerned that without evidence of intervention and work to
       address  this  issue  these  characteristics  remain  unassessed  and
       untreated.

   36. The question is not whether there is a High, Medium or  Low  risk  of
       reoffending. It  is  whether  the  appellants  conduct  represents  a
       genuine present and sufficiently serious  threat.  The  finding  made
       that it does, for the reasons  given,  have  not  been  shown  to  be
       findings outside the range of those available to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence.

   37. The third issue whether that threat affected one of  the  fundamental
       interests of society is clear as the act of rape is contrary  to  the
       criminal law of the UK.  In GW (EEA reg 21: 'fundamental  interests')
       Netherlands  [2009]  UKAIT  00050  the   Tribunal   said   that   the
       'fundamental interests' of a society within the meaning of reg 21  (a
       threat to which may justify the exclusion of an EEA  national)  is  a
       question to be determined by reference to the legal  rules  governing
       the society in question, for it is  unlikely  that  conduct  that  is
       subject to no  prohibition  can  be  regarded  as  threatening  those
       interests.

   38. Fourthly, whether deportation would be disproportionate  in  all  the
       circumstances. The appellant's circumstances were considered  by  the
       Judge as was the question  of  rehabilitation.  The  appellant  still
       refuses to accept responsibility for  his  action  and  there  is  no
       evidence of an attempt to rehabilitate or prospect of the same on the
       evidence in the UK.  The lawful  activities  of  the  appellant  were
       considered by the Judge and it found on balance to be a proportionate
       decision. This has not been shown to be a decision outside the  range
       of those available to the Judge on the facts of this case.  There  is
       no question of interference with the right of free movement of an EEA
       national as the appellants wife has left him. His status as a  family
       member of an EEA national has therefore also ended. The appellant has
       not shown he  is  interested  in  rehabilitation  work  in  whichever
       country he lives in.

   39. The finding the decision is proportionate when all  relevant  factors
       are considered and the rehabilitation question assessed by  reference
       to the guidance provided by the Court of Appeal  in  SSHD  v  Arturas
       Dumliauskas, Lukasz Wozniak and ME (Netherlands) has not  been  shown
       to be outside the range of findings available to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence. No arguable legal error material to the decision to dismiss
       the appeal has been made out.

Decision

   40. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   41. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 August 2015

