
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01252/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                  RICKY [V]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Liew, UK Migration Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Presenting Officer


                    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (a panel comprising First-tier Tribunal Judges Holmes and
    Cope) dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made
    on 16 June 2014 that he is a person to whom section 32 (5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applies.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya, born in 1990. He has lived in  the
    United Kingdom since 2000 and was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain on
    10 February 2009 despite a prior conviction for robbery in  respect  of
    which he was on 8 September 2008 sentenced to a  2-year  detention  and
    training order. He was also on 18 September 2009 sentenced to theft  of
    a dwelling and sentenced to 12 months' detention at a young  offenders'
    institute.

 3. Although the appellant had a prior appeal in respect of the decision to
    deport him made on 6 October  2009,  and  that  was  unsuccessful,  the
    decision was later withdrawn on 4 June 2013.  The  Secretary  of  State
    then considered that the appellant is liable for automatic  deportation
    due to the conviction for theft of 18 September 2009; that is not so in
    the case of the earlier convictions as he was under 18 at the  date  of
    conviction.

 4. The appellant is in a relationship with Miss [L], a  Malaysian  citizen
    who currently has Discretionary Leave to  Remain.  The  couple  have  a
    child born in 2011.

 5. The appellant's case is that his deportation  would  be  in  breach  of
    article 8 of the human rights Convention given  his  relationship  with
    his partner and child and that the interference to his right to respect
    his right private and family life would be disproportionate.

 6. The appeal came before the first-tier Tribunal on 12  August  2014  and
    was promulgated six days later. The panel found: -

      i) the appellant and his family retained contacts with family  friends
         in Kenya  and  with  extended  relatives  there;  that  he  has  an
         understanding of Kenyan culture [37]; and, that he has transferable
         skills which he could use there to find employment [38];

     ii) that the appellant's position must be considered  by  reference  to
         sections 117A to 117 D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 [39];

    iii) that they were not satisfied that there would be  very  significant
         obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  into  Kenya  and  thus
         section 117 C (4) would not apply [45];

     iv) that although the appellant has  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with the qualifying child,  they  were  not  satisfied
         that the effects of the appellant's deportation on his child  would
         be unduly harsh [45];

 7. the appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law: -

      i) in failing to apply relevant law (Sanade & Ors (British children  -
         Zambrano - Dereci) India [2013] UKUT 48 (IAC); and,

     ii) in failing to provide sufficient reasons for the finding  that  the
         appellant's  deportation  would  not  be  unduly  harsh   for   the
         appellant's child, and failing to give weight to any factors in her
         favour;

    iii) in failing properly to  consider  the  child's  best  interests  in
         failing properly to apply Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).

 8. On 30 December 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge  King  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 9. For reasons which are not entirely clear, the  matter  was  not  listed
    before the Upper Tribunal until the matter came before me on 18 October
    2016.

Did the decision of the first tribunal involve the making  of  an  error  of
law?

10. There is no merit in ground 1. Sanade is not  relevant  to  deportation
    cases, and as the child will have a mother to look after her here, Ruiz
    Zambrano v ONE [2012] EUECJ C-34-09   is not engaged - see  Harrison  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736  and Hines v Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660.

11.  It is unfortunate that this appeal was heard in the short gap  between
    the coming into force of section 117C and new immigration rules  on  28
    July 2014 and the decision in YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292. As both
    representatives agreed, the judges had  a  for  understandable  reasons
    proceeded to determine the appeal on an impermissible basis,  that  is,
    in failing to consider first the Immigration Rules as effective from 28
    July 2014. The question then remains, is the decision sustainable, this
    error notwithstanding?

12. The correct approach, as the Court  of  Appeal  has  subsequently  made
    clear, was to have considered the position under the Immigration Rules,
    in particular paragraph 399 (a) which would have required an assessment
    of whether the effect on the children of  the  appellant's  deportation
    would have been unduly harsh.  The panel should then have  gone  on  to
    consider whether, if those exceptions were not met,  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399".

13. As is clear from MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, the assessment
    of whether something is unduly harsh required regard to be had  to  all
    the circumstances including the  criminal's  immigration  and  criminal
    history.     Assistance  as  to   how   to   assess   very   compelling
    circumstances as set out in paragraph 398, and  section  117C  (6),  is
    given in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662:

         "33.  Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

         34.  The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
             Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013] 1  AC  338  at  [145].
             Nevertheless, it is a consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that
             offenders may be separated from their children for many years,
             contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  those  children.   The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace of family life. That is not usually a sufficiently
             compelling circumstance to outweigh the high  public  interest
             in deporting foreign criminals. As  Rafferty  LJ  observed  in
             Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  CT  (Vietnam)
             [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:

                  "Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the  respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances  which  outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation."

         35.  The Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) that  paras.  398  to
             399A of the 2012 rules constituted a complete code.  The  same
             is true of the sections 117A-117D of the  2002  Act,  read  in
             conjunction with paras. 398 to 399A of  the  2014  rules.  The
             scheme of the Act and the rules together provide the following
             structure for deciding whether a foreign criminal  can  resist
             deportation on Article 8 grounds.

         36.  In relation to a medium offender, first see whether  he  falls
             within Exception 1 or  Exception  2.  If  he  does,  then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next  stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  "sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". If there are, then the Article 8  claim  succeeds.  If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim fails. As was the case
             under the 2012 rules (as explained in MF (Nigeria)), there  is
             no room for a general Article 8 evaluation  outside  the  2014
             rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act."

14. While the panel did at [45] consider whether the effect  on  the  child
    would be unduly harsh, what is said at [44] is limited.

15. Mr Harrison made no submissions on this issue, save to rely on the rule
    24 letter which, however, did not engage with the failure  to  consider
    the matter under the Immigration Rules first.

16. The panel, although not expressly doing so as paragraphs 399  (a)  (ii)
    (a) require, appears to have considered at [44] that it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh to require the child to live in Kenya. This must  be  seen
    in the context of what was said at [28], that Ms [L] said  she  intends
    to travel to Kenya with her child to live with the appellant if  he  is
    deported there, although she did not wish to do so, and  did  not  know
    how it could be managed in practice.

17. This  findings in respect of the child must also be seen in the context
    of SSHD v AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 at [17]:

         "17. These cases show that it will be rare for the  best  interests
             of the children to outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in
             deporting foreign criminals. Something  more  than  a  lengthy
             separation  from  a  parent  is  required,  even  though  such
             separation is detrimental to the child's best interests.  That
             is commonplace and not a compelling circumstance.  Neither  is
             it looking at the concept of exceptional circumstances through
             the lens of the Immigration  Rules.  It  would  undermine  the
             specific exceptions in the  Rules  if  the  interests  of  the
             children in maintaining a  close  and  immediate  relationship
             with the deported parent were as a matter of course  to  trump
             the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.  Rule   399(a)
             identifies the particular circumstances where it  is  accepted
             that the interests of  the  child  will  outweigh  the  public
             interest in deportation. The conditions are onerous  and  will
             only rarely arise. They include the requirement that it  would
             not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK  and  that  no
             other family member is able to look after the child in the UK.
             In  many,  if  not  most,  cases  where  this   exception   is
             potentially engaged there will be the normal  relationship  of
             love  and  affection  between  parent  and  child  and  it  is
             virtually always in the best interests of the child  for  that
             relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
             deportation a disproportionate interference with family  life,
             it would drain the rule  of  any  practical  significance.  It
             would   mean   that    deportation    would    constitute    a
             disproportionate  interference  with  private  life   in   the
             ordinary run of cases where children  are  adversely  affected
             and the carefully framed conditions in rule  399(a)  would  be
             largely otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very  compelling
             justification  overriding  the   high   public   interest   in
             deportation, there must be some additional feature or features
             affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take
             the case out of the ordinary."

18. It must be borne in mind also that any assessment of undue harshness
    would involve an assessment of the public interest - see MM (Uganda)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450:

         "23. The context in these cases invites emphasis  on  two  factors,
             (1) the public interest in the removal  of  foreign  criminals
             and (2)  the  need  for  a  proportionate  assessment  of  any
             interference with Article  8  rights.  In  my  judgment,  with
             respect, the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors. The first  of  them,  the  public
             interest in the removal of  foreign  criminals,  is  expressly
             vouched by Parliament in section 117C(1). Section 117C(2) then
             provides (I repeat the provision for convenience):

                  "The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal."

         24.   This  steers  the  tribunals  and   the   court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case. Accordingly the more pressing the public  interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or  partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.  Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   "unduly   harsh"
             provisions from their context. It would mean that the question
             of undue hardship would be decided wholly  without  regard  to
             the force  of  the  public  interest  in  deportation  in  the
             particular case.  But  in  that  case  the  term  "unduly"  is
             mistaken for "excessive" which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history.

         25.  The issue is not advanced with respect either by the terms  of
             the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance   in   the   immigration
             directorate instructions or the learning on  the  use  of  the
             term "unduly harsh" in  the  context  of  internal  relocation
             issues arising in refugee law. The IDIs are not  a  source  of
             law and the asylum context of internal  relocation  issues  is
             far removed from that of Rules 398 to 399. In  fact  authority
             in the asylum field emphasises the importance of context  (see
             Januzi [2006] 2 AC 426 per Lord Bingham at paragraph 21).

         26.  For all these reasons in my judgment MAB was  wrongly  decided
             by the Tribunal. The expression "unduly harsh" in section 117C
             (5) and Rule 399(a) and (b) requires regard to be had  to  all
             the circumstances including  the  criminal's  immigration  and
             criminal history."

19. While it is submitted in the grounds at [16], that other factors  would
    have weighed in the child's favour, these are not identified,  nor  can
    they be discerned from the evidence and submissions made to the  panel.
     In any event, as noted above, there is no indication, that the  weight
    of the public interest in deporting the appellant was assessed as  part
    of the assessment of undue harshness. While not doing so was an  error,
    it was in the appellant's favour.

20. The assessment of the child's best interests is limited but  there  are
    no particular factors which suggest anything out of  the  ordinary.  It
    may well be in her interest for the family  to  stay  together  in  the
    United Kingdom, but that is very far from outweighing the strong public
    interest in deporting the appellant. The reality  is  that  deportation
    splits up families; it is parliament's intention that it should do  so,
    unless the high threshold of undue harshness is met.  There is in  this
    case nothing which approaches that nor very compelling circumstances in
    terms of paragraphs 398 of the Immigration Rules.

21. In the circumstances, although the Upper Tribunal erred in not applying
    the Immigration Rules in effect from 28 July 2014, that error  was  not
    material,  given  the  sustainable  finding  that  deportation  of  the
    appellant would not have a unduly harsh effect on his child.   Further,
    it cannot be argued that, viewing the determination as a  whole,  there
    was a failure adequately to give reasons for that finding, or a failure
    properly to assess the best interests of the child.

22. Accordingly, I consider that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.




    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law, and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date:  26 October 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

