
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01230/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2014                           |On 19 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                               MR JUSTICE JAY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS



                                   Between

                    PRINCE ZACHARY KUDAKWASHE MUNANGATIRE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadesham, Counsel, instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This  is  an  appeal  against  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Parkes and Mr H G Jones, MBE, JP, which was promulgated
    on 4 November  2013  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to make a deportation order.  That  order
    was made on 4 June 2013 and the notice and grounds of appeal are  dated
    19 June 2013.  The appellant remains in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant was born on 8 April 1990 in Zimbabwe. He  came  with  his
    family to join his father in the United Kingdom  on  9  September  2001
    when he was aged 11 and he has not returned to Zimbabwe since then.  On
    2 March 2006 the appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain.  His
    daughter Saskia was born on 11 March 2009. The appellant's relationship
    with Saskia's mother has ended and  his  current  partner  is  a  woman
    called Hayley.  She gave birth to their son in December 2013.

3.   The appellant has a lengthy criminal record. His  convictions  are  set
    out in the First-tier Tribunal's determination and it is only necessary
    to mention the highlights.  On 2 June 2005 at the Luton Crown Court  he
    was sentenced to 30 months' detention in a young offender's institution
    for offences of robbery and attempted robbery. On 29 May  2006  he  was
    warned that he would be considered for deportation in the event that he
    should reoffend.  Further custodial sentences  were  imposed  in  March
    2007, July 2007 and January 2009.  On 24 April 2009, when the appellant
    was just 19, he was sentenced to  four  years'  detention  in  a  young
    offenders institution in relation to offences committed when he was 18.
     Even after his release  from  detention  the  appellant  continued  to
    reoffend but he has not since April 2009 received further sentences  of
    detention.

4.   At paragraph 29 of  its  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  said
    this:

         "The  appellant's  offending  is  deeply  troubling.   His   record
         contains numerous examples of his failure to comply with  sentences
         that have been passed on him and the warning that he may be  liable
         to deportation did not act as a brake on his behaviour, neither did
         the impending birth of his first child.  Following his  release  he
         has committed offences than present a  danger  to  members  of  the
         public and the use of vehicles when over the limit of  alcohol  and
         then when disqualified and uninsured."

5.   The appeal against the notice of intention to  deport  was  brought  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and Article  8  grounds.   As  for  the
    asylum claim, the First-tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant  had
    not rebutted the presumption under Section 72(9)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that he is a danger to  the  community.
    The panel noted that the Circuit Judge sitting at the Luton Crown Court
    in April 2009 had not imposed an IPP, that is  to  say  a  sentence  of
    imprisonment for public protection  on  the  ground  of  dangerousness.
    That fact alone did not serve to rebut the  presumption.   However  the
    length and seriousness of the appellant's criminal record was such that
    he could not rebut the presumption under Section  72(9).   It  followed
    that he remained a danger to the community and refugee status could not
    be considered.

6.   That said, the appellant was still entitled to  run  a  case  based  on
    humanitarian protection considerations  and  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.
    However the First-tier Tribunal concluded  on  the  available  evidence
    that the appellant would not be at risk if  he  returned  to  Zimbabwe.
    Next, the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered   the  application  of  the
    decision of the  Grand Chamber of the European Court of Hunan Rights in
    Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546.  The panel appears to have considered
    this separately from Article 8 of the Convention, see paragraphs 38  to
    39 of its determination.   At those paragraphs the First-tier  Tribunal
    said this:

         "38.     The appellant came to the UK when he was only 11  and  has
             spent more than half his life in the UK. He has also  spent  a
             large part of that time  involved  with  the  courts  and  the
             criminal justice system. Warnings that he may face deportation
             and the various sentences passed on him have not obviously act
             as a brake on  his behaviour which has  been  seriously  anti-
             social and with  his  recent  driving  offences  continues  to
             present a danger to  members  of  the  public.  His  offending
             continued as  an  adult  and  he  has  not  demonstrated  much
             maturity with reoffending after the offence that  has  led  to
             these proceedings.


         39.      From the evidence in the social worker's  report  and  the
             appellant's mother's witness statement it is  clear  that  the
             appellant still has relatives in Zimbabwe. We do  not  believe
             that the appellant would be left without support if he was  to
             return there and while we do  not  minimise  the  considerable
             readjustment he would have to make on his return we find  that
             he cannot be said to have no connections with the  country  of
             his birth."

7.   Finally, the First-tier Tribunal turned its attention to Article 8  and
    Section 55  considerations.   Although  the  appellant  was  now  in  a
    relationship with Hayley, she was not called to  give  evidence  before
    the panel. The appellant told the First-tier Tribunal that  Hayley  was
    unaware of these deportation proceedings and of the hearing.  The First-
    tier Tribunal drew the inference that this betokened secrecy and deceit
    on his part and we do not disagree. It was also clear from the evidence
    he gave that the appellant did not live with  Hayley.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that "the evidence does not suggest  that  claims  of  a
    shared future can be relied on or are realistic".

8.   At paragraph 44 the First-tier Tribunal said this:

         "We are under no illusions that if the appellant is  deported  then
         that will have the effect of splitting the families involved. Given
         the nature of the contact that he has with his daughter  that  will
         be less of an interference than if he lived with her and her mother
         and had daily contact.  With regard to his son  he  does  not  live
         with the  baby's  mother  and  has  a  less  than  honest  or  open
         relationship with her, the evidence does not suggest that claims of
         a shared future can be relied on or are realistic. If deported  the
         appellant  will  be  deprived  of  the  opportunity  of  forming  a
         relationship with his son that would happen if sent to prison,  and
         begs the question of forming a relationship with his son that would
         happen if sent to prison, and begs the question  of  what  sort  of
         relationship would be formed anyway.  The  fact  that  he  got  his
         girlfriend pregnant when facing deportation was either a calculated
         act to bolster his case  or  shows  a  callous  disregard  for  the
         consequences of his actions and the effects they  have  on  others.
         At the time he  was  aware  that  his  situation  was  and  remains
         precarious  and  his  failure  to  be  honest  with  her   severely
         undermines the claims that he has made and detracts from  the  case
         that is put on his behalf."

9.   The First-tier Tribunal noted that the appellant  has  regular  contact
    with his mother and his siblings. He also  has  half-siblings  but  his
    relationship with  them  is  not  particularly  close.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal stated that the appellant had been beaten by his father who is
    now deceased and that his relationship with his mother  "was  not  good
    either and that is partly reflected in his offending over  the  years".
    As for Saskia, the appellant's daughter by Kelly, the evidence was that
    the child went to the appellant's mother's house at  weekends,  not  to
    the appellant's.  The First-tier Tribunal said that the  appellant  was
    not the main carer  and that his mother enjoys the role of  alternative
    carer, not the appellant.

10.  At paragraph 43 the First-tier Tribunal said  this:

         "We accept that  it  is  preferable  for  a  child  to  maintain  a
         relationship with both parents even if they do not or  cannot  live
         together.  If would be in the best interests of  the  daughter  and
         his son if such a relationship could be maintained and  we  do  not
         pretend that if the appellant  is  deported  the  effect  would  be
         anything other than to effectively destroy the relationship that he
         has or may have with either or both of them.  In that context it is
         clear that  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  daughter  is
         limited and when apart from her mother it is the appellant's mother
         who is the main carer and that relationship will continue  wherever
         the appellant is."

11.  The panel considered the strength of the appellant's relationship  with
    his siblings but concluded that this was limited in nature.  The First-
    tier Tribunal's conclusion on the issue was as follows:

         "46.  The  best  interests  of  all  the  children  are  a  primary
             considerations  but  not  the  primary  consideration  or  the
             paramount consideration.  The nature of the relationship  they
             have has  to  be  balanced  against  the  public  interest  in
             deporting a person whose removal would  be  conducive  to  the
             public good and  who  is  presumed  to  be  a  danger  to  the
             community


          47.     Do their best interests override the  public  interest  in
             this case?   Taking  into  account  the  appellant's  personal
             history and appalling record, along with the  danger  that  we
             find  he  still  presents,  and  taking   into   account   the
             considerations under the Immigration Rules  and Maslov, we are
             satisfied that the appellant's deportation is a justified  and
             proportionate measure for the Secretary of State to take.


         48.      The appellant  has  adult  siblings  in  the  UK  but  his
             relationship with them is limited and there is nothing in them
             that suggests that his contact or his relations with them  are
             unusually strong or durable.  It appears that  he  has  had  a
             fractious relationship with his mother in the  past  but  that
             has been repaired to some extent. He does not live at home and
             there is no suggestion that will change in the future although
             he relies on his mother to maintain contact with his daughter.
              While it is clear that Article 8 is engaged in this  case  in
             relation to the appellant, his family, children and to a  very
             limited extent with his partner Hayley we are  satisfied  that
             his deportation is justified by the need to prevent crime  and
             to protect the  public  and  that  there  is  nothing  in  his
             circumstances that would make it disproportionate."


12.  The  appellant  advances  four  grounds  of  appeal  although  in  oral
    argument today  Counsel  for  the  appellant  reduced  those  to  three
    headings.  But it is  convenient  to  look  at  the  case  as  formerly
    pleaded.  The first ground has two limbs.  First, that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to apply the Maslov principles properly  and  secondly,
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to grapple with the  issue  of  the
    appellant's integration and rehabilitation in Zimbabwe in line with the
    case of Essa (EEA rehabilitation -integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC).



13.  In support  of  his  first  limb,  Mr  Jagadesham  submitted  that  the
    threshold for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major
    part of his childhood in this country  is  a  high  one,  namely  "very
    serious reasons are required to justify deportation".  He  referred  us
    to the decision of the  Grand Chamber in Maslov where at  paragraph  71
    of its judgment the European Court of Human Rights made clear that  the
    following criteria apply, namely:
    (1)  the nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
    appellant;
    (2) the length of the appellant's stay in the United Kingdom;
    (3)  the  time  elapsed  since  the  offence  was  committed  and   the
    appellant's conduct during that period; and
    (4) the solidity of social, cultural and family ties  with  the  United
    Kingdom and with Zimbabwe.

14.  At paragraph 72 of its decision the  Grand Chamber said that  it  would
    like to clarify that the age of the person concerned can  play  a  role
    when applying some of the paragraph 71c criteria. What was decisive  on
    the facts of Maslov was the youth of the applicant, he was  a  juvenile
    at all material times, and that with one exception the offences were of
    a non-violent nature.

15.  At paragraph 85 of its judgment the Grand Chamber made  it  clear  that
    very serious violent offences can justify expulsion even  if  committed
    by a minor.

16.  Mr Jagadesham drew our attention to  two  domestic  decisions.   First,
    the decision of the Court of Appeal, Lord Justice  Richards  presiding,
    in the case of JO (Uganda) and Another v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 10 and secondly, the more  recent  case
    of MJ (Angola) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA
    Civ 557.  In the latter case the appellant, who  was  born  in  Angola,
    came to the United Kingdom when he was 12 and then was granted leave to
    remain as a member of his father's family on 9 June 1997  when  he  was
    just 15.  The appellant there had  a  history  of  mental  illness  and
    committed a number of  offences  resulting  in  detention  in  a  young
    offender's institution.  In his judgment  in  that  case  Lord  Justice
    Dyson, as he then was, noted that the  determination  of  the  AIT  was
    fairly detailed and that obvious care had been taken with the issue  of
    proportionality. Nonetheless it was the view of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    that the determination of the issues of proportionality was flawed.

17.  It is necessary to quote directly from paragraphs  40  to  42  of  Lord
    Justice Dyson's judgment:

         "40.     The appellant had lawfully entered the United Kingdom when
             he was 12 years of age. He spent his adolescence and the whole
             of adult life here. Much of his offending was  committed  when
             he was under the age  of  21.   In  these  circumstances  very
             serious reasons were required to justify his deportation:  see
             Maslov at paragraph 75.


         41.  Miss Grey does not dispute this.  She points out that the  AIT
             set out all the relevant facts, including the appellant's  age
             when he entered the UK, the fact that he has  ties  with  this
             country and that most of his offending was committed  when  he
             was young. She submits that in substance at paragraphs 66,  84
             and 85 the AIT did provide the 'very serous reasons' that were
             necessary to justify the deportation.


         42.      I do not agree. What  the  AIT  did  was  to  balance  the
             appellant's right to respect for his private life against  the
             rights of  others  to  be  protected  from  the  risk  of  his
             reoffending and to conclude that the former was outweighed  by
             the latter.  In performing the balancing exercise  which  they
             found 'very difficult' they undoubtedly took into account  the
             fact that the appellant had resided in the UK  for  a  lengthy
             period and arrived here as an adolescent:  see  paragraph  66.
             But there is nothing to indicate  that  they  appreciated  the
             fact that (i) the appellant had lived in the UK since  he  was
             12 years of age, (ii) most of his offending had been committed
             when he was under the age of 21, and (iii)  he  had  no  links
             with Angola meant that very serious reasons were  required  to
             justify the decision to deport him. I should add that the  AIT
             are not to  be  criticised  for  not  appreciating  that  very
             serious reasons were required.  They did not have the  benefit
             of paragraph 75 of Maslov, the Grand Chamber had not published
             their decision at the time of the AIT's determination."

18.  Mr Jagadesham submits,  applying  the  principles  laid  down  by  Lord
    Justice Dyson  in  MJ  (Angola),  that  the   analysis  of  Maslov  was
    similarly deficient in the present case.  He refers to  the  fact  that
    paragraphs 38 and 39 of the determination which are the only paragraphs
    directly concerned with Maslov are scantily reasoned. He  submits  that
    the evidence demonstrated that his client had no real ties in Zimbabwe.
     Moreover in this case as in  the  case  of  MJ  (Angola)  all  of  the
    appellant's offending was committed when he was  a  juvenile.   In  all
    those circumstances, he contends that there is no indication that  this
    First-tier Tribunal applied the test  laid  down  in  paragraph  75  of
    Maslov, namely very  serious  reasons  were  required  to  justify  the
    decision to deport.  Instead  what  happened  here  was  that  the  FTT
    carried  out  a  general  balancing  exercise  under  the   rubric   of
    proportionality.

19.  The Secretary of State submits that Maslov does  not  really  apply  to
    this situation since this appellant is not a settled  migrant  who  has
    spent all or most of his childhood in the United Kingdom as required by
    the Grand Chamber's decision.   In  any  event,  he  says,  Maslov  was
    concerned with the deportation of an  EU  resident.  The  Secretary  of
    State submits that it is relevant that this  appellant  only  became  a
    settled migrant when he was nearly 16.  Those factors, he  says,  takes
    this case outside the Maslov principle.

20.  I cannot accept the Secretary of State's argument when I look again  at
    MJ (Angola). In that case the appellant was born in Angola and was  not
    an EEA national or someone claiming rights in that capacity or  through
    the EEA rights of a parent. Moreover in that case the appellant had not
    acquired indefinite leave to remain until he was nearly 15.   In  other
    words, the circumstances of the appellant in  MJ  (Angola)   were  very
    similar to the circumstances of the  appellant  in  the  present  case.
    Furthermore, when I look at the whole  of  the  relevant  part  of  the
    determination, and in our judgment it does not stop  at  paragraph  39,
    one has to read through to the end of paragraph 48, I fail to  see  any
    application of the very serious reasons test.  In paragraph 47  of  the
    determination express reference is made to Maslov which indicates  that
    the First-tier Tribunal clearly had in mind the relevance of that  case
    to Article 8 considerations.  But what the First-tier Tribunal said was
    that  they  were  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  deportation  is  a
    justified and proportionate measure for the Secretary of State to take.
     What the First-tier Tribunal did not say is that they  were  satisfied
    that very serious reasons existed justifying deportation.

21.  In our judgment the First-tier Tribunal did not apply the  right  test.
    Had that been the only issue in the present appeal, however,  it  would
    not have been sufficient to bring the appellant home. We say  that  for
    this reason: that if it were the only issue in  this  appeal  we  would
    have been  in the position to carry  out  the  balancing  exercise  for
    ourselves applying paragraph 75 of Maslov and the very serious  reasons
    criterion.  And if it were the only issue in the  case  we  would  have
    been able to conclude, indeed would have  concluded,  that  there  were
    very serious reasons  justifying  deportation  in  the  light  of  this
    appellant's extremely serious criminal record.  It is to be  emphasised
    that this appellant's criminal record is  far  more  serious  than  the
    record of Mr Maslov in the Grand Chamber's decision.

22.  Moreover as we have  already  pointed  out,  at  paragraph  85  of  its
    judgment the Grand Chamber made it  clear  that  very  serious  violent
    offences can justify expulsion even if committed by a minor.   But  the
    difficulty is the inter-relationship between the Maslov ground and  the
    appellant's other main ground which concerns the best interests of  the
    children since it is clear from paragraph 42 of  Lord  Justice  Dyson's
    judgment that everything must be placed in the metaphorical mix and one
    needs to consider the circumstances of  the  appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom  including  relationships  with  children  as   well   as   the
    circumstances that would obtain if he were removed to Zimbabwe.

23.  In other words, the best interests point or the Article 8  and  Section
    55 considerations point does mesh inextricably with  the  Maslov  point
    and as will be made clear in due course, the appeal does have merit  in
    relation to the best interests point.  However  before  that  point  is
    addressed, we need to consider Mr Jagadesham's second point as advanced
    to us today, namely that dangerousness has not been  properly  assessed
    within the context of the Section 72 presumption.  On our understanding
    Mr Jagadesham effectively took three points under this  rubric.  First,
    that there was no mention of a forensic  psychologist's   report  which
    indicated that the prospects for  rehabilitation  were  good  for  this
    appellant.  Secondly, that proper regard was  not  had  to  His  Honour
    Judge Bevan QC's  application  of  the  dangerousness  provisions  then
    applicable in 2009, and in particular that at the Luton Crown Court  in
    April 2009 an IPP  was  not  imposed.  Thirdly,  that  the  Section  72
    presumption seems to have applied equally to the Article  8  assessment
    as it did to the Refugee Convention assessment  which  is  said  to  be
    impermissible.

24.  In our judgment these points do not carry any particular weight. It  is
    true that there is no mention of the forensic psychologist's report  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision but at the end of the day it was not
    a particularly powerful piece of evidence.  It was merely the  view  of
    one forensic psychologist, with respect to her.

25.   Paragraph  29  of  the  determination  sets  out  the  FTT's   overall
    assessment of the appellant's offending and the likely prognosis, as it
    were, and in our judgment that was entirely permissible.

26.  As for the absence of a finding of dangerousness in  relation  to  what
    happened at the Luton Crown Court in April 2009, that in  our  judgment
    does not carry the appellant's case sufficiently far.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to conclude that the decision of a circuit  judge
    not to pass an IPP does not discharge the presumption on the appellant.
    That part of its decision was perfectly correct.  Of  course  what  was
    wrong, if I can put it in those terms, with the decision  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal incorrectly stated that the Crown Court  applies  a
    criminal standard of proof, but overall the conclusion on the IPP issue
    was not flawed.

27.   Finally,  as  for  the  point  that  the  Section  72(9)  finding  was
    impermissibly carried  through into the Article 8 finding, it should be
    recorded that at the beginning of paragraph 49 of its determination the
    Tribunal stated that "for the avoidance of doubt we find expressly that
    the appellant remains a danger to the community".  This seems to  be  a
    finding which was separate from any application of the presumption  and
    relates back to paragraph 29 of its determination.  So at  the  end  of
    the day we cannot accede  to  the  appellant's  submission  under  that
    particular heading.

28.  This leads really to the third ground, best interests  and  Article  8,
    where as has already been intimated there is greater force to be  found
    in the appellant's submissions. Mr Jagadesham first  of  all  drew  our
    attention to the decision of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74 where the court  stated
    that  the  following  principles  are  applicable  were  children   are
    concerned:

         "(5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a   child's
             circumstances and of what is in  the  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations.


          (6)     To that extent  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
             examination of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a
             child are involved in an Article 8 assessment."

29.  Mr Jagadesham's submission  is  that  there  has  not  been  a  careful
    examination of all the evidence here.  For example, there is no mention
    of an independent social welfare  report  which  states  amongst  other
    things that the appellant and his  daughter  Saskia  have  developed  a
    "very genuine and loving  relationship"  through  regular  contact  and
    interaction, that "Saskia trusts him and has  faith  in  him  and  very
    clearly loves him", and that  the  appellant's  removal  will  lead  to
    "anger and resentment on Saskia's part".  That does not feature in  the
    determination nor does the  appellant's  mother's  evidence  which  was
    along similar lines. That evidence could  or should have carried weight
    given that we are told in paragraph 41 of the  determination  that  the
    appellant's mother is  a  social  worker.   It  follows  that  she  has
    experience of these matters although of  course  could  not  have  been
    regarded as an entirely independent witness. But what is not  mentioned
    is any of that evidence, and in our  judgment  that  is  a  significant
    failing. The exercise conducted  under  paragraphs  40  to  48  of  the
    determination is otherwise satisfactory but it seems to  us  that  this
    evidence should have been placed in the  melting  pot  before  a  final
    conclusion was reached, and such a conclusion would have  had  to  have
    taken into account with regard to the paragraph 75 Maslov very  serious
    reasons criterion.

30.  In our judgment that represents a flaw  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusion  which  cannot  be  allowed  to  stand  and  which  in   the
    circumstances of  this  case  merits  a  remission  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for consideration of all issues in this case.

31.  Mr Jagadesham advanced a subsidiary submission in relation to the  fact
    that the First-tier Tribunal  was  operating  on  a  false  premise  in
    relation to social services interest in the mother's  ability  to  look
    after the daughter Saskia. That in itself, in our judgment,  would  not
    have founded a proper ground of appeal but given that we are  remitting
    the case for overall  reconsideration  of  all  relevant  matters  that
    factor will have to be considered too.

32.  So we allow the appeal  on  the  grounds  we  have  identified  and  it
    follows from that that the matter will be remitted as we have indicated
    to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration on all issues  and  that
    is the order we make in this case.





Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Jay

