
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01047/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 21 October 2013                            |On 4 November 2013           |
|Prepared 22 October 2013                      |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                    RUI PAULINO CARDOSO VIERA DE ALMEDIA
                                                                    Claimant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Cole, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Miss E Martin, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State (the respondent) appeals with permission against
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  24  July
    2013, allowing Mr  De  Almedia's  (the  claimant)  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 13 May 2013 to make a  deportation  order
    against him pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Immigration  Act  1971  and
    Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").

 2. The claimant, who was born on 20 December 1988, arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2005, joining his siblings here.  It is his case that he has
    lived here ever since, apart from short visits to Portugal.

 3. Between 7 October 2008 and  22  October  2012  the  claimant  has  been
    convicted of fourteen offences on  nine  occasions.   The  most  recent
    conviction was at Ipswich Crown Court when, on 18  September  2012,  he
    was convicted upon a guilty plea of supplying controlled  drugs,  class
    A, an offence to which he was sentenced to sixteen months' imprisonment
    on 22 October 2012.

 4. On 13 May 2013 the respondent took a decision to  deport  the  claimant
    for reasons set out in the refusal letter of that date.  The respondent
    did not accept that the claimant had acquired the  right  of  permanent
    residence under the 2006 Regulations [21] considering that, pursuant to
    the principles set out in Regulation 21(5) of the 2006 Regulations that
    as the claimant poses a medium risk of harm [26], [31] and, having  had
    regard  to  all  the  available  evidence,  concluded  that  he  had  a
    propensity  to  reoffend  [45],  represents  a  genuine,  present   and
    sufficiently serious threat to public to justify his deportation on the
    grounds of public policy.  She considered also that  the  decision  was
    proportionate [47] and also that his deportation  was  a  proportionate
    interference with his right to  respect  to  family  and  private  life
    pursuant to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 5. The appeal against that decision came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki and Mrs W Jordan).  The panel found:-

      i) that the claimant had acquired the right of permanent residence  in
         the United Kingdom and thus  could  only  be  deported  on  serious
         grounds of public policy or public security [14];

     ii) that the sentencing judge found that the claimant's  offending  had
         been isolated events [16] to which he had pleaded guilty;

    iii) that the  claimant  had  committed  fourteen  offences  since  2008
         including assaulting  a  police  officer  [17],  that  he  had  not
         completed an aggression replacement training  programme  [17],  the
         reason for the  index  offence  being  that  the  claimant  was  an
         habitual cannabis user who had acquired a drug debt [17];

     iv) that having considered also the OASys assessment, the assessment of
         risk of reoffending which is shown as high [18] that the likelihood
         of serious harm to others including  as  to  children  as  low  and
         others as medium and concluding [21]  that  the  claimant  did  not
         present  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
         affecting one of the fundamental interests of society  [21]  noting
         that his sister was prepared to accommodate him  and  that  he  was
         willing to live with her;

      v) that the claimant's deportation was not justified  under  the  2006
         Regulations [22] and that his  removal  would  be  disproportionate
         pursuant to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal against the decision on  the
    grounds;

      i) that the panel had failed to provide  adequate  reasons  for  their
         finding that the claimant did not present a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society, having noted that he posed  a  high  risk  of
         reoffending, had failed to consider whether he had  shown  remorse,
         was still associating with negative peers, whether he has addressed
         drug and alcohol problems, whether his  siblings  could  exert  any
         such influence over him;

     ii) that the Tribunal failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  their
         conclusions that the claimant has formed a strong  family  unit  or
         had established a family life with his  siblings,  there  being  no
         evidence of any dependency [6] and  they  had  therefore  erred  in
         finding that the claimant's deportation was not proportionate.

 7. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  14  August  2013  by  Designated
    Immigration Judge McClure who noted "there was before the  Tribunal  an
    OASys Report which confirmed that the claimant  was  likely  to  commit
    further offences."

 8. I heard submissions from both representatives.  Miss  Martin  submitted
    that it was not clear from  the  determination  why  the  Tribunal  had
    discounted the evidence of the claimant's propensity to  reoffend,  his
    track record of offending which increased in seriousness as well as his
    lack of remorse and attempts to deny his past offending.  She submitted
    also that the Tribunal had failed to take  into  account  in  a  proper
    manner the evidence of the claimant's siblings which indicated that  he
    had not addressed his cannabis use or alcohol abuse which  appeared  to
    be continuing.

 9. Miss Martin submitted also that the panel had  erred  in  applying  the
    wrong test both in the Regulations given that, they had found that  the
    claimant had acquired the permanent right of residence, and that  there
    had been in the circumstances no proper analysis of whether there  were
    serious grounds of public policy  such  that  the  claimant  should  be
    deported.

10. Miss Martin submitted  also  that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  in  their
    analysis of proportionality within  the  EU  Regulations  appearing  to
    confuse this to a considerable degree with the analysis under Article 8
    of the Human Rights Convention.  It was on that basis also that part of
    her decision should be set aside.

11. Miss Cole submitted that the panel had given adequate consideration  to
    the claimant's propensity to reoffend and that  the  reasons  they  had
    given for concluding that he was at medium  risk  of  reoffending  were
    borne out by the evidence.  She submitted that little weight  could  be
    attached to the OASys Report given that it was now out-of-date and that
    the references to the claimant still being a cannabis user  and  having
    failed to address his offending behaviour were taken  out  of  context,
    that evidence being historic.

12. Miss Cole submitted that although the Tribunal had  erred  in  applying
    the wrong test under the 2006 Regulations, this was not material  given
    that that test imposed a significantly higher  threshold  and  that  it
    could not properly be argued that had the claimant succeeded under  the
    lower level, that he would not have  succeeded  had  they  applied  the
    correct test.

13. There is no challenge to the Tribunal's finding that the  claimant  had
    acquired the permanent right of residence.  Accordingly, the test which
    the Tribunal should have  applied  when  considering  the  decision  to
    deport the claimant is that set out in Regulation 21(3):

         "A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a  person  with
         the permanent right of residence  under  Regulation  15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security".

14. It is established law that this test requires  a  significantly  higher
    threshold to be achieved than that imposed by Regulation 21(5)(c) which
    provides that  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society. It follows from this, that
    if the panel did not err in concluding that the claimant  succeeded  on
    the lower test established by regulation 21 (5)(c),  their  failure  to
    apply the higher test made no material difference to the outcome.

15. It also follows that if the panel did err in the manner averred in  the
    grounds, that error was material only if it could  be  shown  that  the
    claimant would not have succeeded on a proper application of  the  test
    set out in regulation 21 (3).

16. There is in the material before the Tribunal an OASys assessment  which
    although initially created in early 2012 does contain several  reviews,
    the most recent being on 18 June 2012.  This document was, it  appears,
    forwarded to the Home Office and I note from  the  exchange  of  emails
    between the Home Office and the  Probation  Service  (E1-E2)  that  the
    overall risk of harm is said to be medium.  The  NOMS  Report  was  not
    completed and whilst, as Miss Martin correctly submitted, there is  one
    section in which the claimant's risk of reoffending is said to be high,
    the overall assessment indicates medium risk to known adults, staff and
    the public.  That is despite a high OVP score indicating a high risk of
    proven violent-type reoffending.

17. It is to be noted that the OASys  assessment  defines  medium  risk  of
    serious harm as follows:

         "There are identifiable indicators of risk of  serious  harm.   The
         offender has the potential to cause serious harm but is unlikely to
         do so unless there is change in circumstances, for example, failure
         to take medication, loss of accommodation, relationship  breakdown,
         drug or alcohol misuse".

18. In this case there was evidence before the Tribunal that the  claimant,
    who it is accepted had been violent towards his partner, was no  longer
    in  a  relationship  with  her.   The  Tribunal  identified  that   the
    claimant's sister would be providing accommodation  [21]  and  has  the
    support of his brothers.

19. It is evident from the determination that the Tribunal had  had  regard
    to the judge's sentencing remarks [12], [16] as well  as  his  criminal
    record [14].  They also took into account the particular  circumstances
    of the offence [17] and referred to previous offences.

20. In assessing the claimant the panel was entitled to take  into  account
    the fact  that  he  had  attended  part  of  programmes  on  aggression
    replacement training. The panel also sets out at paragraph 20 what they
    took into account in assessing the risk presented by the claimant.

21. Whilst it is correct that in their  witness  statement  the  claimant's
    sister referred to the claimant only staying with her for a  few  weeks
    in the past, that was in 2005.  The panel heard evidence from  her  and
    her brothers as well as the claimant and were entitled to come  to  the
    conclusion that she would now be providing accommodation  on  a  secure
    basis for the claimant.

22. There are references in the witness statements to the claimant  needing
    a purpose and structure  to  his  life  and  needing  to  stop  smoking
    cannabis, but there is merit in the submission that this  needs  to  be
    viewed in context which is that the claimant has been in prison now for
    a substantial period and whilst there is no positive  evidence  of  him
    testing negative for drugs, neither is there any  evidence  that  there
    had been any negative tests or that there had  been  any  adjudications
    against him  during  his  detention.  Further,  there  is  insufficient
    indication that it was submitted to the panel  that  they  should  have
    taken adverse inferences from the claimant's account.

23. It is not properly arguable that the claimant sought  to  diminish  his
    offences.  Whilst it is clear that he accepted his guilt, the basis  of
    which Miss Martin submits that the claimant had diminished his offences
    is that he did not take  full  responsibility  for  it.   That  is  not
    correct.  It was accepted by the sentencing judge that the reason  that
    the claimant had undertaken the sale of drugs was as a result of a drug
    debt and it is significant that the consequent custodial  sentence  was
    at the low end of the range of possible sentences for  possession  with
    intent to supply class A drugs.

24. In conclusion, the Tribunal gave adequate reasons for  concluding  that
    the claimant did not  represent  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    It is not properly arguable that they failed to deal properly with  the
    issue of propensity to reoffend given their acceptance that overall  he
    presented a medium risk of reoffending, one which was open to them  and
    which, in the light of their other sustainable findings, entitled  them
    to conclude as they did.

25. Whilst the panel did err in applying the wrong test, it  is  unarguable
    that had they addressed themselves to the higher test, serious  grounds
    of public policy, they would not have come to the same conclusion.  The
    panel did not err in its assessment of proportionality under Regulation
    21(5) given that they had set out in sufficient detail the factors they
    took into account,  including  the  claimant's  ties  with  the  United
    Kingdom and lack of ties to Portugal and it is  not  properly  arguable
    that, having found that he did not represent  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society that it could have been proportionate to remove him.

26. On that basis, I find that the decision to deport the claimant was  not
    in accordance with the 2006 Regulations.  It did not involve the making
    of an error of law capable of affecting the outcome.   Accordingly,  it
    follows that any error in the assessment of Article 8 cannot have  been
    material.

27. For these reasons, I find that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.



SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

1    The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law, and I uphold it.



Signed                                  Date: 31 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


