
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01139/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 January 2014                            |On 12 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

  The honourable mr justice foskett sitting as judge of the Upper Tribunal
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                             mr jacek straszwski

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Poland born on 24 February  1987  and  so
    is now 26 years old.  This is a rehearing of  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 13 November 2012 to  make  a
    deportation order against him.  The rehearing is as  a  result  of  the
    finding by Upper Tribunal Judges Eshun and Perkins on 17 September 2013
    that the First-tier Tribunal had made an error in law in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal.  The Upper Tribunal held as follows:

         "3.  It is not disputed that the claimant  arrived  in  the  United
             Kingdom on 12 October 1998 or that he was sent to prison  just
             over 12 years later on 19 November 2010.  At paragraph  15  of
             the  letter  entitled  'reasons  for  deportation'  dated   13
             November 2012, the Secretary of State said:


                  'Whilst it is accepted that you arrived in the UK in 1998,
                  for the purposes of determining permanent residence,  only
                  the period when you have resided lawfully  in  the  UK  is
                  taken into account.  You were a dependent on your mother's
                  claim for asylum in October  1998,  this  was  refused  in
                  September 2002, at which point you and  your  family  were
                  granted Exceptional Leave to Remain for  one  year.   Your
                  mother submitted an  application  for  further  ELR  on  1
                  September 2003 and Poland joined the EEA in May 2004.  You
                  were remanded in custody on  6  August  2010;  hence  your
                  period of lawful residence  in  the  UK  is  approximately
                  seven years and eight months.'


         4.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  said  at  paragraph  21   of   its
             Determination:


                  'The Secretary of State in paragraph 15 of the reasons for
                  decision letter considers that the  appellant  had  lawful
                  residence in the United Kingdom  for  approximately  seven
                  years and ten months as he was remanded in  custody  on  6
                  August 2010.  The Secretary of State appears to have  only
                  considered the period from September 2002 until  6  August
                  2010.   Irrespective  of  any   area   [error?]   in   the
                  calculation made by the Secretary of State, it is hard  to
                  understand why the Secretary of State has not included the
                  period from the time of the claim  of  asylum  in  October
                  1998 until refusal of the asylum claim in September  2002.
                  Even if the [claimant] had arrived in the  United  Kingdom
                  unlawfully, once he had made an  application  for  asylum,
                  through his mother, his residence in  the  United  Kingdom
                  would have been lawful.'


         5.   The Tribunal then go on to say that the Presenting Officer was
             not able  to  criticise  that  reasoning  and  the  claimant's
             representative (not Ms Kiai) said that it was correct.


         6.   We are quite satisfied that it is not.  The problem here seems
             to be based on a misreading of the decision  of  the  European
             Court  of  Justice  in  Ziolkowski  (freedom  of  movement  of
             persons) Joined Cases C-424/10 and C-425/10 dated 21  December
             2012. This decision did  determine  authoritatively  that,  by
             reason of Directive 2004/38/EC, in determining if a person had
             accrued a right of residence  in  an  EEA  country,  residence
             before that country was part of the EEA was to be  taken  into
             account.   However,  it  was  also  plain  from  reading   the
             judgement as a whole that mere residence  was  not  enough  to
             bring a person within the scope of the Directive.  Neither was
             it relevant if the residence was in accordance with the law of
             the country concerned.  Paragraphs 46 and 47 of Ziolkowski are
             particularly pertinent and state:


                  '46. It  follows  that  the  concept  of  legal  residence
                      implies that the  terms  'have  resided  legally'  in
                      Article  16(1)  of  Directive   2004/38   should   be
                      construed as meaning  a  period  of  residence  which
                      complies  with  the  conditions  laid  down  in   the
                      Directive, in particular those  set  out  in  Article
                      7(1).


                  47.  Consequently, a period of  residence  which  complies
                      with the law of a member state but does  not  satisfy
                      the conditions laid down in Article 7(1) of Directive
                      2004/38 cannot be regarded as  a  'legal'  period  of
                      residence within the meaning of Article 16(1).'


         7.   In its concluding remarks at paragraph 63 the  European  Court
             of Justice reiterates the importance of  compliance  with  all
             the requirements of the Directive if a person is to  reap  its
             benefits and says:


                  '63. In the light of  the  foregoing  considerations,  the
                      answer to Question 2 is  that  periods  of  residence
                      completed by a national of a non-Member State in  the
                      territory of a Member State before the  accession  of
                      the non-Member State to the European Union  must,  in
                      the absence of specific  provisions  in  the  Act  of
                      Session, be taken into account for the purpose of the
                      acquisition of the right of permanent residence under
                      Article 16(1) of  Directive  2004/38  provided  those
                      periods were complete  and  in  compliance  with  the
                      conditions  laid  down  in  Article   7(1)   of   the
                      Directive.'


         8.   It follows therefore that the use of the  word  'lawfully'  in
             the refusal letter is misleading.  Properly understood it  was
             never the intention of the Reasons for Refusal Letter  to  say
             that time spent between claiming  asylum  on  arrival  in  the
             United Kingdom and being given permission to  remain  was  not
             time spent lawfully in the United Kingdom.   However,  it  was
             not time to be  considered  in  determining  if  the  claimant
             satisfied the requirements of the Directive because it was not
             time spent in accordance with Article 7(1).  The claimant  was
             not exercising  treaty  rights.   He  was  not  a  worker  and
             although he was at school for part of that period he was  not,
             or at least there is no evidence to suggest that  he  was,  in
             possession of appropriate medical insurance.  It is no  answer
             to this to assert, as may be the case, we do  not  know,  that
             the claimant was not a burden on public  funds.   As  is  made
             quite clear in Ziolkowski a person can only claim the  benefit
             of  the  Qualification  Directive  if  the  person   met   its
             requirements, and that goes beyond residing  in  a  particular
             country with permission.  In the absence of  an  admission  by
             the Secretary of State, a person who says that he is  entitled
             to the protection of the Directive must prove his claim.


         9.   Paragraph 15 of the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  (where  the
             respondent says: 'You were remanded in  custody  on  6  August
             2010; hence your period of  lawful  residence  in  the  UK  is
             approximately 7 years and 8  months')  is  rather  unfortunate
             because although it sets out accurately the time that  elapsed
             between the claimant being granted exceptional leave to remain
             and his being remanded in custody, the Refusal letter goes  on
             to make it plain that the Secretary of State does  not  accept
             that the  claimant  has  shown  even  five  years'  continuous
             residence in accordance with the Directive.


         10.  The Tribunal said at paragraph 30 of the determination:


                  'Taking into account the evidence as a whole  we  conclude
                  that the  appellant  has  been  exercising  treaty  rights
                  throughout the time he  has  been  living  in  the  United
                  Kingdom.'


         11.  However, the only reason for this finding is that the Tribunal
             was  persuaded  that  the  appellant  had  maintained  himself
             without recourse to public  funds.   That  is  not  enough  to
             establish residence in accordance with  the  Directives.   The
             claimant could (theoretically) have been a  'worker'  for  the
             necessary time, or he could  have  been  the  dependant  of  a
             worker for the necessary time, or he could have been a  person
             with sufficient resources both to avoid being a burden on  the
             social assistance scheme in the United Kingdom and to have had
             comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  but  he  could  not
             establish any of these things on the evidence that was  before
             the Tribunal.


         12.  We cannot be satisfied from the  determination  just  how  the
             Tribunal reached a conclusion that the appellant had  achieved
             a continuous period of at least ten  years'  residence  within
             the meaning of the Qualification  Directive.  Neither  can  we
             ascertain from the material before us if the claimant  had  in
             fact achieved five years relevant residence for the purpose of
             the qualification directive.  It is just not clear and has  to
             be decided again.


         13.  Although we have tried hard to avoid a further hearing we find
             that a further hearing is necessary to consider in the  lights
             of the above the evidence concerning the claimant's status  in
             the United Kingdom...:"

2.   That, therefore, is the background to  the  matter  coming  before  us.
    The Secretary of State's decision to make a deportation  order  against
    the appellant was taken with reference to Regulation 19(3)(b) and 21 of
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.    The
    appellant had been convicted on 19 November 2010 at  Blackfriars  Crown
    Court of two  counts  of  robbery  and  was  sentenced  to  42  months'
    imprisonment.  On 9 June 2010 he was convicted of grievous bodily  harm
    and  at  Kingston  Crown  Court  was  sentenced  to   fifteen   months'
    imprisonment.  The appellant was due to be released on 26 December 2012
    but was then taken into immigration detention  where  he  has  remained
    since.  The Secretary of State expressed  herself  satisfied  that  the
    appellant would pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    to the interests of public policy if he were allowed to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   The findings made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  have  not  been
    affected by the error of law, and which have been preserved,  are  that
    the appellant has been continually resident in  the  UK  since  October
    1998.  He attended school in the UK after  his  arrival  in  1998.   He
    attended full-time education until he was 16.   He  worked  in  the  UK
    after leaving school, but this was sporadic as he was smoking  cannabis
    and drinking heavily.  He attended Southwark College and undertook some
    English language modules and a full-time electricians  course  when  he
    was 16 years of age.  This ceased when he was nearly 18 years  of  age.
    The appellant  worked  as  a  painter  and  decorator.   The  appellant
    confirmed this evidence at the hearing before us.

4.   Ms Kiai confirmed that she would be relying on the  argument  that  the
    appellant has obtained permanent rights of residence in the  UK  as  an
    EEA national  who  has  resided  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations for a continuous period of 5  years.   Her  case  was  that
    between June 2004 and September 2009 he was a dependant of  his  mother
    who was a self-employed person in the UK.  Consequently, the  appellant
    is entitled to the second level of protection, that is,  the  appellant
    can only be deported if "serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
    security" exist.  She would be relying on Article 8 of the  ECHR,  i.e.
    family and private life, and Article 3  of  the  ECHR  because  of  the
    psychiatric report that he may be at risk of committing suicide were he
    to be deported to Poland.

5.   The first issue we have to consider is the  status  of  the  appellant.
    Has he exercised treaty rights in the United Kingdom for five years and
    has acquired permanent residence from June 2004 to September 2009 as  a
    result of his mother being self-employed during that period.   In  2004
    the appellant was 17 years old.  Under Regulation 7  of  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations and Article 2 of the Directive 2004/38/EC the appellant  is
    classified as a family member of a Union citizen if he is under the age
    of 21 or if he is exercising treaty rights as a self-sufficient person.
     Miss Kiai did not pursue her argument at paragraph 56 of her  skeleton
    argument where she submitted that the  appellant  has  been  exercising
    treaty rights as a self-sufficient person, but choose instead  to  rely
    on the argument that the appellant was dependent on his mother who  was
    a self-employed person in the UK.

6.   Ms Martin, in light of the  documentary  evidence,  accepted  that  the
    appellant's mother was in business running a shop from June 2004.   She
    did not, however, accept that it  was  established  that  the  business
    continued until it was closed in September 2009, relying on the lack of
    supporting documentary evidence to that effect.  She submitted that the
    documentary evidence suggested that the business closed in April  2009.
    Without evidence to corroborate the mother's claim  that  the  business
    ended in September 2009, she submitted that the appellant fell short of
    the five years continuous residence.  We accept, as did Ms  Kiai,  that
    there was no specific documentary evidence beyond April 2009 to confirm
    the date the appellant's mother's business closed.  However, there  was
    evidence, however, that a bankruptcy order  was  made  against  Barbara
    Straszwski, the appellant's mother, on 4 February  2010  and  that  the
    order was discharged on 12 November 2010.

7.   We saw and heard the appellant's mother give  evidence  and  we  accept
    that she was running the business alone, that it was not doing well and
    that she closed it in September 2009.  On the advice of her  accountant
    and the Citizens Advice Bureau,  she  filed  for  a  bankruptcy  order,
    documentary evidence of which is before us as we have  indicated.   The
    chronology of her bankruptcy suggests that it is a reasonable inference
    that her business closed in September 2009 as she stated.  Consequently
    we accept that  the  appellant's  mother  was  a  self-employed  person
    exercising Treaty rights from June 2004 until September 2009.

8.   Ms Martin did not dispute the evidence of  the  appellant,  his  mother
    and brother that he has lived with his mother throughout  his  stay  in
    the UK, which we accept.   Indeed,  Ms  Martin  did  not  dispute  this
    evidence.  She lives in rented  council  accommodation  and  was  until
    September 2009 responsible for paying  the  rent.   The  appellant  was
    reliant on her  for  everything,  including  food  and  clothing.   The
    appellant has not held down meaningful employment  for  any  reasonable
    duration.  We accept that sometimes he helped his mother  in  the  shop
    for which he was not paid.  We find that the money he gained  from  the
    painting and decorating work he did, which was not much, would not have
    been sufficient to enable him to be self sufficient.  In any event  the
    money he earned was spent on drugs and drink.  He did not contribute to
    his living expenses.  On this evidence we find that the  appellant  was
    dependent on his mother, throughout the period  from  June  2004  until
    September 2009 when she was exercising Treaty rights.

9.   We also accept that during the five years when the  appellant's  mother
    was a self-sufficient person, she was paying  her  taxes  and  national
    insurance.  There was documentary evidence to that effect.

10.  It follows that we find on the evidence before us  that  the  appellant
    had acquired five years' continuous residence under the EEA Regulations
    prior to his convictions on 9 June 2010  and  19  November  2010.   His
    period of imprisonment occurred after his acquisition  of  a  right  of
    permanent residence and did not interrupt the period during which  that
    right was being acquired; cf. the cases decided by the  European  Court
    of Justice in Onuekwere (C-378/12) and MG (C-400/12)

11.   Having  found  that  the  appellant  has  established  five  years  of
    permanent residence in the UK as a family member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK, he can only be deported if "serious
    grounds of public policy or public  security"  exist.   The  burden  of
    proof rests on the respondent to establish that the personal conduct of
    the appellant represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

12.  The appellant has committed  two  very  serious  offences.   The  first
    offence was committed on 9 June 2010.  He attacked a friend of his,  Mr
    Matthews, with a broken tea glass whilst under the influence of alcohol
    causing him serious injuries to his face, the lip,  the  neck  and  the
    back of the neck and Mr Matthews bled heavily  as  a  result  of  those
    injuries.  He pleaded guilty to unlawful wounding.   According  to  the
    sentencing judge, after this  offence  and  whilst  on  bail  for  this
    offence, he committed two very serious offences of robbery for which he
    received 42 months'  imprisonment.   He  was  sentenced  to  15  months
    imprisonment  for  his  attack  on  Mr  Matthews.  This  sentence   was
    consecutive to the sentence he  was  now  serving.   The  sentences  he
    received are indicative of the seriousness of the offences committed by
    the appellant.

13.  The root cause of the appellant's criminality stems  from  his  use  of
    drugs and alcohol.  In the NOMS report prepared in  January  2012,  the
    appellant was assessed at high risk of re-offending, the risk being  of
    physical violence, robbery and theft from a person.  The risk was  most
    likely to occur and escalate when the appellant is under the  influence
    of alcohol and drugs.  In respect of the likelihood of reconviction  he
    was assessed at low risk according to an OASys report.

14.  There were before us two reports from Dr  Joanna  Dow,  an  independent
    Psychiatrist.  The first is dated 28 April 2013 and was put before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  Dr   Dow's
    conclusion that the appellant's risk of reoffending in the next year if
    returned to the community in the UK was medium. "Medium" is defined as:
    there being identifiable indicators of risk of harm, the  offender  has
    the potential to cause harm but is unlikely to do so unless there is  a
    change in circumstances, e.g. loss of accommodation, a  lapse  back  to
    drug or alcohol misuse.   Dr  Dow  was  of  the  opinion  that  if  the
    appellant obtained gainful employment to provide  him  with  structured
    activity and a boost to his sense of  purpose  and  self-esteem,  gains
    appropriate accommodation away from his antisocial peer group, was able
    to benefit from the support of family  and,  most  importantly,  if  he
    remained abstinent from illicit drugs and excess alcohol, his  risk  of
    re-offending would be significantly decreased.

15.  Dr Dow assessed the risk of serious harm to others (where serious  harm
    is defined as death or serious personal injury whether that is physical
    or psychological) as medium.  Again, she was of the  opinion  that  the
    risk of serious harm to others would arise mainly if he were to  return
    to illicit drug and alcohol misuse.  She noted that the  appellant  had
    completed programmes related to substance misuse while in custody.   He
    showed a reasonable degree of insight into his  past  substance  misuse
    and demonstrated an apparent determination to remain  abstinent.   This
    determination was reinforced in the appellant's oral  evidence  to  us.
    He said that he did not want to go back to drink  and  drugs.   At  the
    time he said he thought he was the cleverest and  ignored  advice  from
    his mother and friends  to  desist  from  his  behaviour.   He  is  now
    approaching his 27th birthday and he would want to settle down,  get  a
    job and marry.  He did not want to end up in prison again.

16.  A second report prepared by Dr Dow is  dated  21  December  2013.   She
    said at paragraph 59 that her opinion with regard  to  the  appellant's
    risk of reoffending had not changed and  that  in  the  next  year,  if
    returned to the community in the UK, it was medium.   She  remained  of
    the same opinion with regard to the factors that are  likely  to  lower
    this  risk,  namely  gainful  employment,  appropriate   accommodation,
    abstinence from illicit drugs and  excess  alcohol  and  the  continued
    support of the family.  She continued to assess  his  risk  of  serious
    harm to others as medium.  Again she was of the opinion that  the  risk
    of serious harm to others would be mainly  if  he  were  to  return  to
    illicit drug and alcohol misuse.  She said that undergoing  counselling
    to help him to understand and process  his  past  in  relation  to  his
    problems with anger, was in her opinion, likely to  reduce  this  risk.
    Adherence to risperidone is also likely to  reduce  the  risk  but  she
    stressed that there was no indication to continue to  prescribe  it  in
    the long term and that dealing with the underlying issues would be  the
    key.

17.  The appellant said in evidence that in order to address his  misuse  of
    drugs and alcohol, he has undertaken a huge number of courses in prison
    and is now clean from drugs  and  alcohol.   He  submitted  documentary
    evidence of the courses.

18.  We accept that whilst his mother had not been very  supportive  in  the
    past due to her own problems  in  relation  to  her  business  and  the
    violent treatment she  received  at  the  hands  of  her  husband,  the
    children's father, she is now in a position to give the appellant  much
    fuller attention and support.   The  business  is  closed  and  she  is
    currently on jobseekers allowance.  Her evidence suggests that  she  is
    willing to play a supportive role in  the  appellant's  rehabilitation.
    The appellant's brother, Sebastian, was also imprisoned in the past  as
    a result of a crime committed under the influence of drugs.  He has now
    turned his life around and is in gainful employment. From his  evidence
    we gathered that he is willing to support the  appellant  to  turn  his
    life around as he has done.  To that extent he  has  arranged  for  his
    employer, Mr. Andrzej  Citko,  to  employ  the  appellant  when  he  is
    released.

19.  Mr Citko runs a business called Brixtonian Builders Limited.   We  have
    received a Certificate of  Incorporation  of  the  business  issued  by
    Companies House, Cardiff on 21 November 2011.  The  Company  Number  is
    7854130. Mr Citko gave credible oral evidence and confirmed his written
    evidence that he was willing to offer the appellant a basic job  within
    the building and construction industry when he is released from prison.
     His business is involved in small to medium size projects ranging from
    painting and decorating to bathroom and kitchen installation.  He  said
    the appellant would, at the beginning, start as a labour  resource  and
    could choose to specialise in a specific trade within his company.   We
    accept that this  is  a  credible  offer  of  employment  and  not,  as
    suggested by Ms Martin, just an offer as a favour  to  the  appellant's
    brother, Sebastian and a means of meeting an important requirement  for
    stability identified by Dr. Dow.

20.  The appellant intends to live with his mother when he is released  from
    prison and our assessment, having seen the mother,  the  appellant  and
    Sebastian give evidence, is that the family are united in their support
    of the appellant.

21.  Given that the risk of re-offending was originally assessed as high  in
    the NOMS report and it is now assessed as medium by Dr Dow, it  follows
    that,  whilst  a  risk  undoubtedly  remains,  the   re-offending   has
    diminished somewhat.  With the factors identified by Dr  Dow  being  in
    place, the likelihood of reoffending could diminish even further.

22.  The appellant said he was taking medication which has calmed him  down.
     Although he has never undertaken an anger management course, we accept
    his evidence that the different courses he has undertaken in  the  past
    have taught him how to deal with his anger and cope with life.

23.  Whilst, of course, there is no absolute guarantee  that  the  appellant
    will not offend again, on the totality of the evidence we find that the
    respondent has failed to establish that he poses a  serious  threat  of
    harm to the public.

24.  We now consider the appellant's appeal under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Ms Martin sought to argue that the appellant is an adult as are members
    of his family and therefore the family ties do not go beyond the normal
    emotional ties between adults.  Whilst  the  family  life  between  the
    appellant, his mother and siblings is  between  adults,  we  find  that
    there are emotional family ties that bind them  together.   The  family
    suffered significant trauma when they were in Poland  as  a  result  of
    their mother and  father  being  perceived  to  be  part  of  the  Roma
    community.  The appellant's father was violent towards all of them  and
    in Poland they had no relief or protection from  the  authorities.   In
    the UK his father continued to be violent and was finally  deported  to
    Poland.  The family together has been scarred from  these  experiences.
    The appellant has since his arrival in the UK lived  with  his  mother,
    and as we have indicated, has been dependent on her for  his  financial
    and accommodation needs.  It is to  his  mother's  home  that  he  will
    return and begin the process of rehabilitation.  We find therefore that
    there is family life between the appellant, his mother and siblings and
    the appellant has established private life by his presence  in  the  UK
    since 1988.  Plainly, the removal of the appellant will interfere  with
    his established family and private life and the interference  would  be
    of sufficient gravity as to engage Article 8.  It would, of course,  be
    for the legitimate purpose of the prevention of crime but the  question
    is whether it would be disproportionate  to  the  achievement  of  that
    legitimate aim.

25.  The  offence  he  committed  have  given  us  pause  for  thought,  but
    nonetheless on the evidence as a whole we are  of  the  view  that  the
    appellant's removal would be disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim
    intended by the respondent.  He has been in the UK since 1998  when  he
    was 11 years old.  He has studied in the UK.  He has not  in  the  past
    held down any meaningful employment but we have accepted  the  evidence
    that Mr Citko is prepared to offer him a  job  and  give  him  a  fresh
    start.  The appellant has  integrated  into  British  society  and  now
    speaks good English.  We accept his evidence that he is unable to  read
    or write Polish.  We accept that he is clean from drugs and alcohol and
    has a desire to build a new life for himself in the UK.

26.  In both MG and Onuekwere the European Court of Justice, albeit  in  the
    context of those cases, held that periods of imprisonment may be  taken
    into consideration as part of the overall assessment required in  order
    to determine whether the integrating links previously forged  with  the
    host member state have been broken.  We accept that the imposition of a
    custodial sentence shows that  the  appellant  has  not  respected  the
    values of the British society.  The appellant has been in custody since
    June 2010, but he has had time to reflect on his previous lifestyle and
    from  his  evidence  we  can  detect  a  determination  to  change  his
    lifestyle, to which we have already referred. In the  circumstances  we
    find that the integrating links forged  by  the  appellant  in  the  UK
    remain despite his offending behaviour.

27.  As we have indicated in light of the evidence before us  we  find  that
    it would be disproportionate to remove the appellant from the UK.

28.  We were not persuaded by Ms Kiai's argument that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would breach Article 3 of the ECHR because he was  likely  to
    commit suicide as a  result  of  his  mental  health  issues,  horrific
    memories and the lack of family support in Poland.  The  appellant  has
    not attempted  suicide.   Dr  Dow  remains  of  the  opinion  that  the
    appellant does not suffer from a severe  and  enduring  mental  illness
    such as psychotic or affective (mood)  disorder.   She  said  that  the
    voices which the appellant describes hearing are best understood in her
    opinion, in the context of his personality disorder.  They do not  have
    the nature or quality of true hallucinations that one might  experience
    in a psychotic disorder.  She said that  the  appellant  is  prescribed
    risperidone, which is a medication  usually  used  to  treat  psychotic
    disorders such as schizophrenia.  However, it also  has  a  role  as  a
    major tranquilliser and is  clearly  beneficial  to  the  appellant  in
    helping to calm him and to control his anger.  It is also effective  in
    eliminating his pseudo-hallucinations.  This evidence does not  support
    the claim that the appellant,  if  returned  to  Poland,  would  likely
    commit suicide and certainly  comes  nowhere  near  the  threshold  for
    considering this a relevant factor.

29.   Accordingly,  we  allow  the  appellant's  appeal   under   the   2006
    Regulations and under Article 8 of the ECHR.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on her  behalf  and  on  behalf  of  Mr.  Justice
    Foskett

