
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01147/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 17 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     HM
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Capel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The respondent notified the appellant of her  intention  to  deport
         him on 30 May 2013 due to his criminal convictions. This was due to
         his lengthy criminal record amassing 17 convictions for 37 offences
         between 1997 and 2012. These  included  theft  (x11),  fraud  (x5),
         drugs (x5), possession  of  offensive  weapon  (x3)  and  custodial
         sentences of 2 years in 2000 for possession of class A  drugs  with
         intent to supply, 18 months in 2011 for robbery, and 16  months  in
         2012 for threats to kill.

      2. His appeal against that decision, based on asylum and human  rights
         grounds, was dismissed by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Corben  ("the
         Judge") following a hearing on 8 August 2014.  This  is  an  appeal
         against that decision.

      3. Miss Capel applied for the hearing to be adjourned as the appellant
         had fallen ill on the way to the hearing. I refused the application
         as his presence would have been of no assistance  as  this  was  an
         error of law hearing where it was plain (and was conceded  by  both
         representatives subsequently given the basis  on  which  permission
         had been granted) that the only possible decision I could reach  if
         there was a material error of law was to remit the  matter  to  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing.  In  any  event,  Miss  Capel
         produced excellent representation  taking  and  forcefully  arguing
         every  point  she  possibly  could  with  vigour.  The  appellant's
         attendance would have added nothing.

      4. I note  here  that  Dr  Rachel  Thomas  is  a  Consultant  Clinical
         Psychologist and Dr Alan George is  an  academic  who  has  written
         numerous reports and is an acknowledged expert  in  Middle  Eastern
         affairs. Both were experts who  filed  reports  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant.

      5. I was provided by Miss Capel with copies of Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department v  RK  (Algeria)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  868,  J  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  629,  Y
         and Z (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2005] EWCA Civ 362, and Ben Said  v  United  Kingdom  (application
         44599/98) ECHR 6 February 2001.

The grounds of the application

      6. Delay in promulgation - "The appeal was heard on 8 August 2014. The
         decision was dated and  promulgated  on  14  January  2015.  It  is
         suggested that an objective view would be that a decision made over
         5 months after the hearing would no longer have live evidence fresh
         in the mind of the decision maker; and would be far beyond the time
         limits set out in the procedure rules". Miss Capel's submission was
         that the subtleties of  evidence  and  overall  impression  of  the
         witness had been lost over time.

      7. Refusal to adjourn to assess the current position in  Iraq  -  "The
         decision [33-34] makes reference to the request for an  adjournment
         on several bases, inter alia 'the situation in Iraq'.  The  hearing
         was immediately preceded by news of US airstrikes on Northern  Iraq
         in response to the  renewed  ISIS  offensive  against  Kurdish-held
         territory. The  IJ  relied  [78]  on  outdated  evidence  that  the
         appellant could seek protection in the Kurdish region of Iraq.  The
         IJ, whose attention had been  drawn  to  the  developments  in  the
         region, refused an adjournment for the updating  of  evidence,  and
         made a Wednesbury unreasonable finding given the date of  hearing."
         This was expanded on in the preamble to the grounds where it states
         "the determination of IJ Corben failed to consider  the  impact  of
         the ISIS offensive and related allied  airstrikes,  which  severely
         impacted the very area relied upon by the respondent and the IJ for
         internal relocation, at the relevant date (date of hearing)  -  and
         have continued to since. Failure to consider this evidence amounted
         to unlawful failure to consider a material factor;  furthermore  it
         gave rise to a conclusion on risk that is  Wednesbury  unreasonable
         in all the circumstances." Miss  Capel's  submission  was  that  Dr
         George had written his report on 3 March 2014 which  was  5  months
         before the hearing. The (then) recent bombings  were  part  of  the
         complexity of the case and the appellant could not seek  protection
         in the Kurdish region of  Iraq.  She  further  submitted  that  the
         respondent had produced 4 separate updates on the  fluid  situation
         in Iraq.

      8. Suicide risk -  "There  was  accepted  evidence  of  mental  health
         problems, including previous  sectioning  [70],  and  four  suicide
         attempts, uncontested save for the motive [78]. The IJ [78]  failed
         to make a finding regarding suicide risk,  which  would  have  been
         relevant to claimed breaches of Articles 3 and 8 ECHR."

The grant of permission

      9. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission to appeal  (18  May
         2015), it having been refused by Judge Parkes (10  February  2015).
         Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul stated that

             "It is arguable that the judge erred in not making  a  finding
             on the appellant's risk of committing suicide, or  in  stating
             what weight he placed on the report of Dr Thomas. While  there
             is less merit in the other grounds, in particular ground 1,  I
             grant  permission  on  all  grounds,  given  that  this  is  a
             protection case and a further evaluation of the risk would  be
             needed, were an error of law found in respect of ground 3."

Respondent's position

     10. The respondent asserted in her reply (10 June 2015) in essence that
         the Judge

          1) directed himself appropriately,

          2) noted [5, 6] his criminal record,

          3) noted the sentencing Judges remarks [9] and probation  officer
             report [20] where the risk of re-offending  is  deemed  to  be
             high,

          4) noted Dr George's conclusion [75] that "there  was  no  reason
             why he could not reside permanently in the Kurdish  controlled
             part of Iraq",

          5)  carefully  listed   his   medical   condition   [20-23]   and
             psychological condition regarding PTSD and  the  suicide  risk
             [78],

          6) noted Dr George's view "that the appellant is able to live and
             seek protection of the Kurdish region of Iraq",

          7) made findings that were open to him, and

          8) took time to consider the case which was justified  given  the
             abundance of material before him.

     11. Mrs Petterson submitted that  the  appellant's  ethnicity  was  the
         basis for the adjournment application [paragraph 35].

Findings and conclusions

Ground 1 - Delay in promulgation

     12.  The  Judge  identified  the  colossal  amount  of   evidence   the
         appellant's  representative  chose  to   produce   which   included
         [paragraph 3 and 4] bundles of subjective evidence (148 pages), the
         report from Dr Thomas (47 pages), 2 separate bundles of  background
         evidence 1 part of which contained the US Country Report  on  Human
         Rights Practices for 2012 in Iraq together with  the  Human  Rights
         Watch World Report Watch Report of Iraq for 2013 (63 pages) and the
         second part (737  pages),  and  case  law  (147  pages).  This  was
         supplemented by a skeleton argument (38 pages) and was in  addition
         to the respondent's bundle (about 100 pages). I note here that both
         representatives confirmed that the fact that I did not have the 800
         pages of background evidence was of no  relevance  to  the  hearing
         before me given the issues for me to determine.

     13. I refer to RK (Algeria) as requested by Miss  Capel.  Paragraph  23
         clarifies paragraph 18 to which I was referred (my underlining);

             "Miss Chan's brief is in effect to submit that, of  itself,  a
             delay  of  about  six  months   until   preparation   of   the
             decision...represents such a lamentable failure on the part of
             the system that the only fair reaction of an  appellate  court
             is to require the exercise to be undertaken again. When in the
             course  of  argument  I  suggested  to  her  that,  were   her
             submission upheld, all judges and tribunal chairmen should, in
             cases in which their decisions were not fully prepared by  the
             expiry of six months, cease work on them, she... qualified her
             submission. For the length of delay which  would  trigger  the
             need for a rehearing under her suggested  principle  would  of
             course depend upon the complexity  of  the  decision.  I  also
             accept that the anxious scrutiny to be applied to  immigration
             cases might make them more appropriate candidates for the sort
             of principle which she purports to  enunciate.  But,  even  as
             thus qualified, I cannot accept her  principle.  For  she  has
             failed to show, indeed she does not purport to show, any nexus
             between the delay and the safety of the decision."

     14. If this was a straightforward matter then such a  proliferation  of
         information comprising almost  1,300  pages  would  not  have  been
         needed and the Judge would not have had to  read  and  consider  it
         all. He  produced  a  comprehensive  24  page  determination  which
         plainly showed there was anxious scrutiny to all of the appellant's
         evidence and strands to his claim.

     15. In any event, as stated by Judge Parkes when he refused  permission
         to appeal "the grounds do not refer to any part of the decision and
         reasons said to be lacking". Miss Capel was still  unable  (despite
         being on notice of this point) to  identify  any  such  credibility
         finding said to be  lacking  in  any  way,  including  due  to  the
         subtleties of evidence and overall impression of the  witness,  due
         to the passage of time. There was therefore  no  established  nexus
         between the delay and the safety of the decision. Indeed so lacking
         in merit was the argument that I was  able  to  announce  prior  to
         hearing from Mrs Pettersen that I was dismissing that ground.

     16. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         manner in which the Judge dealt with the  "delay  in  promulgation"
         issue.

Ground 2 - Refusal to adjourn to assess the current position in Iraq

     17. I bear in mind Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
         (IAC) which guides me to the view that where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  First-
         tier Tribunal acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied  is
         that of fairness:   was  there  any  deprivation  of  the  affected
         party's right to a fair hearing.

     18. The Judge in this case considered the application which was made on
         3 bases, the other 2 not being pursued  in  this  application.  The
         Judge said [paragraph 37] "If as was suggested to me the  political
         landscape was very fluid there was no guarantee that any length  of
         adjournment  would  produce  a   more   definitive   picture.   The
         appellant's appeal had to be heard and a hope or  expectation  that
         at some point in the future the position would be  more  beneficial
         to the appellant's or the respondent's case was not something  that
         would justify an adjournment."

     19. I note the factual findings made in  relation  to  the  appellant's
         case and Dr George's observation (he being the  appellant's  expert
         witness) of the availability of internal relocation.

     20. I have checked the  record  of  proceedings.  The  application  was
         indeed made on the basis identified by Mrs Pettersen and not on the
         basis of recent bombings. It was summarised by the Judge [paragraph
         35] in this way - "The second factor  concerned  the  situation  in
         Iraq. The appellant had commissioned an expert country report  from
         Dr Alan George. However the appellant had a complex  ethnicity  and
         the situation in the country had meant that the report needed to be
         amended. A short adjournment would suffice and it would also  allow
         Dr George to consider the contents of the  psychologist's  report".
         The only reference to bombings was the "prospect of air strikes and
         the possibility of international intervention" which  was  made  in
         closing submissions. In those circumstances  the  Judge  cannot  be
         criticised for not adjourning the hearing on the basis of  a  point
         not made to him.

     21. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         Judge refusing to adjourn to assess the current position in Iraq.



Ground 3 - Suicide risk

     22. Dr Thomas identified (page 38 of her report) "a  number  of  highly
         traumatic  life  experiences  occurring   during   his   childhood,
         adolescence and early adult life including

          1) in Iraq;

             being abandoned by his mother in childhood;

             being left by her in the care of his authoritarian father;

             growing  up  in  a  war-torn  country  and  witnessing   daily
             atrocities including people being killed;

             having become a juvenile soldier aged 9;

             seeing his father and brother massacred.

          2) in the UK:

             being forced out of the house by his uncle who also  defrauded
             him of benefits;

             being rendered street homeless at 17;

             developing a substance misuse habit whilst sleeping rough aged
             17-19;

             getting involved in crime to feed his drug dependency and  for
             survival."

     23. She further stated (page 39) that  "the  risk  of  returning  to  a
         country where he will undoubtedly  be  extremely  fearful  for  his
         future and of reprisals from groups who killed his  family  members
         or on account of his homosexuality or both,  is  highly  likely  to
         cause his psychiatric condition to deteriorate markedly".

     24. She further stated (page 40) "whilst I am  not  an  expert  on  the
         provision  of  psychological  therapy  and   psychiatric   services
         available in Iraq ... I  cannot  imagine  that  they  would  be  of
         equivalent standard to what" HM "could receive in the UK on the NHS
         and via  the  voluntary  sector.  Moreover,  even  if  help  of  an
         equivalent standard were available, it would  be  my  review  (sic)
         that being returned to Iraq for such a psychiatrically  unwell  and
         traumatised man, to the site  of  his  original  life  experiences,
         would  rapidly  cause  re-traumatisation  and  further  psychiatric
         deterioration.  Given"  HM's  "level  of   suicidality,   I   would
         anticipate that in the circumstances the likelihood of a successful
         suicide would be extremely high and,  even  if  it  were  not,  the
         alternative would be likely to be  (sic)  severely  psychiatrically
         ill man who  would  require  long-term  inpatient  treatment  in  a
         psychiatric hospital."

     25. It is a well established principle that it is for the Judge to make
         findings of fact. The Judge

          1) stated "this is not a case where I can make a finding that the
             appellant is a generally credible witness" [paragraph 64];

          2) identified various discrepancies  in  the  account  [paragraph
             64/65];

          3) accepted his father was dead but was unable to  accept  either
             of the  accounts  as  to  the  cause  of  his  father's  death
             [paragraph 66];

          4) accepted his mother lives in Kuwait [paragraph 66];

          5) rejected  the  assertion  that  the  appellant  is  homosexual
             [paragraph 69]; and

          6) rejected the assertion that he would face persecution  in  the
             basis of his imputed political opinion  due  to  his  father's
             involvement with the Baath party and the appellant's ethnicity
             stating "it is difficult to  give  this  claim  any  credence"
             [paragraph 74].

     26. The Judge therefore did not find that he had

          1) witnessed daily atrocities including people being killed;

          2) become a juvenile soldier aged 9; or

          3) seen his father and brother massacred.

     27. The Judge  stated  [paragraph  78]  that  "there  is  of  course  a
         significant difference between being afraid of  being  returned  to
         one's country of origin due to a perceived threat to one's life  on
         return and a desire not to leave the United Kingdom because of  the
         loss of social  and  economic  benefits  here.  As  Dr  George  has
         concluded that the  appellant  would  be  able  to  live  and  seek
         protection in  the  Kurdish  region  of  Iraq  there  would  be  no
         objective basis to any concern that the appellant would have  about
         a risk to his life. It may be that in time the appellant will  come
         to appreciate that fact but in any event the authorities here  will
         be alerted to the risk and will be able to take steps to  alleviate
         it."

     28. The Judge noted [paragraph 78] that "the appellant  does  not  meet
         the high threshold set by N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 to establish that
         deportation with his medical condition at its current  level  would
         engage article 3".

     29. Miss Capel rightly submits that J states that an  article  3  claim
         can in principle succeed in a suicide case, Ben Said states that an
         article 8 claim can in principle succeed in a mental  health  case,
         and that Y and Z (Sri Lanka)  states  that  if  Claimants  were  so
         traumatised by their experiences, and so subjectively terrified  at
         the prospect of return to the scene of  their  torment,  that  they
         would not be capable of seeking treatment they needed  which  could
         ameliorate the real risk of suicide, a forced  return  would  reach
         the high threshold of inhuman treatment prohibited by article 3.

     30. However it is also worthy of note that J also states  that  in  the
         context of a foreign case, the article 3 threshold is  particularly
         high simply because it is a foreign case, and if the fear  of  ill-
         treatment is not well-founded (as in this case), that will tend  to
         weigh against there being a real risk that the removal will  be  in
         breach of article 3. If the removing  and/or  the  receiving  state
         have effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide  that  will
         weigh heavily  against  an  applicant's  claim  that  removal  will
         violate his or her article 3 rights.

     31. It is also worthy of note that MN (Rwanda) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1064 states that in determining
         whether there was a real risk of breaching article  3  where  there
         was a risk of suicide, it was appropriate to look separately at the
         risk of suicide in the United Kingdom  on  hearing  of  an  adverse
         decision, the risk in transit, and  the  risk  in  the  destination
         country. It is of note that  the  Judge  considered  this  (without
         making reference to the authority) when he  stated  [paragraph  78]
         that "in any event the authorities here will be alerted to the risk
         and will be able to take steps to alleviate it." It was plainly  in
         the Judge's mind  that  this  included  the  MN  steps.  Dr  Thomas
         properly qualified her competence to comment on  the  provision  of
         services in Iraq.

     32. Miss Capel placed reliance on Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8)
         [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC) which I note  was  an  unsuccessful  appeal
         against  a  decision  of  mine.  The  facts  of  that   case   were
         incomparable to the facts  in  this.  It  merely  states  that  the
         correct approach is not to leave out of account  what  is,  by  any
         view,  a  material  consideration  of  central  importance  to  the
         individual concerned  but  to  recognise  that  the  countervailing
         public interest in removal will outweigh the consequences  for  the
         health of the claimant  because  of  a  disparity  of  health  care
         facilities in all but a very few rare cases.  The  consequences  of
         removal for the health of a claimant  who  would  not  be  able  to
         access equivalent health care in their country  of  nationality  as
         was available in this country are plainly relevant to the  question
         of proportionality. But, when weighed against the  public  interest
         in ensuring that the limited resources  of  this  country's  health
         service are used to the best effect for the benefit  of  those  for
         whom they are intended, those consequences do not weigh heavily  in
         the claimant's favour but speak cogently in support of  the  public
         interests in removal. The Judge plainly had this in mind [paragraph
         85] and did not have to cite Akhalu.

     33. I am satisfied that the Judge was fully cognisant  of  Dr  Thomas's
         views but rejected much of  the  factual  background  of  what  the
         appellant said had happened in Iraq, the claimed homosexuality, and
         the risk on return upon which Dr Thomas  based  her  opinion.  That
         inevitably  would  reduce  the  level  of  risk  of   suicide   she
         identified. In addition the Judge was  entitled  to  find  that  Dr
         Thomas's assertion of the risk of suicide  was  manageable  by  the
         respondent who would be able to take steps  to  alleviate  it.  The
         Judge identified the parts of Dr Thomas's report he  placed  weight
         on, where and why he disagreed with her, and why he did  not  agree
         with her assessment of the risk of suicide. He  does  not  have  to
         identify the weight he attached to every single point she  made  or
         give a "percentage chance" of suicide.

     34. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         manner in which the Judge dealt with the "suicide" issue.

Decision:

         The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

         I do not set aside the decision.



Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
16 July 2015

