
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01463/2014
                                                               DA/01464/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 23 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     DH
                                      S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms W Bremang, Counsel instructed by Citywide
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   DH is a citizen of Jamaica and her date of birth is  4  March  1980.  I
    shall refer to her as the appellant.  S, her daughter, is a citizen  of
    the United States of America and her date of birth is 25 January  2005.
    On 9 July 2014 the Secretary of State refused to revoke  a  deportation
    order against the DH which was  made  on  27  August  2002  subject  to
    Section 5(1) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The  appellant  appealed
    against this and her appeal was dismissed by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Tiffen.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Chambers on 19 May 2015 and thus  the  matter  came
    before me.

2.   The appellant's immigration history is complicated.  She  came  to  the
    UK on 21 January 2000 for one month as a visitor.  On 28 September 2001
    she was encountered in  Nottingham  with  a  quantity  of  cocaine  and
    heroin.  Following arrest she gave a false name  and  claimed  to  have
    been born in the UK.  Enquiries revealed that a British passport in the
    name that the appellant asserted was hers had been  reported  as  lost.
    The appellant was charged with possession with intent to supply a class
    A drug.  She was convicted of the  offence  on  16  February  2002  and
    sentenced to two years and six months' imprisonment.  The judge made  a
    recommendation for deportation.  On 11 February  2002  the  appellant's
    daughter B was born whilst the appellant was in prison.

3.   The appellant appealed against the  deportation  order  (claiming  that
    she feared return to Jamaica) but she withdrew her  appeal,  indicating
    that she wanted to return to Jamaica and she was  deported  to  Jamaica
    along with B.   The  appellant  next  came  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities here when she was arrested at the US Embassy in  London  on
    13 March 2014, trying to  obtain  a  US  passport  for  S.   During  an
    interview with the police the  appellant  claimed  that  she  had  last
    arrived in the UK at Gatwick on 26 July 2013, using a passport that she
    had obtained fraudulently  and  which  belonged  to  her  cousin.   The
    appellant explained to the police that she had obtained  this  passport
    using her cousin's birth certificate.

4.   The appellant stated that she had brought S to the UK as a  visitor  in
    2011.  In order to travel the appellant used her cousin's passport  and
    S travelled on her own US passport.  The appellant stated that she  had
    left the UK in January 2012, leaving  S  to  be  looked  after  by  the
    appellant's cousin here in the UK.  She returned to the UK in 2013  she
    and S resided with DH's partner, V, a British citizen.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant and  V.   The
    case was presented on the basis of the appellant and  S's  family  life
    with V.  The evidence was that the couple met in 2012  and  started  to
    live together in 2013.  At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the appellant was pregnant with V's child.

6.   The judge heard evidence from V.  He came to the  UK  from  Jamaica  in
    2002.  He married a British citizen in 2004.  He has two children  with
    a woman (not his ex-wife) and at the date of the hearing they were aged
    3 and 1.  His evidence was that he sees the  two  children  in  the  UK
    every day after work.  He has three  children  in  Jamaica  with  three
    different mothers. They are aged 19, 13 and 2.  His evidence  was  that
    he is in contact with them and visits them, but has not done so for the
    last two years. He gave evidence that he sends money to Jamaica for his
    children and he gives money  to  his  ex-partner,  the  mother  of  his
    children in the UK, but she will not allow the children to visit him.

7.   Prior to the hearing the appellant was in  immigration  custody  and  S
    was residing  with  V.   The  respondent  instructed  a  social  worker
    assessment and as a result of this there was an assessment of 24  March
    2014 in the respondent's bundle at K3.  A social worker visited S and V
    at home and noted that S regarded V as her father and he  is  kind  and
    patient with her.

8.   It is clear from the report that the social worker was satisfied V  was
    looking after S and that there were no concerns with this  arrangement.
    The social worker recorded that V would be devastated if S was  removed
    from his care because he regards her as his daughter and wants to adopt
    her. The social worker recorded that the appellant's immigration status
    had caused the family significant stress, but that V hoped to  finalise
    his divorce so that he can marry the appellant and his  long-term  plan
    is to obtain a legal order which will allow him  to  have  a  "parental
    right" for S.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

9.   The judge recorded that the appellant had  been  here  lawfully  for  a
    short period of time only (between  21  January  2000  and  3  February
    2000).  Since that time she has had an appalling immigration history of
    deceit, using forged documents  and  of  course  there  is  a  criminal
    conviction.

10.  The judge  had  serious  doubts  about  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and V.   The judge recorded in the decision that when  V  was
    asked when the appellant knew that she was pregnant, he stated that  he
    was not sure whether the child was  his.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had become pregnant as a further  attempt  to  flout  the  UK
    immigration law.   The  judge  noted  that  V  was  not  aware  of  the
    immigration status of his children's mother in the UK.  The judge found
    that there was no independent Social Services report to confirm that  V
    maintained contact with his children here in the UK and  there  was  no
    affidavit from the mother of  the  children  stating  that  they  would
    experience any  adverse  effect  should  he  decide  to  accompany  the
    appellant back to Jamaica.

11.  The judge took into account that deportation would  have  a  disturbing
    effect on S, noting that she had been at school in the UK since  8  May
    2013.  The judge went on to find that children of her age  could  adapt
    wherever they are as is evidenced by the children of parents working on
    overseas contracts when they move to  a  country  completely  alien  to
    them.

12.  The judge found that  S  would  be  moving  to  Jamaica  and  she  made
    reference to the social worker report in which it is stated that she is
    aware of her Jamaican heritage and enjoys traditional Caribbean dishes.
     The judge took into account that she was not  a  British  citizen  and
    there is no evidence that she would be unable to return with her mother
    to  Jamaica.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  would  have  no
    difficulty whatsoever in re-establishing herself in Jamaica and that  V
    could re-establish himself there if he chose to.  In  relation  to  the
    appellant and V's claim that it is safer in the UK the judge noted that
    neither seemed to have a problem with leaving their children there.

13.  The judge found that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules and she considered that
    there were serious reasons for upholding the deportation order and that
    removal would be in the public interest.  The judge directed herself at
    paragraph 30 that she had to consider whether  there  are  "exceptional
    circumstances."  The judge found that it was clear from the appellant's
    immigration history that she is not  of  good  character  and  she  has
    continued to commit immigration offences.  She noted that S  is  not  a
    British citizen and it is in her best interests that she is removed  to
    Jamaica with her mother.

The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Submissions

14.  The grounds seeking leave  to  appeal  argue  that  the  judge  wrongly
    recorded V's evidence and that he did not  state  that  he  was  unsure
    about whether he is the father of the appellant's  then  unborn  child.
    The child he was referring to was another  child  of  his.   Mr  Jarvis
    conceded this point, but in his view, this was  not  a  material  error
    because the appeal could not succeed, in any  event,  because  she  had
    failed to establish compelling circumstances.

15.  The second ground of appeal is that the judge had failed to  take  into
    account the report from the Social Services relating to S and  her  and
    the appellant's relationship with V.

Conclusions

16.  Whilst it is the case that the judge wrongly recorded the evidence  and
    I cannot be sure whether the judge took into account  the  evidence  of
    the social worker when considering the relationships in issue, I am not
    persuaded that there is a material error of law in the decision. It  is
    a fact that this appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph
    399 and 399A of the Rules and that it was incumbent on the appellant to
    establish compelling circumstances over and above  those  contained  in
    399 and 399A in order to  establish  that  the  decision  breached  her
    rights  under  Article   8.   The   judge   referred   to   exceptional
    circumstances, but this was not raised by the appellant as amounting to
    an error of law  and  it  is,  in  my  view,  immaterial.  If  anything
    exceptional circumstances is an easier test that the test of compelling
    circumstances, but nothing turns on this.

17.  Whatever the view of the judge about the relationship  between  DH  and
    V, she ultimately made findings on  the  basis  that  the  relationship
    between the appellant and V was  subsisting  and  these  findings  were
    grounded in the evidence and reasoned. Had she found that the report of
    the social worker accurately reflected the relationship between  S  and
    V, this would lead to an inevitable conclusion that S's best  interests
    would be to remain part of  a  family  unit  with  her  mother  and  V.
    However, the evidence did not establish, by any account that  it  would
    be in her best interests to  remain  here  in  the  UK.   S  is  not  a
    qualified child. She is a US citizen with Jamaican  heritage.  She  has
    family, including a sibling, in Jamaica.  She has been here since 2011,
    but most of the time  she  has  been  here  she  was  living  with  the
    appellant's cousin. I accept that she has now started school in the UK,
    but she is still young and dependent on her  mother.   She  has  bonded
    with V who  like  DH  has  family  and  children  in  Jamaica.   He  is
    originally from Jamaica and it is a matter for him should  he  wish  to
    return there.  I appreciate that he has children here, but there was no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of their status or  the  status
    of their mother or indeed evidence to corroborate V's contact with  his
    children.

18.  It is significant that DH and V formed a  relationship  and  recklessly
    allowed a relationship to flourish between S and V at  time  when  DH's
    immigration status was unlawful and there was no  certainty  that  they
    would be able to remain together in the UK. The appellant was  pregnant
    with V's  child  but  this  does  not  impact  on  the  proportionality
    assessment so as to outweigh the very significant  public  interest  in
    deportation. It is reasonable and proportionate to expect the family to
    return together to Jamaica should they wish to act in  accordance  with
    S's best interests.  Whatever V decides to do the position is  will  be
    separated from his children (in Jamaica or in the UK).  Any  error  the
    judge made in the assessment of the  child's  best  interests  was  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

19.  Deportation of the  appellant  is  in  the  public  interest.  She  has
    committed a serious offence and she has gone on to involve herself more
    recently with criminal activity (albeit she has  not  been  convicted).
    The appellant has an appalling immigration history.   There is a  total
    absence of very compelling circumstances. Article 8 must be  considered
    through the lens of the Rules and Section 117B and 117C of the 2002 Act
    and the appeal inevitably falls to be dismissed.

20.  The appellant did not submit further evidence  under  Rule  15  of  the
    2008 Procedure Rules, but documentation was submitted  at  the  hearing
    before me establishing that the appellant gave  birth  to  a  child  in
    April of this year and that V is the biological father. Thus the  child
    is a British citizen. This was not challenged by Mr  Jarvis.   However,
    it does not give rise to an error of law. At the date  of  the  hearing
    the child had not been born and the focus of the decision  was  rightly
    on the appellant, V and S.

21.  In any event, if I were to find a material error of law and remake  the
    decision on the basis that there is now a British citizen child, I find
    that it would not be unduly harsh to expect the child  to  relocate  to
    Jamaica with the appellant, in the light of the public interest and the
    age of the child (see KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh)  Nigeria  [2015]
    UKUT 00543).

22.  To summarise, the judge did not make a material error of  law  and  the
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appellants' appeal is refused.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 19 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
