
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01809/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Oral Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 July 2014                            |On 6 August 2014                |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Mr Bratam Rai
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Saunders Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore and Mr A  P  Richardson)
    whose determination was promulgated on 9 April 2014.  The panel allowed
    the appeal of Mr Bratam Rai both against the deportation  decision  and
    on human rights grounds.  For the sake of continuity I shall  refer  to
    Mr Rai as the appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 10  December  1988,
    he is now aged 25.  He arrived in the United Kingdom aged 16 on 25  May
    2005 accompanied by his mother and sister.  He did so in order to  join
    his father who was of settled status, he being a member of  the  Gurkha
    Brigade.  The appellant was granted indefinite leave to  remain  on  15
    May 2007.  It was his  evidence  that  his  father  as  a  Gurkha  sold
    property in Nepal in order to come to the United Kingdom  and  start  a
    new life.

 3. The appellant himself was educated in southern India and therefore only
    returned to Nepal  for  a  limited  period  essentially  during  school
    vacations.  It was his claim therefore that he knew little  or  nothing
    of the culture and traditions in Nepal.  He  had  been  educated  at  a
    Christian residential school which was some thousand  miles  away  from
    Nepal in an isolated part of southern India.  It was an  indication  of
    the distance from Nepal that he gave evidence that it used to take  him
    four days to travel from his school to Nepal during those times of  the
    year when he returned home.  It limited him to returning  to  Nepal  to
    about two times a year.

 4. After his arrival in the United Kingdom it is  common  ground  that  he
    associated with a group of people who were using heroin and he  himself
    became an addict.  As a result of this craving he committed a series of
    offences between 2008 and  December  2012  where  he  accumulated  five
    convictions  in  respect  of  ten   offences   involving   shoplifting,
    possession of  heroin  and  other  theft  offences.   The  offences  in
    relation to theft were all in order to supply his drugs' need.   On  18
    January 2013 at Canterbury Crown Court the appellant was  convicted  of
    offences of supplying a class A drug, namely heroin, and  sentenced  to
    two years and eights months' imprisonment.  In addition  there  was  an
    earlier suspended sentence which was activated making a total of  three
    years' imprisonment in all.  However for my purposes it is the sentence
    of two years and eight months that is material.

 5.  The  appellant's  appeal  came  before   First-tier   Tribunal   whose
    determination was promulgated on 9 April 2014.   The  panel  considered
    the attempts that the appellant had made in  order  to  kick  his  drug
    habit and the use that he had made of  a  drug  support  service  (KCA)
    which had provided him with a methadone script with which he  was  able
    to  deal  with  the   day-to-day   difficulties   of   his   addiction.
    Unfortunately the budget of KCA was removed and the panel recorded that
    methadone scripts were no longer available to the appellant and, having
    separated from his family and the family environment, he relapsed  into
    heroin addiction.  As a result of having no means of income,  the  only
    way to feed his habit was to commit crime and that is what occurred  in
    the cases which came before Canterbury Crown Court.

 6. The circumstances of the offence  were  that  an  undercover  policeman
    approached him for the supply of drugs and he assisted the  officer  in
    locating an individual who would supply him.  It was the  Secretary  of
    State's case that he was in fact a drug  runner  for  others  supplying
    heroin in the Ashford area.  There were however  positive  things  said
    about the Appellant.  There was a letter  from  the  drug  and  alcohol
    practitioner dated 9 October 2013 confirming  that  the  appellant  had
    been working with the substance misuse team since March 2013  in  order
    to address his addiction and during that time  he  had  had  one-to-one
    sessions.  It was confirmed the appellant was on a methadone  reduction
    programme with the clinical team.  Importantly his parents  had  agreed
    that he could live with them  upon  release  from  prison  provided  he
    continued to stay drug-free.

 7. The panel considered a large number of cases in relation to the correct
    approach in relation to Article 8 and these are set out between pages 9
    and 11 of the determination.  There are a number of findings which  are
    challenged by the Secretary of State in this appeal.

 8. The panel considered that the appellant  no  longer  had  any  ties  to
    Nepal.  It recorded that he had left Nepal when he was 16 years of age,
    that he had not returned in the past 9 years, that during  his  teenage
    life he was at school in southern India only returning to Nepal on  two
    occasions during school vacation.   There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant had any friends who remained in Nepal and with  whom  he  had
    contact in the United Kingdom but it was accepted the appellant had two
    grandparents with whom it said the appellant had little or  no  contact
    in the time that the appellant had been in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    panel therefore concluded that the appellant  no  longer  retained  any
    ties with Nepal.

 9. That finding is challenged by the Secretary of State.  It is as well to
    point out that in the grant of  permission  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson said in paragraph 3 of her grant of permission,

         "It cannot seriously be argued that the Tribunal failed to  provide
         adequate reasons for finding that  the  appellant  lacked  ties  to
         Nepal.  The evidence of lack of ties is detailed in  paragraphs  11
         to 12  and  the  Tribunal's  findings  in  paragraphs  25  and  32.
         Moreover the Tribunal found that the appellant had  lived  most  of
         his adult life and teenage years in the United Kingdom and has  not
         returned to Nepal in the past nine years."

10. Notwithstanding that I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  erred
    in law in finding that the appellant no longer has any ties.

11. The existence of ties has been considered in a number  of  cases.   The
    most important of these is Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) a decision of the President, Blake J and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor.  The  case  concerned  a  young  man  who  had
    lawfully entered the United Kingdom on 7 July 1991, aged six, in  order
    to join his father, who has been settled and mainly resident here since
    1961. He was granted indefinite leave to remain on the 29 June 1999. He
    had thus been resident in the United Kingdom for 21 years at  the  time
    of the hearing,  about three quarters of his life.





12. In paragraphs 123 and 124, the panel said:

         The natural and ordinary meaning of the  word  'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless.

         We recognise that the text under the  rules  is  an  exacting  one.
         Consideration of whether a person has 'no  ties'  to  such  country
         must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances
         and  is  not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'
         circumstances.

13. It is perfectly plain that the Tribunal must  not  be  limited  in  its
    approach to what amounts to ties.  Ties cover a wide variety of social,
    cultural and familiar matters.  It is not just a question  of  language
    but in this case there is no doubt that the  appellant  had  spent  the
    first sixteen years of his life in a  country  other  than  the  United
    Kingdom.  During the time that he was growing up in Nepal there can  be
    no doubt that he acquired considerable cultural and  social  ties  with
    that country.

14. Notwithstanding the fact that he only returned from boarding school  on
    two occasions each year it cannot reasonably be said that  during  that
    period he lost ties with Nepal.  Indeed if  that  were  the  case  then
    there would be many thousands of people who had been sent to schools in
    different parts of the world  who  would  lose  their  ties  simply  by
    spending a period of their teenage life being educated in  a  different
    country.  That is not remotely likely.  I am quite satisfied that  when
    the appellant came to the United Kingdom, he had never lost his ties to
    Nepal.  Since that time he has been in  the  United  Kingdom,  spending
    much of the time with his  Nepalese  parents,  he  continues  to  speak
    Nepalese.  Indeed his parents, had  they  given  evidence,  would  have
    required an  interpreter.   The  application  for  an  interpreter  was
    repeated before me.  But language is not the only tie.  I am  satisfied
    that it cannot on any rational basis be said  that  the  appellant  has
    lost his ties with Nepal notwithstanding the fact that he has  been  in
    the United Kingdom for some nine years and has been granted  indefinite
    leave to remain about seven years ago.

15. The Tribunal on that basis went on to say,

         "We are satisfied that this appellant would  not  be  able  to  re-
         establish and maintain a private life if deported to Nepal".

    It seems to me that this was putting the case very highly indeed on the
    part of the Tribunal to  say  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  him
    notwithstanding the fact that he is a Nepalese citizen, notwithstanding
    the fact that he speaks Nepalese, notwithstanding the fact that he  had
    spent the first sixteen years of his life in Nepal albeit for  some  of
    those years being absent in southern India whilst he was being educated
    but returning to Nepal during the vacations.  It is also  to  be  noted
    that he has got family members in spite of the fact  that  he  was  not
    found to have any substantial contact  with  them.   It  cannot  in  my
    judgment rationally be said that it would  be  impossible  for  him  to
    establish and maintain a private life in Nepal.  That  is  one  of  the
    challenges which is made by the Secretary of State in this  appeal.   I
    accept that the finding that he had no ties to Nepal was not one  which
    was properly open to the panel.

16. The panel then went on  to  consider  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances in the case.   This  obviously  affected  the  Article  8
    consideration.  The panel operated on the basis  that  the  appellant's
    criminal behaviour was related to  his  drug  addiction.   That  was  a
    finding that was entirely open  to  the  panel.   But  they  were  then
    persuaded that imprisonment and reflection has informed  the  appellant
    that with the support both practical and emotional  of  his  family  he
    could kick the drug habit and maintain  drug-free  and  therefore  keep
    away from bad company and not commit further crimes.  Having heard  the
    arguments advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State by  Mr  Saunders
    to the contrary, I am persuaded that that was  a  sustainable  finding.
    Whilst there was clearly a prospective assessment that was made by  the
    Tribunal (and it may be that it was more pious hope  than  reality)  it
    was an assessment that the panel was entitled to make.   It  cannot  be
    said that it was irrational  having  considered  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant, a benefit which I did not have, and having seen the presence
    of his parents in the Tribunal hearing,  although  they  did  not  give
    evidence.

17. The panel then went on to find  that  there  was  a  prospect  of  drug
    rehabilitation which would be bettered in the United  Kingdom  than  it
    would be in Nepal.  Whilst the issue of rehabilitation is well-known in
    EU cases where the issue is whether the non-national  who  is  a  Union
    citizen would better be rehabilitated in this country  rather  than  in
    his European homeland, I  do  not  see  that  that  principle  has  any
    traction in a non-European case.  There is no duty  to  facilitate  the
    rehabilitation of an individual and therefore to improve  his  position
    in circumstances which would outweigh  the  importance  of  immigration
    control.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal
    panel  skewed  its  assessment  of  exceptionality  and  they  did   so
    principally by relying on the importance  of  their  finding  that  the
    appellant had lost all ties with Nepal.

18. The consequence of that finding is now significant.   As  a  result  of
    changes which were made by s. 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 and  which
    were implemented today by operation of the  commencement  order  taking
    effect from midnight there are radical changes  to  the  provisions  in
    relation to foreign criminals.  The appellant is defined as  a  foreign
    criminal by reference to Section 117D, a provision which was introduced
    into the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   A  foreign
    criminal is defined as a person who is not a British  citizen  and  who
    has been convicted in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an  offence  and  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months.

19. The new provisions which have been introduced are to be seen in s. 117C
    which sets out additional considerations in cases involving  a  foreign
    criminal in relation to Article 8.  It says,

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies."

    Exception 1 is defined in Section 117C(4)

         "(4) Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life, and

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country in which C is proposed to  be
                  deported."

    As a result of the use of the word "and" between paragraphs (b) and (c)
    there can be no doubt that these are cumulative requirements.  There is
    also no doubt that paragraph (a) prevents Exception 1 applying  in  the
    case of this appellant because he has not been lawfully resident in the
    United Kingdom for most of his life.

20. It follows from this that in any consideration of Article 8 which I now
    am required to conduct I have to take into account the provisions of s.
    117C.  I am conscious of the fact that in  cases  such  as  this  there
    might be transitional provisions which render it  inapplicable  insofar
    as cases where there has been a relevant decision  made  prior  to  the
    coming into effect of the Act.  The Secretary of State  expressly  does
    not say in the context of this appeal that these provisions apply to  a
    decision which was made prior to their implementation by the  Secretary
    of State or to a decision made by the Tribunal where  these  provisions
    were not in effect.  But as a result of my finding that  there  was  an
    error of law, a finding which is made independently of  the  provisions
    of the new Part 5A, I am now required to determine whether or  not  the
    decision made by the Secretary of State breaches the appellant's  human
    rights or would be unlawful under s. 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act.   In
    such circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  I  have  to  apply  the  new
    legislation.

21. In my judgment the appellant cannot now avail himself of the benefit of
    Article 8 because in re-making the decision I have to consider that  it
    is not lawful for him to remain in  this  country  unless  Exception  1
    applies.  That would only apply if he had established that he had  been
    lawfully present in the United Kingdom for most of his  life  which  he
    has not done.  For these reasons I consider both  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law and that in remaking the  decision  I  am
    bound by Part 5A which requires the appellant to be removed.
22. Article 8 and the  public  interest  is  now  the  subject  of  primary
    legislation.  It is Parliament and not the Secretary of State  who  now
    determines the Tribunal's approach.  Section 117A enacts:
         (2)In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
         the considerations listed in section 117C.


23. The requirement to pay regard to the definition of public interest  may
    not be in absolute terms.  Article 8 is in absolute terms in  that,  if
    an appellant's private and family life is potentially  engaged,  it  is
    unlawful  to  remove  him  if  the  decision  to   do   so   would   be
    disproportionate.  Nevertheless, the proportionality  exercise  is  now
    conducted with reference to a  statutory  yardstick  against  which  an
    appellant must place his private and family  life  considerations.   It
    will, of course, be something of a rarity if those  interests  outweigh
    the public interest and circumstances will have to be identified  which
    merit a departure from the norm, where the statute does not engage with
    the private and family life which an appellant places in  the  balance.
    There are no such circumstances in the present appeal.

DECISION

The panel made an error on a point of law and I  allow  the  appeal  of  the
Secretary of State  and  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal allowing Mr Bratam Rai's appeal on  human  rights  grounds  against
the decision to make a deportation order against him.


I substitute a decision dismissing his appeal.

                                                                       [pic]
                                                              ANDREW JORDAN,
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


