
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01086/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2016                          |On 7 October 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                               PROFESSOR JUSS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               faisal mohammad
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Perry who heard the respondent's appeal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision that  he  should  be  deported  as  a  result  of  his
    offending behaviour.

2.   He is a Danish citizen.  He was born in  1993  and  he  came  here,  it
    seems, in August 2002. We say "it seems" because there was an issue  as
    to the date on which he had arrived in this country.   He  asserted  at
    one stage that it was in  2000  but  as  the  judge  noted,  there  was
    evidence from the Danish Embassy  which  confirmed  that  he  had  left
    Denmark on 29 March 2002 and he himself  in  his  evidence  before  the
    judge said that he had arrived in this country in August 2002.

3.   We note that in paragraph 51 of his judgment the  judge  said  that  he
    found that he arrived in the UK with his  mother  and  siblings  around
    2001 and 2002.  It seems to us from the findings made  by the judge  on
    the evidence that was before him that that  is  not  a  proper  finding
    because, as we say, it is clear that he did  not  arrive  before  March
    2002 and the evidence clearly that was finally  before  the  judge  was
    that it was August 2002.

4.   That is of some importance because it could affect the protection  that
    the  respondent  has  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  because  deportation  under   those
    Regulations is strictly confined.

5.   The reason why  the  decision  to  deport  was  made  was  because  the
    respondent has committed a  considerable  number  of  offences  between
    March 2010 and March 2014.  In  all  he  has  been  convicted  of  nine
    offences, commencing with the most serious which was  a  wounding  with
    intent to do grievous bodily  harm  and  there  have  been   others  of
    possessing offensive weapons, battery and failing to  comply  with  the
    requirements of a detention and training order.

6.   Again, because it is material in deciding what protection  he  has,  it
    is important to note the dates upon which the relevant convictions took
    place. The first and the most serious was on 26  March  2010  when  for
    wounding intent to do grievous bodily harm he received a detention  and
    training order for two years.

7.   Then on 20 December 2011  he  received  three  months  for  failing  to
    comply with the detention and training order  and  finally  so  far  as
    custodial sentences are concerned, on 7 May  2013  for  conspiracy  and
    theft he received a sentence  of  six  months  in  a  young  offender's
    institution.

8.   Thus the total detention to which he was sentenced was  two  years  and
    nine months and he would have served in prison half of that period.

9.   In addition he was out of the country when at the age of 13 because  he
    had been  expelled from  school  for  bad  behaviour  he  was  sent  to
    Tanzania by his mother to stay with his maternal aunt.   The  judge  in
    paragraph 3 of his decision says that that was for six  months,  albeit
    it would seem there was some dispute about that and the respondent  had
    indicated that it was only for four months.

10.  However that was clearly the history that is recorded.   However  later
    in his decision the judge says that it was four months.  It is a little
    difficult to  follow  why  six  months  becomes  four  months  with  no
    reasoning why that should be in between.

11.  However the final decision of the judge was  that,  as  he  is  an  EEA
    national, if he has resided in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  at
    least ten years prior to  the  deportation  decision  he  can  only  be
    deported on imperative grounds of public security.   That  is  the  key
    finding which is under attack by the Secretary of State in this appeal.



12.  It is important to  bear  in  mind  what  the  Regulations  provide  in
    deciding whether the ten year applies.  The starting point is paragraph
    15 of the 2006 Regulations which provides so far as material

         "(1) The following person shall acquire the right to reside in  the
             United Kingdom permanently.


             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period
                  of five years;"

    It is clear that that means lawful residence and periods in  prison  do
    not count towards that residence.

13.  One then goes to paragraph 19 which deals with removal from the  United
    Kingdom and provides by 19(1B) which provides

         "If the Secretary of State considers that the exclusion of  an  EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national  is  justified  on
         the grounds of public policy, public security or  pubic  health  in
         accordance with Regulation 21 he may make a removal order",

    But the point  so far as removal is concerned is dealt  with  by  15(3)
    which provides so far as material that removal may be required  if  the
    Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal  is  justified
    on grounds of public policy in accordance with Regulation 21.

14.  One then goes to Regulation 21 which provides again so far as  material
    by subparagraph

         "(iii) a relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


         (iv) a relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who


             (a)   has resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                  decision."

15.  Thus as can be seen so far  as  the  ten  years  is  concerned,  it  is
    necessary to work back from the date of the decision  in  question  and
    decide whether there has been a continuous period of at least ten years
    prior to that decision, the decision in this case having been  made  in
    May 2014.

16.  Thus one goes back prima facie to May 2004 but one excludes the  period
    when he was in Tanzania,  which  on  the  judge's  indication  was  six
    months, and the periods when he was in custody which amount to at least
    one year four-and-a-half months.  That of course takes it back  further
    and one as to bear in mind that the period has to be  continuous  prior
    to the decision and thus one has to have in  mind  that  there  was  no
    continuous lawful residence for a period of ten years because what  one
    cannot do is to look at various periods and add them together  to  make
    the necessary ten year period because, as we say, one has to work  back
    from the date of the removal decision.

17.  Mr Melvin has submitted that he does not meet  the five year  provision
    because he says that he has not resided in the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of five years and one  does  not  work  backwards  in
    deciding the  five year period.

18.  Suffice it to say that in our view it is not necessary for us to  reach
    a final determination as to whether that is or is not  correct  because
    the question that we have to ask ourselves is whether there are serious
    grounds of public policy  so  far  as  this  particular  respondent  is
    concerned.  We are satisfied, looking at his record and the history  of
    his offending and behaviour, that the Secretary of State  was  entitled
    and indeed correct to take the view that she did  and  we  are  equally
    satisfied that there are in this case serious grounds of public  policy
    which justify the removal of this respondent.

19.  The conclusions of the judge cannot in our view be  upheld  essentially
    for the reasons that we have already given, because it is not a case of
    imperative grounds, it is not a case of ten years and indeed the  judge
    says in his final paragraph "I therefore find  that  the  appellant  as
    resided in the UK for a continuous period of at least ten years."

20.  What he does not say and what he should have made  clear  was  that  it
    was a case of working back from the decision in question, and  that  is
    not an exercise that he has properly undertaken. Nor having  regard  to
    the times in prison was there any continuous period of  ten years.

21.  The respondent has not attended  this  appeal  and  there  has  been  a
    notification from the solicitors who represented him before the  First-
    tier Judge and who were responsible for the grounds of appeal that they
    are no longer instructed. We have no  doubt  that  the  respondent  was
    properly notified of this appeal and we see in those  circumstances  no
    reason why it would be adjourned.

Notice of Decision

22.  We therefore decided this appeal  in  accordance  with  Rule  38  which
    entitles us so to do.  In the circumstances this appeal will be allowed
    and the decision of the Secretary  of  State  that  the  respondent  be
    removed will stand.

23.  No anonymity direction is made.




[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 25th February 2016


Mr Justice Collins


