
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01985/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 15 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PTA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms O Momoh, instructed by Shan & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. In a decision promulgated on 5 December 2014, the Upper Tribunal  found
    an error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Callow and Dr T Okitikpi which allowed the deportation appeal  of  PTA.
    The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  set  aside  and  the
    deportation appeal now comes before us to be remade. The error  of  law
    decision is appended and gives the background to this matter.

 2. We continue the anonymity order made in the error of law  decision  for
    the reasons given there. This appeal falls to  be  considered  in  line
    with Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 which inserted Part  5A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 with effect from  28th
    July 2014. All deportation appeals heard after that date,  whether  the
    decision to deport or the deportation order was made prior to that date
    or not, are subject to this new statutory scheme.

 3. The amendment to Part 5A reads as follows:

         117A Application of this Part


              (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
                   to  determine  whether  a   decision   made   under   the
                   Immigration Acts-


                   (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                       family life under Article 8, and

                   (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                       Human Rights Act 1998.

              (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or
                   tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


                   (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                       117B, and

                   (b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                       criminals, to the considerations listed  in  section
                       117C.

              (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
                   the question of whether an interference with  a  person's
                   right to respect for private and family life is justified
                   under Article 8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

              (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                   the public interest.

              (2) It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                   interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                   Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in  the
                   United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons
                   who can speak English-

               [pic] [pic]  [pic]

                   (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                   (b) are better able to integrate into society.

              (3) It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                   interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                   Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in  the
                   United Kingdom are financially independent, because  such
                   persons-

                   (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                   (b) are better able to integrate into society.




              (4) Little weight should be given to-

                   (a) a private life, or

                   (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                       is established by a person at a time when the person
                       is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

              (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                   established by a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                   immigration status is precarious.

              (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                   the public interest does not require the person's removal
                   where-

                   (a) the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                       relationship with a qualifying child, and

                   (b) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                       leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

              (1) The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                   interest.

              (2) The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                   criminal,  the  greater  is  the   public   interest   in
                   deportation of the criminal.

              (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                   sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or
                   more, the public interest requires C's deportation unless
                   Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

              (4) Exception 1 applies where-

                   (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                       for most of C's life,

                   (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                       Kingdom, and

                   (c) there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                       integration into the country to which C is  proposed
                       to be deported.

              (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                   relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine  and
                   subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,
                   and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child
                   would be unduly harsh.

              (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                   to a period of imprisonment of at least four  years,  the
                   public interest requires  deportation  unless  there  are
                   very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
                   described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

              (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                   taken  into  account  where  a  court  or   tribunal   is
                   considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal  only
                   to the extent that the reason for the  decision  was  the
                   offence or offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                   convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

              (1) In this Part-"Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European
                   Convention on Human Rights; "qualifying  child"  means  a
                   person who is under the age of 18 and who-


                   (a) is a British citizen, or

                   (b) has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                       period of seven years or more;

                   "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                   (a) is a British citizen, or

                   (b) who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  (within  the
                       meaning of the Immigration Act 1971  -  see  section
                       33(2A) of that Act).

              (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


                   (a) who is not a British citizen,

                   (b) who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                       offence, and

                   (c) who-

                       (i) has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
                            of at least 12 months,

                       (ii)    has been convicted of an  offence  that  has
                            caused serious harm, or

                       (iii)   is a persistent offender.

              (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a  person  subject
                   to an order under-


                   (a) section 5 of the Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act
                       1964 (insanity etc),

                   (b) section 57 of the Criminal Procedure  (Scotland)  Act
                       1995 (insanity etc), or

                   (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health  (Northern  Ireland)
                       Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted of
                       an offence.

              (4) In this  Part,  references  to  a  person  who  has  been
                   sentenced to a period   of imprisonment  of  a    certain
                   length of time-


                   (a) do not include a person who has received a  suspended
                       sentence (unless a court  subsequently  orders  that
                       the sentence or any part of it (of whatever  length)
                       is to take effect);

                   (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced  to  a
                       period of imprisonment of that length of  time  only
                       by  virtue  of  being   sentenced   to   consecutive
                       sentences amounting in aggregate to that  length  of
                       time;

                   (c) include a person who is sentenced  to  detention,  or
                       ordered  or  directed  to   be   detained,   in   an
                       institution  other  than  a  prison  (including,  in
                       particular, a hospital or an institution  for  young
                       offenders) for that length of time; and (d)  include
                       a  person  who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment   or
                       detention, or ordered or directed  to  be  detained,
                       for an indeterminate period, provided  that  it  may
                       last for at least that length of time.

              (5) If any question arises for the purposes of this  Part  as
                   to whether a person is a British citizen, it is  for  the
                   person asserting that fact to prove it."


 4. The Immigration Rules were amended at the same time as s117A  to  s117D
    came into effect and read, in so far as relevant  to  this  appeal,  as
    follows:

         "A362.Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
         Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014  are  met,
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.

         ...

         396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall
         be that the public interest requires  deportation.  It  is  in  the
         public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make  a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007.

         397. A deportation order will not be made if the  person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Where
         deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is outweighed.

         Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months;

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported;
                      and

                      (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to  be  deported;
                      or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life; and

             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported.

         399B.  Where  an  Article  8  claim  from  a  foreign  criminal  is
         successful:

             (a) in the case of a person who is in  the  UK  unlawfully  or
             whose leave to  enter  or  remain  has  been  cancelled  by  a
             deportation order, limited leave may be  granted  for  periods
             not exceeding 30 months and subject to such conditions as  the
             Secretary of State considers appropriate;

             (b) in the case of a person who has not  been  served  with  a
             deportation order, any limited leave to enter or remain may be
             curtailed to a period not exceeding 30 months  and  conditions
             may be varied to such conditions as  the  Secretary  of  State
             considers appropriate;

             (c) indefinite leave to enter or remain may be  revoked  under
             section 76 of the 2002 Act  and  limited  leave  to  enter  or
             remain granted for a period not exceeding 30 months subject to
             such  conditions  as  the   Secretary   of   State   considers
             appropriate;

             (d) revocation of a deportation order does  not  confer  entry
             clearance or leave  to  enter  or  remain  or  re-instate  any
             previous leave."

 5. There was agreement before us that the appellant is a foreign  national
    criminal as defined in s117D.

 6. It was common ground  also  that  the  appellant  who  has  received  a
    sentence of 3 years and 6 months, so  coming  under  paragraph  398(b),
    could not meet the requirements  of  paragraphs  399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. This was because the appellant does not have any children of his own in
    the UK. Whilst he was in prison his partner had a child on  13  January
    2013 by another man. The appellant met  that  child  only  once  before
    coming out of prison in 2014 so a relationship of any meaning, at best,
    in our view, can only have begun after he came out of prison less  than
    a year ago. He has not been living with his partner and her child since
    leaving prison. It was not suggested to us that he had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with that child or that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without him.  Given  the
    very limited nature of his relationship with his  partner's  child,  it
    appeared to us that paragraph 399(a) could not be met.

 8. The finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant has a genuine
    and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  partner  who  is  settled  is
    preserved before  us.  The  relationship  was  not  formed  whilst  the
    appellant was in the UK lawfully, however as he  only  regularised  his
    status in 2009, however and the evidence is that the relationship began
    in approximately 2001. Paragraph 399(b)(i) could not be  met  for  this
    reason.

 9. In any event, it was not our view that the appellant's removal could be
    said to result in unduly harsh circumstances for the partner where  the
    evidence indicates that the relationship has an unsettled history,  she
    managed to continue working and looking  after  her  child  whilst  the
    appellant was in prison and that she has good support from other family
    members including her mother.

10. The appellant has been in the UK for most of his life, from 1990 to the
    present. He cannot meet the provisions of paragraph 399A where  he  was
    in the UK unlawfully from 1990 to 2009, however. It was also  our  view
    that even where the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant has no
    ties to Nigeria, having come to the UK whilst  relatively  young,  this
    was not something that in his circumstances would necessarily amount to
    significant obstacles to integration where he has family  members  such
    as his mother who grew up there  who  can  advise  him  about  life  in
    Nigeria and who can continue to offer the support he has received since
    leaving prison.

11. Where those matters were so, we proceeded  to  consider  whether  there
    were "very compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A" as required by paragraph 398.

12. When conducting that assessment, we  referred  to  the  case  of  Chege
    (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015]  UKUT  00165  (IAC)  which
    provides in the head note that

         "... such identification to be informed by the seriousness of the
         criminality and taking into account the factors set out in s117B"

    and

         "... [c]ompelling as an adjective has the meaning of having a
         powerful and irresistible effect; convincing."

    and, at [25]:

         "What are "very compelling circumstances over and above those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A" referred to in the closing
         words of paragraph 398? They can only be circumstances, which are
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the public interest in
         deportation and render such deportation a breach of Article 8. The
         present Rules set out particular aspects that must be taken into
         account in the weighing of proportionality; they allow for
         consideration of other circumstances that may not fall within that
         rubric but, in the language of the Rules, those circumstances "must
         be very compelling"

    and, at [28]:

         "Those individuals who do not come within paragraph 399 or 399A
         will need to establish very compelling circumstances over and above
         those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A because nothing else
         will be weighty enough to outweigh the public interest in
         deportation."

13. In our judgement there was nothing in the evidence before us which fell
    outside the "rubric" of or was  "over  and  above"  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 399 and 399A, certainly nothing that could  be  characterised
    as  sufficiently  compelling  so  as  defeat  the  public  interest  in
    deportation. Paragraphs 399 and 399A provide for his relationship  with
    his partner and her child and his length of residence. His relationship
    with other relatives in the UK has not been found to amount to a family
    life as the appellant is an adult  who  can  be  expected  to  and  has
    established an independent adult life.

14. Section 117C (2) indicates that the more  serious  the  offences,  "the
    greater is the public interest in deportation". The  appellant's  index
    offence is of possession with intent to supply Class A drugs for  which
    he received a sentence of 3 years and 6 months. That offence followed a
    number of others and the use of 14 aliases and four different dates  of
    birth. His offending behaviour is very serious to our minds. It  cannot
    be mitigated to any  meaningful  degree  by  the  fact  that  he  began
    offending at the age of 15 where he continued to offend  as  an  adult,
    the offending becoming ever more serious. The weight attracting to  the
    public interest remains significant where he has  been  assessed  as  a
    posing a medium risk of serious harm to the public in the  most  recent
    OASYS report dated 18 June 2014.

15. The appellant cannot come within the exceptions of s.117C where, as set
    out above, he has not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his
    life and it is not unduly harsh for his partner or her child that he is
    deported.

16. The factor weighing in his  favour  in  s.117B,  being  able  to  speak
    English, is, to our minds, of little purchase in  the  context  of  the
    matters set out above.

17. His relationship with his partner and private life also attract  little
    weight following s.117B (4) as he was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  for  an
    extended period.  We  have  already  given  our  view  on  the  limited
    relationship with his partner's child and do not find that  s.117B  (6)
    assists the appellant.

18. We did not have evidence before us of the appellant  being  financially
    independent for any consistent period so s.117(3)  also  cannot  assist
    him.

19. After assessing the evidence put forward in support of the  appellant's
    case, therefore, for the reasons set out above, we did  not  find  very
    compelling  circumstances  existed  that  could  outweigh  the   public
    interest in deportation. We therefore refused the appeal.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on  a  point
    of law and was set aside.

21. We re-make the appeal, refusing it under Article 8 of the ECHR.



Signed:  [pic]         Date: 7 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01985/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 November 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PTA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Balroop, instructed by Shan & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    promulgated on 5 August 2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow and Dr
    T Okitikpi which allowed the respondent's appeal against deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, we refer to PTA as the appellant and
    to the Secretary of State as the respondent, reflecting their positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and was born on 25 May 1980.

 4. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the  UK  at
    the age of 10 in 1990. He appears to have been here  unlawfully  until,
    on 22 January 2007, he made an application for leave  and  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain (ILR) on 15 October 2009 on the basis of  14
    years long residence.

 5. The appellant has a history of offending from a relatively  young  age,
    beginning with a 2 month sentence on 14 February 1996 for assault  with
    intent to rob and including 6 further offences for  some  of  which  he
    received custodial sentences of varying lengths. After a conviction  on
    15 August 2003 for possession of cannabis for which he was  fined  �50,
    the appellant did not offend again until, on 31 October  2012,  he  was
    sentenced to 3 years and 6  months  imprisonment  for  possession  with
    intent to supply crack cocaine and heroin. As a result of that offence,
    the respondent commenced automatic deportation proceedings against him,
    a deportation order was made on 16 September 2013 and served on him  by
    hand  on  18  September  2103.   The  appellant  appealed  against  the
    deportation  order  on  30  September  2013,  giving  rise   to   these
    proceedings.

 6. The appellant's grounds of appeal against the deportation order  relied
    on Article 8 ECHR.  He maintains that he  has  a  family  life  with  a
    partner, SB, a British national. She  has  a  child,  J,  from  another
    relationship. He also maintains that he has established  a  significant
    private life.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal against deportation  on  the
    basis of the appellant's long residence since the age of 10 years'  old
    and his relationship with SB and her child.

 8. The respondent's grounds of appeal were as follows:

          a. the First-tier  Tribunal  was  incorrect  to  require  in  the
             Article 8  proportionality  assessment  that  there  be  "very
             serious reasons" justifying deportation, applying an incorrect
             principle from Maslov v Austria [2008] GC ECHR  1638/03,  that
             incorrect principle being identified by the Court of Appeal in
             R (Akpinar) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)
             [2014] EWCA Civ 937.

          b. the panel erred in finding that  the  appellant's  family  and
             private life could amount  to  "a  very  strong  claim"  under
             Article 8 that could succeed in defeating the public  interest
             in deportation and was wrong to find that  the  appellant  had
             lost any meaningful ties with Nigeria

          c. the errors set out above meant that the  public  interest  was
             incorrectly weighed.

 9. We found merit in the first ground, sufficient to  require  us  to  set
    aside the Article 8 proportionality assessment to be re-made.

10. At [34] the First-tier Tribunal set out a summary of Maslov. At [34(d)]
    the panel states:

         "For a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major part
         of his or her childhood and youth in the host country very  serious
         reasons are required to justify expulsion. This is all the more  so
         where the person concerned committed the  offences  underlying  the
         expulsion measure as a juvenile"

11. Comparing this with the appellant's history as above, it will be  clear
    that even if this was an accurate  expression  of  a  principle  to  be
    applied from Maslov, it does not apply  here.  The  appellant  has  not
    spent all or the major part of his childhood in  the  UK.  The  offence
    underlying the expulsion decision here was committed when he  was  over
    30 years' old.

12. In any event, as stated in the grounds, as explained by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Akpinar, the statement of the First-tier Tribunal as  to  the
    principle to be applied from Maslov was not correct and overstated  the
    standard placed on the respondent to justify  expulsion.  At  [30]  and
    [31] of Akpinar the Court of Appeal states:

        "30.    Paragraph 75 of the judgment [in Maslov] has been regarded
        by some, and as is submitted on behalf of Mr Akpinar, as laying
        down a new rule of law, creating a consistent and objective hurdle
        to be surmounted by the State in all cases to which it applies; in
        other words, irrespective of the other factors involved, unless the
        State can show that there are "very serious reasons" for deporting
        "a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major part of
        his or her childhood and youth in the host country", his Article 8
        rights will prevail. The phrase "very serious reasons" has been
        taken to mean "very serious offending".

     1. I do not think that this is a correct reading of the judgment. The
        Court's extensive citation of its previous case law does not
        suggest that it intended to depart from it. The first words of
        paragraph 75 "In short", indicate that it was seeking to summarise
        the effect of the previous jurisprudence. This is how paragraph 75
        was read by the Court of Appeal in JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory Coast)
        v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 10, in
        which at paragraph 21 of his judgment Richards LJ described it as
        pulling together what had been stated in earlier paragraphs.
        Paragraph 76 of the judgment in Maslov shows that the State's and
        the courts' consideration of an Article 8 claim involves a
        balancing exercise, in which the factors to which the Court
        referred are to be taken into account. This is confirmed by the way
        in which it expressed its ultimate conclusion, in paragraphs 100
        and 201 of the judgment ... "

13. We were satisfied that the error as to the correct  standard  that  the
    respondent had to show in order for deportation  to  be  justified  was
    material where the First-tier Tribunal  at [40] stated as part of their
    assessment:

         "As a settled migrant who has now lived in the UK for  nigh  on  23
         years,  very  serious  reasons  are   required   to   justify   his
         deportation"

    that approach being reiterated at [41] and at [47]:

         "Repeating the guidance in Maslov, it is trite law to observe  that
         where there has been long residence since childhood a private  life
         claim would succeed unless  there  were  very  serious  reasons  to
         justify expulsion. Those very serious reasons do not exist in  this
         case."

14. As regards the other grounds we found that they only really amounted to
    disagreement with the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal.  Where  the
    appellant has not been in Nigeria since he was 10 years'  old  and  the
    evidence before the panel went only one way it was clearly  within  the
    range of reasonable  responses  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    conclude that he no longer had any meaningful  ties  to  that  country.
    Other than the error already identified, it did not appear to  us  that
    the panel could be criticised for its approach to the  public  interest
    given the clear and correct self-directions in that regard at [30]  and
    [46] and identification at [39] of the  offence  here  as  "undoubtedly
    very serious".

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be re-made.
Directions

16. No later than 7 days before the reconvened hearing  the  parties  shall
    file with the Tribunal and serve on each other a consolidated,  indexed
    and paginated bundle of all documents relied upon.

17. That bundle should include any new evidence relevant to  the  re-making
    of the Article 8 proportionality assessment.

18. No later than 7 days before the reconvened hearing  the  parties  shall
    file with the Tribunal and serve on each other a skeleton argument.

Signed:[pic]                            Date: 17 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


Anonymity

We make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, his partner or his partner's child.   We  do  so  in
the best interests of  the  child  and  in  order  to  protect  the  child's
identity.



