

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  DA/01641/2013
     IA/18986/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2016                              |On 08 August 2016             |
|Prepared 15 April 2016                        |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MAI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     (2 November 2015) Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jowett, Counsel, instructed by Albany
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Somalia, date of birth [ ]  1975,  appealed
    against a deportation order made on 9 August 2012.  On 9 October 2013 a
    First-tier Tribunal  (IAC)  heard  the  deportation  order  and  asylum
    appeals.  On 17 October 2013 the (IAC) did not uphold a Section 72 NIAA
    certificate, dismissed the Claimant's appeals  on  Refugee  Convention,
    Article 2 and 3 the ECHR grounds but allowed the appeal  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.

3.   Permissions to appeal  and  cross  appeal  were  given  and  led  to  a
    remaking of the appeal on 15 July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  N
    Osborne in a panel (the  panel)  who  allowed  the  appeal  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds.   The judge made findings of fact but  no  decision
    on Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds.   The  decision  [D]  eventually  was
    challenged.  At a hearing on 2 November 2015 that the judge's decisions
    relating to the Section 72 certificate stood but there was an error  of
    law in assessing the Refugee Convention claim.  I was satisfied that  a
    claim under the  Refugee  Convention  or  in  respect  of  Humanitarian
    Protection could not succeed but I invited written submissions from the
    parties within fourteen days of the date of the  decision  (8  December
    2015) in respect of the Article 3 ECHR claim.

4.   The grounds of  challenge  by  the  Secretary  of  State  were  limited
    unsurprisingly to the issue of whether or not there  was  a  Convention
    reason  for  the  Claimant's  fears  on  return  of  ill-treatment  and
    persecution.  The grounds settled by Mr R Hopkin of 20 August 2014  are
    essentially confined to that issue.  There  was  no  challenge  to  the
    findings of fact made by the panel.

5.   The panel's findings are set out at paragraphs 15 to 21 of the  judge's
    decision [D] which are set out below.

         "15. The Appellant does not claim  persecution  by  the  state  but
             rather by individuals within it.  Where ill-treatment by  such
             individuals is capable of crossing the severity threshold into
             persecution, the Appellant  must  also  establish  that  those
             individuals can be categorised as "actors  of  persecution  or
             serious harm" pursuant  to  Regulation  3  of  the  Protection
             Regulations.


         16.  I had the benefit of seeing and listening  most  carefully  to
             the Appellant as he gave his evidence.  Moreover,  I  had  the
             benefit of seeing and hearing his above-mentioned  sister  and
             brother  as  they  gave  their  evidence.   Moreover,  I  have
             compared  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence  with  his  written
             accounts given in statement and interview  form.   Having  had
             that opportunity I  state  now  at  this  early  stage  in  my
             findings that I find the Appellant's  claim  to  be  credible.
             Despite appropriately probing cross-examination by Mrs Hibbert
             on behalf  of  the  Respondent,  no  material  inconsistencies
             emerged in the evidence of the Appellant or his two  siblings.
             The cumulative effect of all  the  evidence  in  this  appeal,
             including the expert evidence prepared by Dr  Bekalo  who  was
             not cross-examined  by  the  Respondent,  is  to  enhance  the
             reliability of the Appellant's evidence and  the  veracity  of
             his case.  Pursuant to paragraphs 27, 36, 41 of  the  judgment
             in R (Iran and Others) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, it  is  not
             necessary for every factor in the balance to  be  set  out  or
             examined.  By way of example only of those factors to which  I
             refer, I note the following.


         17.  The Respondent accepts that the Appellant is a Somali national
             and that he is a member of the Isaaq clan and that he was born
             and lived in Burao, Somaliland.  The deceased FA was also from
             the Isaaq clan.  However, the Appellant is from sub-clan  Habr
             Jaalo whereas the deceased was from sub-clan Habr Awal.


         18.  Mrs Hibbert put  to  the  Appellant  that  when  he  lived  at
             [Cardiff], that on 9 January 2003 he had written a  letter  to
             the Home Office  applying  for  a  travel  document  to  visit
             Somalia due to illness in his family at home (see document  k)
             as listed above.  That letter was put to the Appellant in  the
             oral hearing.  He  denied  having  any  knowledge  of  it  and
             asserted that he had not written that  letter  or  signed  it.
             Indeed, he further asserted that it was not his signature.  Mr
             Jowett on behalf of the  Appellant  submitted  that  I  should
             compare his signature with  his  signature  on  his  statement
             dated 17 October 2012 and his asylum interview.  I have indeed
             compared those signatures.  I find that the signature  on  the
             Appellant's asylum interview  is  strikingly  similar  to  the
             signature on the Appellant's witness statement,  whereas  both
             those signatures are starkly different from the  signature  on
             the letter dated 9 January 2003 at  document  k.   It  follows
             that I am far from  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  wrote  or
             signed the letter dated 9 January 2003 whether as  claimed  by
             the Respondent or at all.  I find  that  the  signatures  that
             appear on the  above-mentioned  documents  indicate  that  the
             Appellant did not sign the said letter.  To that  extent,  the
             Appellant's  oral  evidence  given  at  the  oral  hearing  is
             supported by the documentary evidence.  His reliability  as  a
             witness and his personal credibility is duly enhanced  by  the
             documentary evidence which corroborates his oral evidence upon
             this specific issue.


         19.  The Appellant accepts that in or about 1997 he killed FA.   He
             owed FA money for khat.  After the Appellant made a payment to
             [FA], he  attempted  by  way  of  motorcar  to  run  over  the
             Appellant who in response threw a small stone at  the  vehicle
             which pierced the  windscreen/window,  struck  [FA]  who  died
             following a heart attack.  The Appellant promptly visited  the
             police and explained  his  responsibility  for  the  incident.
             Before [FA]'s death  the  Appellant  had  lived  a  relatively
             uneventful and happy life in Cardiff.  After [FA]'s death, the
             Appellant's life has dramatically changed for the worse.   The
             Appellant considers that he will carry the  manslaughter  with
             him for the rest of his life; it is a sensitive topic for him;
              when he was released from prison he felt lost  and  depressed
             and he is not  comfortable  talking  to  strangers  about  it.
             During his trial for manslaughter and after his  release  from
             prison he has been attacked by the deceased's family and other
             clan members.  The Appellant carried many scars to  his  head.
             He was badly assaulted in prison with knives and was taken for
             emergency treatment to  Canterbury  Hospital.   The  case  was
             reported to the police at that time.  The Appellant has  found
             it difficult to come to terms with the fact that he has killed
             somebody and that this is how he is perceived by others.


         20.  In an attempt to avoid the  deceased's  family  the  Appellant
             briefly lived with his sister in  London  and  then  lived  in
             Swindon where he started work at Royal Mail.   Whilst  working
             for Royal Mail in Swindon he was warned that  members  of  the
             sub-clan Habr Awal were going to go after him and so  he  left
             his job and returned to London.  When his licence allowed  him
             to return to Cardiff he did  so  and  found  work  as  a  shop
             assistant in a store.


         21.  However in 2004 and  in  2008  the  above-mentioned  incidents
             occurred because of attacks upon him.  In closing  submissions
             Mrs  Hibbert,  Home  Office   Presenting   Officer   for   the
             Respondent, asserted that there was no evidence other than the
             Appellant's word that he had been assaulted as  claimed.   She
             further submitted  that  there  was  nothing  to  connect  the
             claimed assault in prison with the deceased's family.


              However, I have been referred by Mr Jowatt for  the  Appellant
             to pages 23 and 24 of the  Appellant's  bundle.   Those  pages
             encompass a prisoner's  formal  complaint  under  confidential
             access.  In short, it is a copy of the  Appellant's  complaint
             about an assault (or two) upon him whilst he was held  at  HMP
             Canterbury.  The complaint refers to an earlier incident where
             one of his assailants tried to strangle him in  his  cell  and
             even  locked  him  inside  his  cell.   Additionally,  he  was
             assaulted when he was repeatedly punched to the  head,  kicked
             numerously and stabbed with knives, sustaining injuries  which
             were so extensive that  he  required  emergency  treatment  at
             Canterbury Hospital.  The Appellant claims that  this  was  an
             unprovoked attack on  Friday  3  August  2012.   The  governor
             responded (on page 24) that the matter had  been  referred  to
             Kent Police who are carrying out a  full  investigation.   The
             issue  of  the  meeting  of  the  Appellant  and  his  alleged
             assailants was because it was Eid  prayers  which  is  a  very
             important date in Islam.  The two offenders were  escorted  to
             prayers by an officer who remained with them.  The  governor's
             response is that the Appellant's  safety  was  not  an  issue.
             However, the fact that  a  complaint  was  made  and  that  it
             related to two Muslim assailants does nothing to undermine the
             Appellant's claim that the unprovoked  assault  was  connected
             with the deceased's family/clan.  On balance, and  bearing  in
             mind, as I must, the low standard of  proof  that  has  to  be
             applied throughout in the assessment of this  appeal,  I  find
             that the Appellant has been threatened by the  family  of  the
             deceased and that from time to time since  the  death  of  the
             deceased, the Appellant has been further threatened and/or  in
             the alternative physically attacked.  The documentary evidence
             at pages 23 and  24  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  amounts  to
             corroboration of the Appellant's account upon this issue which
             further enhances the Appellant's reliability as a witness, his
             personal credibility, and the credibility of his claim  to  be
             the  subject  of  continued  interest  from   the   deceased's
             family/sub-clan by reason of a blood feud."

6.   The panel also assessed the expert evidence given by a Dr  Bekalo,  who
    was accepted as a genuine expert  witness  as  was  his  evidence.   Dr
    Bekalo included his view on the Claimant's criminal acts in the  United
    Kingdom, the extent to which there was risk on return  to  Somalia  and
    any available domestic protection to which he could have recourse;  see
    [D22 -31].  In addition, the panel accepted that Dr Bekalo's report was
    balanced and focused and accepted the assessment of risks the  Claimant
    might face on return to Somalia,  from  retaliation  or  revenge.   The
    Panel also accepted the evidence from persons in the  Somali  community
    in Cardiff and how news travelled quickly  within  that  community  and
    abroad.  The panel accepted without qualification, even if  there  were
    some  but  not  material  inconsistencies,  three  witnesses  who  gave
    evidence on those matters and the consistency with Dr Bekalo's evidence
    are set out at paragraphs 32 to 34 of the decision.

7.   It is therefore notable that all the evidence relating  to  the  events
    coming from the Claimant, whose credibility  and  reliability  was  not
    materially challenged on the issue, together with that of Dr Bekalo and
    the  three  witnesses  overwhelmingly  supported  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant reasonably feared he would be  killed.   If  he  returned  to
    Somalia, there would  be  a  bounty  upon  his  head  and  revenge  and
    retribution  amongst  Somalis  was  not   to   be   lightly   dismissed
    irrespective of the general issues of clan feuds  and  revenge  attacks
    which have led to decades of anarchy in Somalia.

8.   None of those findings  were  challenged  by  the  Respondent  and  the
    Presenting  Officer  conducted  "probing  cross-examination"   of   the
    Claimant  and  two  siblings  which  did  not  disclose  any   material
    inconsistencies. Dr Bekalo was not cross-examined and her evidence  was
    regarded as enhancing the reliability of the Appellant's  evidence  and
    the veracity of his claim.

9.   As the panel indicated [D 18] the reliability  of  the  Claimant  as  a
    witness and  his  personal  credibility  was  enhanced  by  documentary
    evidence which corroborated his oral evidence.

10.  Having given time for the representations to be made I decided  that  I
    would informally extend time for receipt of  the  representations.   In
    the event, although I did not receive the  document  at  the  time,  Mr
    Jowett on  behalf  of  the  Claimant  made  representations,  dated  21
    December 2015, which were received at some time in the  Upper  Tribunal
    in  either  December  2015   or   mid-January   2016.    However,   the
    correspondence did not become attached to the file until some  time  in
    early April and its earlier arrival was not notified to me.

11.  There is nothing to indicate  the  Secretary  of  State  has  made  any
    response to my invitation to comment upon the  Article  3  ECHR  issue.
    Thus I have given a very substantial amount of time for a reply  to  be
    served either as intended or as a fact arising  through  the  delay  in
    receipt of representations.

12.  At the hearing on 2 November 2015 remarks were  particularly  addressed
    to Article 3 ECHR.  Article 2  had  previously  been  raised.   In  the
    submissions made by Mr Jowett, dated 21 December 2015, he argued that a
    reasonable inference from the facts found was that  not  only  did  the
    Claimant face death but no less than ill-treatment contrary to  Article
    3 ECHR.  In the event, having considered this issue with the papers  as
    whole, it seemed to me that the judge's findings on risk in Somalia for
    the Claimant to return, engaged  both  the  risk  of  substantial  ill-
    treatment but also particularly the risk of death.  I was satisfied  no
    prejudice could arise to the Respondent from me considering  Article  2
    ECHR as well without a further opportunity to comment.

13.  In the circumstances on the basis of  the  evidence,  particularly  the
    Bekalo report and the judge's findings, I find that  the  Claimant  has
    shown to that low standard of proof as required in  Sivakumaran  [1998]
    ImmAR 97 and Ravichandran [1996] ImmAR 97  as  understood  through  the
    case of Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11  that  news  of  his  return  to
    Somalia would follow him together with the real risk, not least in  the
    light of past attempts in the United Kingdom of there being attack upon
    him, or his death or serious ill-treatment and injury.

14.   Therefore  on  the  evidence  I  find  that  there  is  no  sufficient
    protection within Somalia which the Claimant could  realistically  have
    recourse.  I find that internal relocation  is  not  available  to  the
    Claimant given the general chaos in civilian life  within  Somalia  and
    the lack of any system of domestic protection and the risk  of  revenge
    attacks.   I find there is a real risk of a revenge attack which  would
    not be resolvable by payment of a blood money  payment  because  first,
    the Claimant could not afford it and, secondly, such previous  attempts
    to settle the matter have failed.

15.  I concluded that there is not efficient enforcement within  Somalia  to
    protect the Appellant from such likelihood of attack.  I  can  form  no
    view of the extent to which clan protection is available but  that  has
    not featured as a basis why the  Claimant  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return.  In the circumstances internal relocation is not  a  reasonable
    option because  of  the  identified  state  of  Somalia,  the  lack  of
    infrastructure and governance of any  identifiable  area  the  Claimant
    could  relocate to.

16.  In these circumstances I find the Appellant faces the real risk of ill-
    treatment contrary to Articles 3 and  2  of  the  ECHR.   There  is  no
    sufficient protection to  which  he  can  have  recourse  and  internal
    relocation is not a realistic or reasonable option.

Decision

27.  The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand. The  following  decision
    is substituted. The appeal on Article 2 and 3 ECHR grounds is allowed.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 27 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation has been caused  by  the  case  file
    being  misplaced
