
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01365/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2015                  |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR KENNETH WINSTON WILSON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S Walker, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr. Gibson-Lee, Counsel


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  Bennett  allowing  the
    appeal of the respondent against the Secretary of State's  decision  to
    deport him to Jamaica.

2.   I will in this determination refer to Mr Kenneth Winston Wilson as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as  the  respondent  for  ease  of
    reference.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born  on  26  June  1976.
    He entered the UK on 2 November 2002 as a visitor and was granted leave
    to enter until 2 May 2003.  He married his wife, [ST] on 26 April 2003.
     He applied for leave to remain as a student nurse on 10 July 2003, and
    was granted leave until 30 April 2004.   His  application  for  further
    leave in this capacity was refused and  was  granted  leave  to  remain
    until 31 August 2005 after a successful appeal.  A further  application
    for leave to remain in this capacity on 4 September 2004 was refused on
    4 November 2004.  His wife gave birth to their  daughter,  [T],  on  26
    February 2005.  [SN] gave birth to his first  son,  [L],  on  12  April
    2005.  He had applied for leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  settled
    person which was granted on 26 August 2005 until 26 August 2007.   [SN]
    gave birth to his second son,  [K],  on  28  September  2006.   He  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain on 16 August 2007.  [VR] gave  birth
    to his third son, [D], on 11 February 2011.

4.   The appellant has eleven convictions the  first  of  which  was  on  28
    February 2007 for driving while disqualified and using a vehicle  while
    uninsured.  He was convicted of further offences on  18  December  2009
    and 10 December 2010; and on 14 January 2014 of six offences  of  theft
    that he had committed between 12 April 2013 and 14 September  2013  and
    had asked for four other offences to be taken into  consideration.   He
    was sentenced  to  twelve  months'  concurrent  imprisonment  for  each
    offence, except for the offence committed  on  29  May  2013.   He  was
    sentenced to seven months imprisonment for  this  offence.   The  judge
    also made an anti-social behaviour order because of this offence, which
    was to last for five years.

5.   In light of the  appellant's  immigration  and  criminal  history,  the
    respondent said that his offences brought him within the scope  of  the
    automatic deportation regime.   She  accepted  that  deportation  would
    interfere with his rights under Article 8 and that it might not  be  in
    the best interests of the children but considered that the interference
    was in accordance with the permissible  aim  of  preventing  crime  and
    disorder.

6.   Although the judge did not make clear on what grounds he  was  allowing
    the appeal, it is apparent  from  reading  the  determination  that  he
    allowed it under Article 8 of the ECHR.

7.   The judge's reasons for allowing the appellant's appeal are set out  at
    paragraphs 41 to 59.   The  judge  stated  at  paragraph  41  that  the
    appellant is liable to automatic deportation under the 2007 Act.  He is
    also a foreign criminal for the purposes of Section 117C  of  the  2002
    Act.  The appellant falls within the scope of paragraph 398(b)  because
    he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of at least 12 months.  Miss
    Heybroek accepted that he did not fall within paragraphs 399  and  399A
    of the Immigration Rules.  Consequently, his appeal  can  only  succeed
    under the Immigration  Rules  if,  in  exceptional  circumstances,  the
    public interest in deportation is outweighed by other consideration.

8.   The judge then proceeded to apply section 117.  In considering  Section
    117C(2), the  judge  found  in  the  appellant's  favour  that  he  was
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment at the lower end of the scale.  His
    offences did not involve violence or threats of violence,  children  or
    dealing in drugs.  Also in his favour was the assessment in  the  OASys
    Report that he was at low risk of causing serious harm.  There  was  no
    escaping that  the  appellant  was  sentenced  as  a  serial  offender.
    Although this was not a promising background, there was  some  evidence
    that substantiated the oral evidence that he would  not  reoffend.   He
    attributed his offences to a lack of money. The  OASys  Report  records
    that he acknowledged smoking cannabis heavily.   The  judge  considered
    that the appellant had enrolled on a RAPt programme  while  he  was  in
    prison and appears to have profited from it.  The judge also considered
    the letter from the prison chaplain which indicated that prison records
    show that he was abstinent and of good behaviour.

9.   The judge then considered Article 8 in the context of  Exception  2  of
    Section 117(5) which applies if the effect of deportation on his family
    members would be unduly harsh.  The judge found on  the  evidence  that
    the separation from his wife and  the  children  as  a  result  of  the
    appellant's deportation would be  unduly  harsh.   The  judge  held  at
    paragraph 59

             "59. While the matter is very finely balanced, I am  satisfied
         that the effect that deportation would  have  on  the  wife,  [TC],
         would be unduly harsh, unless the appellant is given a final chance
         to show that he has reformed.  I am therefore satisfied that  there
         are exceptional  circumstances  that  outweigh  the  strong  public
         interest in deportation, having regard to the fact  that,  for  the
         purposes of Section  117C(2)  of  the  2002  Act,  the  appellant's
         offending is at the lower end of the scale."

10.  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  granted  permission  to  the
    respondent to appeal the judge's decision on 4 March 2015.  She  stated
    that the application was out of time by twelve days, but the respondent
    had given reasons for the delay.  She accepted that  the  decision  was
    not received by the respondent until 2 February 2015.  In addition  she
    considered the merits of the application, extended  time  and  admitted
    the application.

11.  In response, Ms Heybroek of Bellyard Chambers submitted a  respondent's
    reply under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 on 17 March 2015.  She  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    should not have been granted an extension of time to lodge  her  appeal
    without further  enquiry.   Ms  Heybroek  submitted  that  in  granting
    permission the UTJ stated that she  accepted  "that  the  decision  was
    received by the appellant (the Secretary of  State)  until  2  February
    2015."  She submitted that this is not what the  Secretary  of  State's
    application stated, and the UTJ erred in coming to this conclusion; the
    application stated there was a delay in the determination arriving with
    SAT but at no point stated that the Secretary of State had not received
    the determination.

12.  Mr Gibson Lee appeared to  suggest  that  Ms  Heybroek  had  asked  UTJ
    McWilliam to reconsider her decision, which was not  what  Ms  Heybroek
    intended at all.  Ms Heybroek intended that when the case  came  before
    the Upper Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal Judge was  to  consider  whether
    UTJ McWilliam erred in granting an extension of time to  the  Secretary
    of State.  Mr Gibson Lee did not properly pursue this  issue.   In  any
    event, on the file were three emails from the  Home  Office  Specialist
    Appeals Team (SAT), one on 29 January 2015 and two on 30  January  2015
    to the court indicating that they had been informed that  their  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal via the First Tier had been refused on 5  January
    2015, and that they had never received any notification  of  this.   If
    this was the case, they requested a  copy  of  the  decision  regarding
    their appeal.  It is apparent that the determinations were sent to  SAT
    by email on  4  February  2015.   On  this  evidence  I  find  that  Ms
    Heybroek's submission was misconceived.  UTJ McWilliam did not  err  in
    extending time and admitting the application.

13.  I now turn to whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law  in
    his decision.

14.  UTJ McWilliam in granting permission said as follows:

         "3.  The first challenge is that the judge erred in the  assessment
             unduly harsh.  The second challenge is that the  judge  failed
             to recognise that the scales are heavily weighted in favour of
             deportation and to give adequate consideration to  the  public
             interest test.  The remaining issues raised are in relation to
             the proportionality assessment generally.

         4.   The appellant conceded that  he  was  unable  to  satisfy  the
             exceptions set out in paragraph 399 or 399A of the  Rules  and
             the judge agreed with this.  However, the judge then  went  on
             to find that, for the purposes of  Section  117,  exception  2
             applied because deportation would be unduly  harsh.   This  is
             arguably irrational.  If what the judge  meant  to  do  is  to
             allow the appeal outside the Rules, it is arguable that he did
             not identify compelling circumstances over and above those  in
             paragraph 399 or 399A.  There is a  lack  of  clarity  in  the
             decision.  The grounds are arguable."

15.  Mr Gibson Lee argued that the judge did not err in law.   He  did  this
    by reading out paragraphs 12 to 18 of Ms Heybroek's response.  He  then
    read out the reasons given by FTTJ Osborne when she refused  permission
    to the respondent to appeal on 22 December 2014.  He then read out part
    of the sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Tomlinson QC,  which  was
    reproduced by FTTJ Bennett at paragraph 4  of  his  determination.   He
    then went to read out extracts  of  FTTJ  Bennett's  determination  and
    concluded just as FTTJ Osborne had said when refusing  permission  that
    the determination was a careful and  well-reasoned  one  in  which  the
    judge set out the pertinent issues, law and evidence  relating  to  the
    facts of the appeal.  The judge's findings were properly open to him on
    the basis of  the  evidence.   The  judge  had  considered  the  public
    interest in the appellant's deportation and  specifically  acknowledged
    at [50] that exception 2 of Section 117C(5) of the  2002  Act  applied.
    Furthermore the judge  had  found  that  the  matter  was  very  finely
    balanced but nonetheless for proper reasons which he  set  out  in  his
    determination the judge was entitled  to  find  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with  a  qualifying  partner  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  that  the  fact  of  his
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

16.  I find that Mr Gibson Lee failed  to  grasp  the  basis  on  which  UTJ
    McWilliam had granted permission at paragraph 4 of her decision.

17.  I find that at paragraph 41  the  judge  misdirected  himself.   Having
    accepted Miss Heybroek's submission that the  appellant  did  not  fall
    within paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge
    misdirected himself by holding that as a consequence,  the  appellant's
    appeal  could  only  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules   if,   in
    exceptional circumstances,  the  public  interest  in  deportation  was
    outweighed by other considerations.  Paragraph 398 states

         'The Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies, and  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.'

18.  It was not apparent from the determination that this test  was  applied
    by the judge.  I agree with  UTJ  McWilliam  that  the  judge  did  not
    identify compelling circumstances over and above those in paragraph 399
    or 399A.  There was a lack of clarity in the decision.  Accordingly,  I
    find that the judge's decision cannot stand.  It is set aside in  order
    for it to be re-made.

19.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for re-hearing by  a
    judge other than FTTJ Bennett.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

