
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Da/01434/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                RODNEY MAHIya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Rodney [Mahiya], who was born on 3  October  1978  is  a
    male citizen of Zimbabwe.  The appellant's claim for asylum was refused
    by the respondent in June 2007 and a subsequent appeal  to  Immigration
    Judge Reed was dismissed in November 2007.  On 30  November  2010,  the
    appellant was convicted at Leeds Crown Court  for  converting  criminal
    property and for dishonestly  making  false  representations.   He  was
    sentenced to a period of two years and seven months' imprisonment.  His
    appeal against his sentence was subsequently withdrawn.  A  deportation
    order was made against the appellant on 4 July 2014 and the appellant's
    application to revoke that order was refused by the Secretary of State.
     The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge N P  Dickson)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 29 July 2015, dismissed the  appeal
    on all grounds.  The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for reaching that decision are as  follows.   First,
    the judge had before him the expert report of Ms Christine  Brown  whom
    he describes as "an experienced social worker" [31].   He  accepted  Ms
    Brown's evidence that the  child  of  the  appellant  (M)  had  a  good
    relationship with him and with her mother.  However, the judge fails to
    deal with Ms Brown's assessment of  the  effect  which  separation  was
    likely to have upon M.  Secondly, the judge  appears  to  have  made  a
    number of findings in his decision which amount  to  little  more  than
    assertions unsupported by any reasoning by reference to  the  evidence.
    At [35], the judge wrote:

         "Ms K is pregnant at the moment and it may be more  convenient  for
         her if M spends more time with her father.   Both  parents  and  in
         particular Ms K have overcome  their  personal  animosity  and  M's
         interests have not suffered in that she is able to see her  father.
         I am not satisfied on the information before me that M will in fact
         live with her  father  on  a  permanent  basis.   She  has  a  good
         relationship with her mother and her step-sibling and is settled at
         school in St Helens.  I have seen her school reports.  I do not see
         how M could blame her mother for the deportation of the  appellant.
         It is the appellant and  his  present  partner  who  committed  the
         crimes while they were in Leeds and her mother  was  living  in  St
         Helens."

 3. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and Ms K (the mother of  M)
    that the parents  of  M  intended  that  she  should  reside  with  the
    appellant.  That was evidence which the judge appears to have  rejected
    but he has not given any reason at all for having done so.  He explains
    why he believes it may be possible for M to live with  her  mother  but
    that explanation fails to engage with the intentions of the parents or,
    indeed, any evidence from M herself as to where she would wish to live.
     The judge acknowledged that there had been problems between M and  her
    mother in the past and, set against the background of  those  problems,
    the judge's failure to provide any reasoning for  his  finding  that  M
    will live with the mother  and  not  with  the  appellant  renders  the
    omission more serious.  I do not say that the  judge  should  not  have
    reached the findings which are contained in his decision only  that  he
    has failed to supply adequate reasons to support those findings.  Where
    there is clear evidence from the parents of a child as  to  where  that
    child may live in the future it is necessary for the Tribunal to engage
    properly with that evidence and, if the Tribunal rejects it, to explain
    in some detail why it has decided to do so.

 4. It is unfortunate that this matter  has  already  been  remitted  on  a
    previous occasion to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  I  am  not
    satisfied, for the reasons which I have  given,  that  Judge  Dickson's
    analysis is legally sound.  I set aside his decision.  The matter  will
    be returned for further fact-finding to the First-tier Tribunal.   None
    of the findings of fact of Judge Dickson shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  29  July
2015 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.   This  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  N  P  Dickson)  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

