

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
DA/01501/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House                        |Promulgated on               |
|5 November 2014                               |7 January 2015               |
|No Hearing                                    |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                               MARCELO MARTINA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 22 October 2014 the following directions were issued to the parties:



          1. The appellant is a  Dutch  citizen  who  appealed  against  the
          respondent's decision to make a deportation order. His appeal  was
          dismissed on the basis that he failed to include  any  grounds  of
          appeal in his notice of appeal. On 5 August  2014  he  was  served
          with a notice that the grounds must be submitted by 12 August 2014
          and that failure to  comply  might  result  in  the  appeal  being
          dismissed without a hearing.

          2. On 1 September 2014 his appeal was so dismissed  on  the  basis
          that nothing further had been heard from him  and  no  grounds  of
          appeal had been received.

          3. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that  the  grounds
          had been submitted under cover of a letter  dated  7  August  2014
          sent by first class post. Permission to appeal was granted  on  17
          September 2014 the judge commenting  that  it  was  arguable  that
          grounds had in fact been submitted within the time limit  provided
          by the Tribunal.

          4. In the Rule 24 response from the  respondent  it  is  indicated
          that the application for permission to appeal is not  opposed  and
          that if  grounds  were  lodged,  the  appeal  must  be  considered
          substantively.

          5. Whilst it does appear to be the case that the grounds  did  not
          come to the attention of the judge who dismissed the  appeal,  the
          appellant has attached to his  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
          Tribunal a copy of the grounds and the  covering  letter  dated  7
          August  2014.  There  is,  therefore,  evidence  to  support   the
          contention that grounds were sent to the Tribunal within the  time
          limit set out in the relevant notice.

          6. It is my preliminary view that this  is  an  appeal  which  can
          properly be determined without a hearing on the basis  that  there
          has been a procedural irregularity  causing  injustice,  that  the
          decision should be set aside and the appeal  be  remitted  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing.

          7. I direct that any representations to the  contrary  are  to  be
          filed with the Upper Tribunal within 14 days of the date of  these
          directions a copy being served on the other party. The  directions
          sent to the parties on 22 September 2014 are set aside.

 2. There have been no representations to a contrary received  from  either
    party. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the proper course  is
    to determine this appeal on the papers. I am satisfied that  there  has
    been a procedural irregularity amounting to an error of law in that the
    appellant's representatives did submit grounds within the relevant time
    period. I therefore set aside the decision. In the  light  of  all  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that this is a proper case for the  appeal
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full reconsideration.

Decision

 3. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  should  be
    set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full
    hearing.










Signed                                  Date 25 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


