
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01336/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13th August 2015                  |On 26th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MR STEVEN JARED MARTIN SPRINGER
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal (Rana & Co Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal first  came
    before me on 15th May 2015.

 2. The Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Springer, as a citizen
    of Trinidad and Tobago born on 7th October 1992  and  he  had  appealed
    against the Secretary of State's decision to deport him.

 3. In my decision following the initial hearing on 15th May 2015  I  noted
    that Mr Springer had come to the UK with all of  his  immediate  family
    aged four and had remained since. The whole family had Indefinite Leave
    to Remain. By the time of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the Appellant was in a relationship with a  young  British  woman.  She
    lived with her parents, not the Appellant. The First-tier Tribunal  had
    found that it would be unduly harsh for her to  live  in  Trinidad  and
    Tobago  because  of  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described  in  paragraph  6.2  of  appendix  FM.  It  thus  found   the
    requirements of paragraph 399 (B) met. It also found that it  would  be
    unduly harsh for Mr Springer's girlfriend to remain in the  UK  without
    him.

 4. The Secretary of State challenged that finding in her  lengthy  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in allowing  the  appeal
    in that it had failed to attach any weight to the  public  interest  in
    deportation and failed to explain why this relationship was such as  to
    engage the exception. The relationship between the  Appellant  and  his
    girlfriend amounted to  no  more  than  that;  a  relationship  between
    boyfriend and girlfriend and of relatively short duration. They did not
    live together and thus it could not be said that removing  Mr  Springer
    would be unduly harsh on his girlfriend. Her family life was  with  her
    parents and the First-tier Tribunal had not given adequate reasons  for
    its conclusion that the exception applied.

 6. On that basis I found  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and set it aside. I noted however  that  the  panel
    had also erred in failing to give any consideration  to  the  exception
    contained in paragraph 399A which clearly require  consideration  given
    the length of Mr Springer's residence in the UK.

 7. Having set aside the decision the First-tier Tribunal I  directed  that
    there be a resumed hearing on the matter of whether paragraph 399A  and
    section 117C (iv) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    applied.

 8. I also directed both parties to provide  any  evidence  on  which  they
    relied including witness statements  and  skeleton  arguments  14  days
    prior to the resumed hearing.

 9. As is regrettably all too often the case, neither party  complied  with
    those directions and I had neither skeleton arguments nor  any  further
    evidence.  As a result the hearing on 13th August was on the  basis  of
    submissions only.

10. Hereafter, for the purposes of clarity and continuity, I shall refer to
    Mr Springer as the Appellant and to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

11. The  background to this case is as follows:-

12. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 1997 and was given leave to
    remain until March 1999. He was granted indefinite leave to  remain  in
    line with his mother in May 2000.

13. The Appellant's offending started on 12th September 2007  when  he  was
    aged 14 and continued until the offence which resulted in the  decision
    to deport him on 4th April 2013. Between  those  dates  he  amassed  17
    convictions for 19 offences. His offences included offending whilst  on
    bail and drugs offences. On several occasions he gave false  names  and
    different dates of birth and it is fair to say that his  offending  has
    escalated in gravity. I set out his record:-

         (i)  12 September 2007 - Theft from a person -  Referral  Order,  8
             months

         (ii) 17 December 2008 - Affray - Community Rehabilitation Order, 12
             months Community Punishment Order, 40 hours

         (iii)    14 January 2009 - Theft-shoplifting - Community Order,  12
             months Supervision with a Requirement of Unpaid Work, 40 hours

         (iv) 1 April 2009 - Breach of Community Punishment Order - Order to
             continue

         (v)  17 June 2009 - Theft-shoplifting  -  Community  Rehabilitation
             Order, 12 months - subsequently revoked

         (vi) 14 May 2010 - Robbery -  Community  Rehabilitation  Order,  18
             months, Curfew requirement, 6 months

         (vii)     28  July  2010  Destroy  or  damage  property   -   Youth
             Rehabilitation Order, Attendance Centre Requirement, 18 hours

         (viii)    13  December  2010  -   Common  Assault   -   Conditional
             Discharge, 12 months

         (ix) 10 October 2011  -  Failed  to  comply  with  requirements  of
             Community Order - Order to continue and Fine

         (x)  14 October 2011 - Possessing controlled drugs with  intent  to
             supply (Class B) - Young  Offenders  Institution  ,  12  weeks
             suspended 12 months

             Breach of Conditional Discharge for supply of  drugs  -  Young
             Offenders Institution, 12 weeks suspended for 12 months

         (xi) 1 March 2012 - Aggravated vehicle  taking  and  Commission  of
             offence  while  on  suspended  sentence  -   Young   Offenders
             Institution, 12 weeks consecutive

         (xii)    28 March 2012  -  Being  carried  in  motor-vehicle  taken
             without  consent  -  Young  Offenders  Institution,  10  weeks
             consecutive

         (xiii)   18 April 2012 - Possession class B drugs  with  intent  to
             supply - Young Offenders Institution, 6 weeks consecutive

         (xiv)    28 August 2012 - Possession  class  B  drugs  -  Community
             Order, Curfew and Electronic Tagging

         (xv) 29 November  2012  -  Fail  to  comply  with  requirements  of
             Community Order - Order to continue with Curfew and Electronic
             Tagging

         (xvi)    20 December 2012 - Failing to comply with requirements  of
             Community Order - Order revoked

         (xvii)   4 April 2013  -  Theft  from  person  -  12  months  Young
             Offenders Institution.

14.   Deportation  of  foreign  national  criminals  is  governed   by   the
    Immigration Rules and in particular paragraphs 398 - 399 thereof. It is
    common ground that the provisions of paragraph 398 (B) applies to  this
    Appellant because he has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    less than four years.

15.  It is also common ground,  given  my  findings  at  the  error  of  law
    hearing, that paragraph 399 does not apply to this Appellant and indeed
    no argument was put forward in that regard by Ms Iqbal.

16.  The issue is whether paragraph 399A benefits this Appellant.  Paragraph
    399A applies where paragraph 398 (b) applies, as it does in  this  case
    and it applies where:-

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident the UK for most  of  his
             life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there will be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

17.  If  paragraph  399A  does  not  benefit  the  Appellant  paragraph  397
    provides that it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    public interest in deportation is outweighed.

18.  Ms Iqbal's submissions in relation to paragraph 399A were as follows:-

19.  The Appellant came to the UK at the age of four or five and  has  never
    been to Trinidad since. He has no knowledge of the culture  or  society
    there because he has never been. He has been raised in British  society
    and his entire family is in the UK apart from four siblings who live in
    the United States.  He  is  socially  integrated  in  the  UK  and  his
    education has been entirely in the UK. He has  completed  Cadet  School
    and apprenticeships for personal training and has had a  part-time  job
    at a hairdressers. While he was detained he used that time  to  achieve
    awards to help him in reforming his character and gain  the  skills  to
    continue to integrate into UK society. All his friends and  family  are
    in the UK and settled or British citizens. He has no family members  in
    Trinidad. He did have a brother there but he passed away in 1999. There
    would be significant obstacles to his return to Trinidad  as  the  only
    link he has to that country is his nationality.

20.  Ms Iqbal argued that in the past the Appellant has  been  suicidal  and
    has self harming issues, which he blamed on lack of parental  attention
    as he was  growing  up.  He  had  self-harming  issues  throughout  his
    childhood which were witnessed by  the  police,  as  evidenced  in  the
    bundle, when he was aged 14 or  15.  His  evidence  is  that  his  self
    harming behaviour started when he was very young because of problems he
    had at home and also racism that  he  encountered  at  school.  He  has
    significant psychological issues and attention  seeking  behaviour.  He
    suffers from panic attacks.

21.  In relation to the submission as regards the Appellant's mental  health
    I note that there is no medical evidence before me in  the  form  of  a
    psychologist's or psychiatrist's report, only medical  notes  which  do
    not support the claim that he has serious psychological or  psychiatric
    issues.

22.  Miss Iqbal then referred me  to  a  document  in  her  bundle  entitled
    "Beyond Boundaries" which she relied upon as  indicating  that  persons
    deported to the Caribbean suffered problems. However, a proper  reading
    of that document indicated that the discrimination suffered was by  the
    deporting country, not the receiving country.

23.  Mr Norton's submissions were based on paragraph 399A (b)  and  (c).  He
    accepted that the Appellant has been lawfully resident in  the  UK  for
    most of his life. He submitted that  he  could  not  be  said  to  have
    integrated in the UK because integration involves  being  a  member  of
    society which carries a two-way obligations. The number  and  frequency
    of his convictions does not show that the Appellant kept  his  side  of
    the contract and thus he cannot be said to be socially integrated.

24.  With regards to integration in Trinidad, he submitted that  there  were
    no very significant obstacles and that such medical evidence  as  there
    was, was self reported.

25.  Miss Iqbal responded to those submissions with  regard  to  integration
    being a two-way contract arguing that the Appellant  had  from  a  very
    early stage admitted his crimes and taken his punishment  and  has  now
    taken very significant steps to reform  himself  as  evidenced  by  the
    certificates  that  he  earned  whilst  in  detention.  He  had   shown
    significant remorse and used his time in detention  positively.  If  he
    were to be deported he would be expelled from everything  that  he  has
    ever known, which would amount to a life sentence for  crimes  that  he
    has already served time for. She argued that the justice system in  the
    UK aims to rehabilitate offenders and is very successful at that and in
    the five months since he has been released from detention  he  has  not
    been in trouble. She  referred  to  the  fact  that  when  attacked  in
    detention he did not retaliate and argued that he no longer presents  a
    threat to society. She argued  that  the  justice  system  has  clearly
    worked in that it has  reformed  him  such  that  he  is  now  of  good
    character.  She  argued  there  were  significant  obstacles   to   his
    integration in Trinidad given that his only link with that  country  is
    his  nationality  and  she  submitted  he  did   indeed   satisfy   the
    requirements of paragraph 399A of the Rules.

26.  I am greatly assisted in this case by the wisdom of  my  colleagues  in
    the Upper Tribunal in the case of Bossade (ss. 117A-D-interrelationship
    with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC). In  that  case  the  Tribunal  was
    dealing with an Appellant in a similar situation to this  one.  He  had
    come to the UK as a child and had been living  here  lawfully  and  had
    been educated here. In that case the country of removal was the DRC and
    unlike the Appellant in this case, he did not speak the language of the
    country.

27.  At paragraph 24 of its judgement the Upper Tribunal indicated that  the
    gravamen of the new paragraph  399A  (b)  is  integration  in  the  UK.
    Integration must  be  shown  to  exist  in  two  respects:  social  and
    cultural. Neither one nor the other is sufficient. The term integration
    imports a qualitative test: in order to assess whether  a  person  "is"
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK, one is not simply looking
    at how long a person has spent in the UK or even  whether  that  period
    comprises lawful residence: the fact that the Appellant spent  some  or
    all of his time in the UK unlawfully may be of  relevance  in  deciding
    whether he has integrated in these two ways.

28.  At paragraph 25 of the judgement the Upper Tribunal  held that the  new
    Rules (398 & 399) "make even clearer than the pre-28  July  2014  Rules
    that the deportation of foreign  criminals  is  always  in  the  public
    interest and can only be outweighed in very limited  circumstances.  In
    general terms the imposition of a custodial sentence is  an  indication
    that the person concerned does not  respect  the  values  of  the  host
    society (cf in  the  context  of  EU  law  on  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals, Case C-400/12 Secretary of State v MG ECJI: EU: C 2014:9  at
    [31]).  Further, whilst in prison a person cannot be a useful member of
    society at large, during that time such person cannot as a general rule
    show integration to society".

29.  So far as 399A (c) is concerned it is made clear  that  the  new  rules
    are far  stricter  than  the  old.  There  must  be  "very  significant
    obstacles. The  Upper Tribunal  in Bossade, said at paragraph 57,  that
    the paragraph 399A (c) test is more stringent: it is not met simply  by
    showing, that a person has no close family ties in the country to which
    it is proposed he is deported; it requires "very significant  obstacles
    to ... integration" to be shown.

30.  In Bossade, notwithstanding the fact the Appellant did  not  speak  the
    language of the Democratic Republic of Congo, he did not have issues of
    physical or mental disability to prevent him from learning the language
    and whilst he identified with British culture rather than that  of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo that would not prevent his integration.

31.  I agree with the Secretary of  State's  view  in  this  case  that  the
    Appellant cannot be said to have integrated into  British  society.  He
    has a very long history of offending behaviour which is  escalating  in
    its gravity. He has not been a useful member of society from the age of
    14 to date. He  has  wholly  rejected  the  values  of  UK  society  by
    committing  crimes,  many  of  which  involve  breaches   of   previous
    punishment orders and neither has he  contributed  to  the  UK  in  any
    useful way. There is  no  evidence  that  he  has  had  any  meaningful
    employment and indeed given the frequency of his offending  that  would
    have been difficult.  I reject the submission that the fact that he has
    not offended for five months indicate he is a reformed character.

32.  Neither do I find  there  to  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Trinidad.  He speaks the language and is of  Trinidadian
    nationality and ethnicity.  The skills he has acquired in the  UK  will
    be of benefit to him there.  I reject as entirely speculative  that  he
    would suffer discrimination there and there  is  no  credible  evidence
    that he has  physical  or  mental  health  issues  that  would  prevent
    integration.

32.  For these reasons I find that the Appellant in this case does not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 399A in full, in particular he  does  not
    fulfil the requirements of either paragraph 399A (b) or (c).

33.  The Appellant is only able to succeed in avoiding deportation if he  is
    able to show pursuant to paragraph 398  that  the  public  interest  in
    deportation is outweighed by very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A. In  this  case  there
    are none and indeed none were argued in front of me.

34.  The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  such
    that the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    to deport him is dismissed.


Signed   Date 24th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction regarding anonymity

There was no application anonymity in this case and I see  no  justification
in making such a direction.


Signed   Date 24th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

