

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      DA/01094/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 15 January 2014                        |On 17 January 2014       |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                             Elliot Joshua Ezike
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:               Mr D Lemer, Counsel
For the Respondent:           Mr G Saunders, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.         The appellant was granted permission to appeal on  22 November
      2013  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  Lane  in  respect   of   the
      determination of Judge Aujla and Mrs Holt dismissing  his  deportation
      appeal following a hearing at Kingston  Crown  Court  on  26  February
      2013.

   2.         The appellant is a Nigerian national born on  17  August 1986.
      He claimed to have arrived here in  2001.  On  18  July  2002  he  was
      granted a residence card valid until 7 April 2004 as the dependent  of
      an EEA national; i.e. his Portuguese stepfather.   This  was  extended
      and on 12 September 2006 he was  issued  with  a  ten  year  residence
      card.

   3.       Between January 2007 and May 2011 the appellant amassed a  total
      of 12 convictions for 23 offences. On 25 October 2012  the  respondent
      made a decision to deport him.

Appeal Hearing

   4.       At the hearing on  15  January  I  heard  submissions  from  the
      parties.  Mr Lever sought only to rely upon the grounds argued  before
      the Administrative court which had led to the matter being returned to
      the Upper Tribunal and to Judge  Lane's  grant  of  permission.  Those
      grounds disclose two points on the Tribunal's  assessment  of  whether
      the appellant constituted a "present threat" requiring removal. It was
      not argued that  his  offending  did  not  amount  to  a  genuine  and
      sufficiently serious threat.

   5.       Mr Lemer submitted that the Tribunal had made two factual errors
      as shown by paragraphs 32 of the determination.  The  first  was  that
      although the panel had been right to say that the NOMS' assessment  of
      the level of risk to others was high, it had wrongly stated that  risk
      of reconviction was also high; in fact  the  report  shows  it  was  a
      medium risk. The second concerned  an  allegation  made  in  the  same
      report that the appellant had been stalking a female prison  education
      officer. The panel had observed that the appellant failed to deny this
      allegation in his witness statement although he had  done  so  at  the
      hearing. in fact,  the  witness  statement  plainly  showed  that  the
      appellant had denied the allegation at that time.  It was argued  that
      these two factual errors undermined the risk assessment and that meant
      the conclusion that the appellant was a "present threat"  was  flawed.
      The appeal would have to be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal.

   6.       In response, Mr Saunders submitted there had been no error.  The
      NOMS report had been considered but so  had  other  evidence  and  the
      report was not determinative of the  panel's  conclusions.  The  panel
      took account of the appellant's long history  of  offending  behaviour
      and found that he would not change his behaviour just because he would
      be living with his mother as was claimed. It noted that he had in fact
      been living with her previously when  he  had  committed  crimes.  The
      panel also considered the appellant's denials, whenever they had  been
      made, and found that  it  preferred  the  evidence  of  the  education
      officer who had no vested interest in fabrication such an  allegation,
      to that of the appellant. Therefore, although the panel had  made  the
      factual errors claimed, when all the evidence was considered,  it  had
      reached a sustainable conclusion.

   7.       Mr Lemer made a brief reply. He stated that he did  not  contend
      that if the appeal were remitted it had to be allowed, but that  there
      was a possibility  of  that  and  the  errors  were  material  to  the
      Tribunal's overall assessment.

   8.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

   9.         I have carefully considered  the  evidence,  the determination
      and the submissions made and reach  the  conclusion  that  whilst  the
      panel did make the two factual errors claimed, they  were  not  errors
      that undermined the overall findings and  conclusions  such  that  the
      decision has to be remade. I now give my reasons for so finding.

  10.       The appellant has a long  history  of  offending.  Many  of  his
      crimes were committed at a time when he was living with his mother and
      so the claim that somehow he would now be a reformed character because
      he lived with her or that she would be able to  exert  some  influence
      over him was properly rejected. Indeed, it noted she  had  sacked  him
      when he worked for her because he had stolen money. The Tribunal  also
      considered the nature and regularity of his offending. It noted he had
      not taken any victim awareness courses in prison and that a sharp item
      had been found in his cell which was of  concern  given  the  repeated
      crimes involving weapons.

  11.       When considering the  NOMS  assessment,  it  is  right  that  it
      conflated  the  level  of  risk  to  others  and  the  likelihood   of
      conviction; both are described as  high  whereas  in  the  report  the
      latter was stated to be medium. Mr Lemer argued that  this  undermined
      the Tribunal's conclusions but it has to be said that  even  a  medium
      risk of reconviction is a present threat.  I  cannot  see,  therefore,
      that consideration of the correct risk would have altered the findings
      of the Tribunal to the extent that the outcome of the  decision  would
      have been different.


  12.       I find it is immaterial when  the  appellant  first  denied  the
      stalking allegation.  The  fact  remains  that  when  the  appellant's
      denials were considered, the panel chose to believe the female officer
      who made them rather than the appellant, who, it has to be said, has a
      history of criminality including  offences  involving  deception.  The
      panel found the officer had no vested interest in falsely  implicating
      the appellant and I do not accept there is  any  possibility  that  it
      would have found differently had it appreciated that the appellant had
      denied the allegation when he made his witness statement. It is  still
      a matter of his word over hers and  the  panel  made  it  clear  whose
      evidence was preferred.

  13.       For these reasons I find that  the  decision  of  the  panel  to
      dismiss the appeal is sustainable.

Decision

  14.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make errors of law such that the
      determination has to  be  set  aside.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal against deportation is upheld.

            Signed:


      [pic]

      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


            16 January 2014


