
[pic]

|                                     |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: DA / 01182 / 2012     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Determination promulgated    |
|On       |30 October 2014           |                  On 19 January 2015  |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|The Honourable Mr. Justice Davis                                            |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|           |Mr Hussein Omar Mohamed                           |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr. A. Masood, of Aden & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms.  S.  Ong,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.


                                DETERMINATION


1.    The appellant is a national of Somalia.  He had appealed to the First-
      tier Tribunal (FtT) against a  refusal  of  the  respondent  dated  16
      November 2012 (served on 21 November 2012)  to  revoke  a  deportation
      order made against him on 9 April 2008. The respondent's  reasons  for
      refusing to revoke the deportation order are set out in a letter dated
      8  November  2012  (the  "RFRTR").  The  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a
      determination   promulgated   on   31   January   2013   (the    "2013
      determination") by a panel of the FtT (Judge Widdup and  Dr.  J.O.  de
      Barros) on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds  and  human
      rights grounds.

2.    The appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  by  the  FtT.  By  a
      determination dated 17 May 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Latter set aside
      the 2013 determination. Our determination is therefore a re-making  of
      the decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      refusal to revoke the deportation order.

3.    There have been two previous determinations in the  appellant's  case.
      Following his claimed arrival in the United  Kingdom  on  21  December
      2002, the appellant claimed asylum. His asylum claim was refused.  His
      appeal was heard before Adjudicator  Mr.  H  O  Forrester  who,  in  a
      determination promulgated on 21 April 2004 (the "2004 determination"),
      dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds. The appellant
      exhausted his appeal rights on 1 November 2004.

4.    On 12 January  2006  at  Isleworth  Crown  Court,  the  appellant  was
      convicted of attempting to obtain  a  service  by  deception  and  was
      sentenced to nine months' imprisonment with  a  recommendation  to  be
      deported.  A  deportation  decision  in  2006  was  withdrawn  due  to
      procedural errors.

5.    On 9 April 2008, the respondent decided to make a  deportation  order.
      The appellant's appeal  against  this  decision  was  dismissed  in  a
      determination promulgated on 5 August 2008 (the "2008  determination")
      by a panel of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Immigration  Judge
      Verity and Mr. C.P. O'Brian") (the "2008 panel").

6.    No steps appear to have been taken by the respondent to  proceed  with
      the  removal  of  the  appellant   who,   through   solicitors,   made
      representations to the respondent on four occasions  between  November
      2010 and November 2012.  Those representations were  rejected  in  the
      decision of 21 November 2012 to refuse to revoke the deportation order
      which is the subject of this appeal.

7.    The issues in this case are:

      i.    In relation to the asylum  claim,  the  issues  are  limited  to
           those set out below, for the reasons given at paras 21-22 and 28-
           29 below:

            a.   whether the appellant would be safe in Mogadishu;
            b.   if so, whether it would be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to
                 relocate to Mogadishu.

      ii.   Whether he would suffer "serious harm" in Mogadishu  within  the
           meaning of  para  339C  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
           Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) (the "IRs"), i.e.  whether
           he is entitled to subsidiary protection under the  Qualification
           Directive   (2004/83/EC)   ("the    Qualification    Directive")
           (described as humanitarian protection in para 339C).

      iii.  Whether his deportation to Mogadishu would be in breach  of  his
           rights under Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention  for  the
           Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR),

      iv.   Whether his deportation would be  in  breach  of  his  right  to
           family life and private life under Article 8 of the ECHR.




The previous determinations

      (a)  The 2004 determination

8.    Adjudicator  Forrester  found  the  appellant's  evidence  lacking  in
      credibility. Nevertheless, he appeared to accept  that  the  appellant
      was a member of the Awl Yahan subclan, part of the Ogaden  clan  which
      was itself part of the majority Darod population in  Somalia.  It  was
      also accepted that he originated from  Kismayo  and  that  his  family
      moved to a town called Raskanboni and lived there from September  2000
      until October 2002.

9.    Adjudicator Forrester rejected the appellant's evidence  that  he  had
      to leave Somalia in 2002 because he was being forced to join a militia
      and he had no wish to fight. The Adjudicator states that "the  overall
      impression I formed of the appellant from his written testimony was of
      a lack of substance to his story". The Adjudicator then made a  number
      of adverse comments with regard to the  appellant's  claim  and  noted
      that his evidence was contradictory.

      (b)  The 2008 determination

10.   The 2008 panel followed the guidance in Devaseelan (Second  appeals  -
      ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka *  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  in
      relation to the findings of Adjudicator Forrester and  considered  the
      new evidence.

11.   The  2008  panel  found  the  Appellant  lacking  in  credibility.  In
      particular:

      i.    It found that the Appellant gave evidence  that  was  completely
           contradictory to the evidence  he  gave  in  the  appeal  before
           Adjudicator  Forrester,  in  that,   in   his   statements   and
           interviews, he said that he was the only member of his family to
           have been targeted by militias  in  Somalia,  whereas  his  oral
           evidence was that his younger brother was also being  forced  to
           join the militias.


      ii.   It found that the appellant's oral evidence to the  effect  that
           after his earlier hearing he found out from his  cousin  in  the
           United States of America (USA) that his entire family  had  fled
           Somalia after his father was killed was  inconsistent  with  the
           fact that according to his  evidence  at  his  asylum  interview
           (which took place in August 2003), he knew then that his  family
           had fled Somalia and gone to Kenya in 2003.

12.   The 2008  panel  stated  that  it  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant "could not remember what he had said  or  to  whom  and  was
      therefore becoming confused with his own stories" and that,  as  such,
      it found him to be "an unreliable witness and that  his  evidence  was
      still lacking in credibility".

13.   The 2008 panel then considered the risk of the appellant returning  to
      Mogadishu and concluded that he would be safe  in  Mogadishu.  In  the
      course of doing so, it made further findings. We therefore quote paras
      35-38 of the 2008 determination, which read as follows:

      "35.  It is however the Appellant's case that he is a  member  of  the
               Darod majority clan and that since the initial decision made
               against  him  with  regard  to  asylum  the  situation   has
               deteriorated in Somalia to such an extent that it would  not
               be safe for him to return. He also draws  attention  to  the
               fact that he  would  be  perceived  to  be  rich  by  Somali
               standards, having lived in a West European country for  some
               years.

      36.   The new country guidance case with regard to  Somalia  is  HH  &
               Others (Mogadishu: armed conflict: risk) Somalia  CG  [2008]
               UKIAT 00022. In that decision the  Tribunal  concluded  that
               neither the TFG/Ethiopians nor the Union of  Islamic  courts
               or its associates are targeting clans  or  groups  and  that
               although harm had been caused from time to time to civilians
               there was  not  any  general  indiscriminate  violence.  The
               Tribunal  also  concluded  that  clan  support  networks  in
               Mogadishu, although strained, had not collapsed and  that  a
               person was not at real risk of serious harm  as  defined  in
               paragraph 339C by reason only of his or her  presence  in  a
               particular zone or area. At paragraph 6 of  the  summary  in
               that case we note the following:

                  "A  person  from  a  majority  clan  or  whose  background
                       discloses a significant degree of  assimilation  with
                       or acceptance by a majority clan will in  general  be
                       able to rely on that clan for support and  assistance
                       including at times of displacement  as  a  result  of
                       security operations etc. Majority clans  continue  to
                       have access to arms, albeit that  their  militias  no
                       longer control the city."

      37.   The Appellant himself is a young, fit, healthy male who  belongs
               to a majority clan. Taking into  account  this  new  country
               guidance case I  am  [sic]  not  of  the  opinion  that  the
               Appellant would be targeted and that even if his presence in
               the community was noted, he would easily be able to rely  on
               the clan network to support  and  defend  him.  We  are  not
               therefore of the opinion  that  the  Appellant  is  at  risk
               because of his clan membership. Nor do we  accept  that  the
               Appellant would be targeted  because  he  had  come  from  a
               western European country. He may be able to return with some
               funds  (which  by  Somali  standards  would  be  viewed   as
               significant),  but  this  would  not  make  him   any   more
               vulnerable to attack than a reasonably well-off  Somali  who
               had continued to live in his  home  country  throughout  the
               period of unrest. The Tribunal have therefore concluded that
               the Appellant  has  never  fulfilled  the  definition  of  a
               refugee at any time, and that he has not told the truth with
               regard to his situation in Somalia either  at  the  original
               Tribunal hearing or at the present one.

      38.   With regard to Article 3 for the reasons we have  already  given
               this  must  stand  and  fall  with  the  asylum  claim.  The
               Appellant is not at risk of persecution or of ill-treatment,
               torture or cruelty. It was put  to  the  Tribunal  that  the
               Appellant  might  well   find   himself   in   an   internal
               displacement camp upon his return to Somalia. Such camps are
               run to provide  humanitarian  assistance  to  the  poor  and
               vulnerable in Somalia. Irrespective of whether the Appellant
               has family in Somalia he is certainly  not  vulnerable  (nor
               with his abilities to find money for the purchase of illegal
               passports) is he poor  by  Somali  standards.  The  Tribunal
               formed the opinion that the Appellant  was  intelligent  and
               manipulative and would always find a way to flourish even in
               the most adverse of conditions. We note  for  instance  that
               although he claimed not to have been able to work whilst  in
               the UK for the last five and a half years he later  admitted
               to the  Tribunal  that  he  had  worked  illegally  and  had
               supported himself. The Tribunal therefore formed the opinion
               that the Appellant is the least likely candidate for an  IDP
               camp and that as a young, fit male belonging to  a  majority
               clan and with some likely means of support bought  from  the
               UK he would be in a particularly strong position to  find  a
               place in clan society."

14.   The findings of Adjudicator Forrester and the 2008 panel stand  before
      us. We consider them in line with the guidance in  Devaseelan.  As  at
      the dates of the hearings before Adjudicator Forrester  and  the  2008
      panel, the evidence was that the appellant had no family in the United
      Kingdom. On 1 August 2012, the appellant and  a  Ms  Fous  Abdi  Salad
      entered into an Islamic marriage ceremony. Accordingly, the  right  to
      family life was relied upon for the first time before the 2013 panel.
      (c)  The relevance of the 2013 determination

15.   The 2013 panel likewise found the appellant  lacking  in  credibility,
      stating that his evidence was riddled with contradictions on important
      issues (para 32). Although this determination was set aside  by  Judge
      Latter, it is clear from  the  reasons  that  Judge  Latter  gave  for
      finding that the 2013 panel had erred in law,  that  the  errors  were
      found to be in the assessment of the future  risk,  specifically,  the
      safety of the appellant's return to Kismayo (his home area) and travel
      to Kismayo.

16.   Accordingly, the 2013 panel's summary of the oral  evidence  given  at
      the hearing before it is also before us, as we informed the parties at
      the commencement of the hearing. In addition, we asked Mr.  Masood  to
      deal with the 2013 panel's adverse assessment of  credibility,  if  he
      thought it relevant to the appellant's appeal. He informed us that  he
      did not wish to challenge  the  credibility  assessment  of  the  2013
      panel.

17.   In assessing the future risk, the 2013  panel  found  that  Al-Shabaab
      had been driven from Kismayo and that, whilst the appellant could  not
      reasonably be expected to travel from Mogadishu  Airport  by  road  to
      Kismayo while Al-Shabaab controlled the roads south, he would  not  be
      at risk by using a commercial flight from Mogadishu to the airport  in
      Kismayo. Thus, the 2013 panel found that the Appellant  would  not  be
      required to pass  through  Al-Shabaab  territory  in  order  to  reach
      Kismayo.

18.   The decision of Judge Latter setting aside the  determination  of  the
      2013 panel is  attached  to  this  determination  as  Appendix  A.  In
      summary, Judge Latter considered that the 2013  panel  had  materially
      erred in law as follows:

      i.    The applicable country guidance as at the date  of  the  hearing
           before the 2013 panel was AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian
           crisis; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445.  At  the  time  of  the
           hearing in AMM, Kismayo was under  the  control  of  Al-Shabaab.
           Kismayo was therefore not  safe.  The  2103  panel  relied  upon
           evidence before it  that  Al-Shabaab  had  been  driven  out  of
           Kismayo in August-September 2012. However, the panel had  failed
           to consider how durable the change was especially in  the  light
           of its reference to the situation being fluid and that areas  of
           control could change on a monthly or even weekly basis.

      ii.   It was also very unclear  on  what  evidential  basis  the  2013
           panel found that the appellant would be able to  travel  by  air
           from Mogadishu to Kismayo. It  was  not  clear  that  sufficient
           reasons had been given for this finding.

      iii.  If Kismayo was unsafe or inaccessible, then the issue  arose  of
           whether the appellant could  relocate  to  Mogadishu,  an  issue
           which the 2013 panel had not considered.   It  did  not  make  a
           clear finding in the alternative  whether  the  appellant  could
           relocate in Mogadishu or elsewhere in Somalia.

      iv.   In relation to family life, the 2013 panel  had  focused  unduly
           on the  fact  that  Ms  Salad  had  only  been  told  about  the
           deportation order and the failed asylum  claim  after  they  had
           undertaken their Islamic marriage to  each  other,  although  it
           accepted that she knew of his immigration status before the said
           marriage. It inferred that, if this was a genuine marriage based
           on love and affection, the appellant would have  told  Ms  Salad
           about the deportation order and the failed asylum  claim  before
           the marriage and that he did not do so in  case  this  dissuaded
           her from proceeding with the marriage.

      Assessment of what the issues are in this case

19.   Through no fault of her own, Ms. Ong informed us that she was  not  as
      prepared as she would have liked, as the case papers were  only  given
      to her late. She was therefore unable to  inform  us,  without  taking
      instructions from the respondent's policy unit, whether the respondent
      continued to maintain her position in para 22 of the RFRTR,  that  the
      appellant was excluded from humanitarian protection by virtue of  para
      339D of the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC  395  (as
      amended) (the "IRs") because he had committed a "serious crime" within
      the meaning of para 339D. Para 339D reads:

            "339D.     A person is excluded from  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                 protection under paragraph  339C  where  the  Secretary  of
                 State is satisfied that:


                  (i)  there are serious reasons for considering that he has
                    committed a crime against peace, a war  crime,  a  crime
                    against  humanity,  or  any  other  serious   crime   or
                    instigated or otherwise participated in such crimes;


                  (ii) ...;


                  (iii)      ...; or


                  (iv) ..."

            (our emphasis)

20.   This was most unfortunate, given that nearly two  years  have  elapsed
      since the date of the RFRTR.

21.   Unfortunately, Ms. Ong's difficulties did not end there. She  informed
      us that it was also necessary for her to take  instructions  from  the
      respondent's policy unit as to:

      i.    whether Kismayo was safe and, if so, the  evidence  relied  upon
           to support that contention;

      ii.   (in relation to the Article  8  claim)  whether  the  respondent
           maintained her position at para 38 of the RFRTR that para 398(c)
           of the IRs applies because the appellant did not have family  in
           the United Kingdom.

22.   We decided not to exercise our discretion to adjourn  the  hearing  to
      enable Ms. Ong to take instructions, given that the respondent had had
      ample time to prepare for the hearing. These  were  issues  that  were
      obvious. It was plain from the determination of Judge Latter that this
      resumed hearing could not proceed without the respondent  being  ready
      the address the issue mentioned at our para 21(i). The  issues  raised
      at paras 22 and 38 of the RFRTR were  the  respondent's  own  case  as
      there had been two previous hearings (one before the  2013  panel  and
      one before Judge Latter). Even a short adjournment was likely to  lead
      to the case not being completed or  other  cases  in  the  list  being
      adjourned to another day. This was an old appeal, first lodged in  the
      year 2012. We therefore proceeded to deal with the issues:

      (a)  Whether the appellant is excluded  from  humanitarian  protection
      by para 339D

23.   At the hearing, we indicated our  view  that  the  appellant  was  not
      excluded from humanitarian protection under para  339D.  We  will  now
      give our reasons for our finding.

24.   In AS (s.55 "exclusion" certificate - process) Sri Lanka  [2013]  UKUT
      00571), the Upper Tribunal decided that, whilst the issue of exclusion
      in relation to asylum did not need to be decided at  the  commencement
      of a hearing, the effect  of  s.55  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006  is  to  require  the  Tribunal  in  its  written
      determination to decide exclusion from asylum first before  proceeding
      to address other heads of claim. Importantly, the Upper Tribunal  went
      on to say that the exclusion criteria for humanitarian  protection  in
      para 339D was very similar to  Article  1F(a)  and  that  therefore  a
      Tribunal should also decide on exclusion from humanitarian  protection
      first before substantive consideration of that  claim  notwithstanding
      that there was no statutory provision akin to s.55.

25.   What constitutes a "serious crime" for the purposes of para  339D  was
      settled in R (Mayaya) v  SSHD  (C4/2011/3273Z),  on  appeal  from  the
      judgment of Cranston J in [2011] EWHC (Admin). The mere fact  that  an
      individual has received a 12-month sentence cannot in itself amount to
      a "serious crime" for the  purposes  of  exclusion  from  humanitarian
      protection. Following the judgment in R  (Mayaya)  and  the  Court  of
      Appeal's judgment in AH (Algeria) v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  395,  the
      respondent re-issued her Humanitarian  Protection  Policy  on  15  May
      2013, which (insofar as relevant) reads:

           " 5.1 Exclusion criteria


           . A person will not be eligible  for  a  grant  of  Humanitarian
           Protection if  he  is  excluded  from  it  because  one  of  the
           following provisions in paragraph 339D of the Immigration  Rules
           apply:


           (i) there are  serious  reasons  for  considering  that  he  has
           committed a crime against peace, a war crime,  a  crime  against
           humanity, or any other serious crime or instigated or  otherwise
           participated in such crimes;
           ...
           . This is to be interpreted in  a  manner  consistent  with  the
           policy on Exclusion under Article 1F of the Geneva Convention. A
           "serious crime" for the purpose of exclusion  from  Humanitarian
           Protection was previously interpreted to mean one  for  which  a
           custodial sentence of at least twelve months had been imposed in
           the United Kingdom, but it is now  accepted  that  a  12  month
           sentence (or more) should not alone determine the seriousness of
           the offence for exclusion purposes.


           . In the Court of Appeal's judgment in AH (Algeria) v Secretary
           of State for the Home  Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ  395,  Lord
           Justice Ward noted (paragraph 54) that "Sentence is, of  course,
           a material factor but it is not a benchmark. In deciding whether
           the  crime  is  serious  enough   to   justify   his   loss   of
           protection, the Tribunal must take all facts and  matters  into
           account, with regard to the nature of the crime, the part played
           by the accused in its commission, any mitigating or  aggravating
           features and the eventual penalty imposed."


           .The sentence must therefore be  considered  together  with  the
           nature of the crime, the actual harm inflicted, and whether most
           jurisdictions would consider it a  serious  crime. Examples  of
           "serious" crimes include murder, rape, arson, and armed robbery.
           Other offences which might  be  regarded  as  "serious"  include
           those which are  accompanied  by  the use  of  deadly  weapons,
           involve serious injury to persons, or if there  is  evidence  of
           serious habitual criminal  conduct.  Other  crimes,  though  not
           accompanied by violence, such as large-scale fraud, may also  be
           regarded as "serious" for the purposes of exclusion."

26.   In AH (Algeria), the Court of Appeal said as  follows  (at  paras  50-
      54):

      "50.  Being an international convention, [the Geneva Convention]  must
           be given an autonomous meaning.  They  are  ordinary  words  and
           should be given their ordinary universal meaning. "Crime" surely
           means any illegal act punishable at law.


        1.  Furthermore,  in  my  judgment,  "serious"  needs  no   further
           qualification. Where  further  qualification  is  required,  the
           Convention gives it: compare Article  1F(b)  with  Article  33.2
           which refers to "a refugee ... who, having been convicted  by  a
           final judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes  a
           danger to the community of  that  country",  with  the  emphasis
           added  by  me.  The  same  distinction  is  drawn  in   the   EU
           Qualification   Directive   2004/83/EC   between   Article    17
           ("committed a serious crime") and Article 21 ("convicted ...  of
           a particularly serious crime").


        1. Although an ordinary word, "serious" has shades of  meaning  and
           the appropriate colour is given by the context in which the word
           is used. What may be serious for one purpose may not be  serious
           for another. The context  here  is  that  the  crime  which  the
           refugee has committed must be  serious  enough  to  justify  the
           withholding of the protection he  would  otherwise  enjoy  as  a
           person having a well-founded fear of persecution  and  owing  to
           such fear is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of the
           country of his nationality or to return to the  country  of  his
           former habitual residence. This seems to  be  the  view  of  the
           Grand Chamber in Bundesrepublik Deutschland v B (C-57/09) and D
           (C-101/09)[2011] Imm. A.R. 190 expressed with regard to Articles
           12(2)(b) and (c) of the European Directive but, it seems to  me,
           equally apposite for the Geneva Convention:


                  "108. Exclusion from refugee status on one of the  grounds
                 laid down in Article 12(2)(b) or (c) of  Directive  2004/83
                 ... is linked to the seriousness  of  the  acts  committed,
                 which must be of such a degree that  the  person  concerned
                 cannot  legitimately  claim  the  protection  attaching  to
                 refugee status under Article 2(d) of that Directive."


        1. Beyond that I would not go.  Like  Lord  Brown  of  Eaton-under-
           Heywood at paragraph 39 of JS (Sri Lanka),


                  "It would not, I  think,  be  helpful  to  expatiate  upon
                 Article 1F's reference to there being "serious reasons  for
                 considering" the asylum-seeker  to  have  committed  a  war
                 crime."


        1. I certainly do not find it helpful to  determine  the  level  of
           seriousness by the precise sentence  of  imprisonment  that  may
           have been imposed upon the accused. Sentence is,  of  course,  a
           material factor but it is not a benchmark. In  deciding  whether
           the crime is serious enough to justify his loss  of  protection,
           the Tribunal must take all facts and matters into account,  with
           regard to the nature of  the  crime,  the  part  played  by  the
           accused  in  its  commission,  any  mitigating  or   aggravating
           features and the eventual penalty imposed. I  would  leave  that
           decision to the good sense of the Tribunal."

27.   The appellant committed his offence when  he  attempted  to  board  an
      aeroplane bound for Canada using false documents.  Offences  involving
      the use of false documents of identity (which the appellant's  offence
      involved) are serious because they  undermine  the  economy  and  make
      borders insecure but the issue is whether the appellant's  offence  is
      "serious" within the meaning of para 339D. Whilst we do not rely  upon
      the length of his nine-month sentence as a benchmark, it is a material
      factor. Given the limited information we have about the crime  and  in
      all of the circumstances, we have concluded that the crime  is  not  a
      "serious crime" within the meaning of  para  339D.  The  appellant  is
      therefore not excluded from humanitarian protection.

      (b)  Safety in Kismayo and safety of travel to Kismayo

28.   As stated above, at the time of the hearing in  the  country  guidance
      case of AMM, Kismayo was not safe because it was under the control  of
      Al-Shabaab. In the more recent country guidance  case  of  MOJ  &  Ors
      (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC),  the  Upper
      Tribunal stated (see, for example, para (i) of the "Country  guidance"
      section of the headnote) that the country guidance issues addressed in
      MOJ were not identical to those engaged with by the  Tribunal  in  AMM
      and that where country guidance was given in AMM in respect of  issues
      not addressed in MOJ, the guidance provided in AMM shall  continue  to
      have effect.

29.   As the Upper Tribunal  did  not  deal  with  safety  in  Kismayo,  the
      guidance in relation to Kismayo in the AMM case applies. However,  the
      2013 panel had evidence that Al-Shabaab had been driven out of Kismayo
      in August-September  2012.  Given  that  Ms.  Ong  did  not  have  any
      instructions or evidence to adduce on these issues,  we  decided  that
      the material before us would not enable us to make findings about  the
      safety of Kismayo and the safety of travel to  Kismayo.  We  therefore
      decided that  the  issues  in  relation  to  the  asylum  ground,  the
      humanitarian protection ground and Article 3  of  the  ECHR  would  be
      limited to the risk in Mogadishu  and,  in  the  case  of  the  asylum
      ground, whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate
      to Mogadishu.

      The evidence since the 2004 and 2008 determinations

      (a)  The witness statements

30.   The appellant has made two witness  statements,  the  first  dated  15
      January 2013  and the second dated 27 October 2014. In both, he states
      that he cannot live safely  in  any  part  of  Somalia.  In  both,  he
      maintains  that he would be at serious risk of serious harm  from  Al-
      Shabaab and various other militia groups controlling Somalia.  In  the
      second statement, he  states  that  Al-Shabaab  are  still  active  in
      Mogadishu, Kismayo and other parts  of  Somalia  and  that  there  are
      bombings and civilian casualties almost every day. He does  not  agree
      with the religious and political beliefs of Al-Shabaab.

31.   The appellant said that, as a returnee from  the  West,  he  would  be
      perceived as someone who has Westernised  and  has  breached  the  so-
      called religious code of conduct of Al-Shabaab. He has no known family
      members in Somalia who could protect  him  or  provide  him  with  any
      support. He is not connected to any powerful people in Somalia.

32.   In his second statement, the appellant said, further, that he  has  no
      support network in Somalia. He would not be able to find employment in
      Somalia. He does not belong to a category  of  middleclass  people  or
      professional persons. He has no home  to  which  he  could  return  in
      Somalia. If he were to return to Somalia, he would  have  to  live  in
      extremely difficult and harsh circumstances.

33.   The appellant said that he met Ms Salad who has  indefinite  leave  to
      remain (ILR). They were married in an Islamic marriage ceremony  on  1
      August 2012. They could not register their marriage under English  law
      because he does not have status.

34.   The appellant's Islamic marriage certificate  has  been  submitted  to
      the Tribunal. He has  a  DVD  of  his  Islamic  wedding  ceremony  and
      photographs of his wedding.  He  has  submitted  documents  confirming
      cohabitation and residence at the same addresses. Given that he has no
      status in the United Kingdom, he is unable to produce bank  statements
      or other formal  documents  in   his  name.   In  his  second  witness
      statement, the appellant said  that  he  does  voluntary  work  for  a
      charity.  Correspondence with that charity and with  the  Home  Office
      has been submitted as proof of cohabitation. There is also documentary
      evidence from his doctor's surgery. He and Ms Salad are registered  at
      the same surgery.

35.   The appellant said he is unable to return to Somalia to make an  entry
      clearance application because there is no British Embassy in  Somalia.
      It would be unduly harsh and disproportionate to expect him to  return
      to Somalia to make an entry clearance application.

36.   In his second statement, the appellant  also  states  that  he  has  a
      strong private in the United Kingdom, having lived here for 12  years.
      He has learnt the English language and  he  has  integrated  with  the
      local culture and society. He has a reference letter from the  charity
      where he does voluntary work.

37.   Ms Salad has also submitted two witness statements,  the  first  dated
      15 January 2013 and the second dated 24 October  2014.  In  both,  she
      said that she came to the United Kingdom in January 2004 as an  asylum
      seeker. She was granted ILR in 2009. After her arrival in  the  United
      Kingdom, she had no contact with her ex-husband, Mohamed Khadar,  from
      whom she obtained a divorce through family members. She does not  have
      any documents to confirm her divorce.

38.   Ms Salad met the appellant on 5 April 2012.  She  married  him  in  an
      Islamic marriage ceremony on 1 August 2012. They are in a genuine  and
      subsisting marital relationship.

39.   In both statements, Ms Salad said that the appellant cannot return  to
      Somalia as his life would be in danger in Somalia. It would be  unduly
      harsh and disproportionate to expect him to return to Somalia as  they
      have a strong family life together in the United Kingdom.  If he  were
      to return to Somalia, they would lose their family  life  because  she
      would be unable to join him in Somalia. She herself would not be  safe
      in Somalia. She is settled in the United Kingdom and has  a  right  to
      enjoy her family life with her husband in the United Kingdom.  She  is
      part of British society and cannot reasonably be expected to live with
      her husband in Somalia or any other country.

40.   In her second statement, Ms Salad expanded upon the  difficulties  she
      said she and the appellant would experience if he were  to  return  to
      Somalia.  She  said  she  had  ILR  and  is  entitled  to  apply   for
      naturalisation as she has had ILR for nearly  5  years.  She  said  it
      would be unjust to require her to accompany the appellant  to  Somalia
      because she has a  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  She  had  received
      education and undertaken professional courses in the  United  Kingdom.
      She has worked and receiving training as a care worker and  a  support
      worker in the United Kingdom.  She  completed  her  last  contract  of
      employment in August 2014 and is looking for another job. There is  no
      life in Somalia. There are casualties almost every day. The  prospects
      of employment in Somalia are very limited.

41.   In her second witness statement,  Ms  Salad  said  that  she  and  the
      appellant love each other very much and that they cannot  think  about
      living without each other.  She  does  not  want  to  lose  him.   She
      referred to the documentary evidence to  establish  cohabitation  that
      had been submitted. She referred to the fact that the 2013  panel  did
      not believe that she and the appellant had a genuine relationship  due
      to the fact that the appellant had not told her about the  deportation
      order made against  him,  although  she  knew  about  his  immigration
      status. She explained this by saying that she was  not  deterred  from
      marrying the appellant although she knew he did not  have  immigration
      status because their marriage was a genuine one. It was not a marriage
      of convenience.

42.   There is a witness statement from a Mr. Mohamed Farah Shire  dated  28
      October 2014. In his statement, he said he is a  British  citizen.  He
      lives and works in the United Kingdom.  He  has  known  the  appellant
      since 2002. The appellant is one of his good friends.  They  are  both
      from Kismayo.

43.   Mr Shire confirmed that the appellant and Ms Salad were married  on  1
      August 2012 in a mosque. He  attended  their  wedding  and  he  was  a
      witness to the marriage. He has visited the  appellant  and  Ms  Salad
      three times since their wedding They have also  visited  him  and  his
      family many times. They are good family friends. They have  also  been
      in regular contact over the telephone.

44.   Mr Shire said that, to his knowledge, the appellant and Ms Salad  have
      been living together in the United Kingdom and  that  they  are  in  a
      genuine and subsisting marital relationship.

      (b) Oral evidence before the 2013 panel

45.   We informed the parties at the commencement of the  hearing  that  the
      evidence given at the hearing before the 2013 panel was before  us.  A
      summary of  that  evidence  is  given  at  paras  16-24  of  the  2013
      determination, which we now set out:

           "16.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  and  was  assisted  by  an
                 interpreter.  No difficulties arose during the hearing.


           17.   He confirmed that the contents of  his  witness  statement
                 were true.  In cross-examination he was  asked  if  he  had
                 informed the Home Office of his marriage.  He said that  he
                 had told his lawyer.  His lawyer had told the  Home  Office
                 towards the end of October.  He had married on  1st  August
                 and the delay of almost three months was because they  were
                 busy preparing and waiting for the decision.


           18.   He  had  met  his  wife  at  a  house  in  Heston.   Their
                 relationship began on 12th April 2012.   She  is  from  the
                 south of  Somalia,  from  Qoqane  which  is  not  far  from
                 Kismayo.  When asked what she would do if he  was  returned
                 to Somalia he said she would be  devastated.   He  supposed
                 she would come after him.  She knows it is dangerous.  They
                 have discussed this and she has said he  cannot  go  there.
                 She has no relatives in Somalia.  They are  in  Kenya.   He
                 did not know what had happened to his family.  He last  saw
                 them in 2002.  He had made enquiries but had no news.


           22.   The Appellant's wife then gave evidence in  English.   She
                 has indefinite leave to remain.  She was given this because
                 her claim for asylum was one of the legacy cases.


           23.   In cross-examination she  produced  her  travel  document.
                 She has not applied for a British passport.   She  had  met
                 the Appellant in Heston.  She was aware of the  deportation
                 order when she got married.  She then  said  that  she  was
                 told of it  after  the  marriage.   She  was  told  of  the
                 unsuccessful asylum claim after the marriage.   Before  the
                 marriage he said he did not have  any  immigration  status.
                 Afterwards he told her  everything.   She  is  from  Qoqane
                 which is in Kismayo.  It is not safe  for  her  to  return.
                 She had claimed asylum in 2004 but the claim  was  refused.
                 She said that her father is dead and her  mother  is  in  a
                 refugee camp.  At this point she started to  give  evidence
                 through the interpreter.  The Appellant had told  her  that
                 his father was dead.  He had family in Somalia.  He had not
                 tried to trace his family.


           24.   In answer to our questions she said that to get a  divorce
                 from her first husband her family had had  to  contact  her
                 husband's family.  She had married her first husband  at  a
                 traditional  ceremony.   She  had  decided  to  marry   the
                 Appellant because she liked him.  She liked his personality
                 and fell in love with him."

      (c)  Oral evidence before us

46.   The appellant gave  evidence  though  an  interpreter  in  the  Somali
      language. He confirmed that his statements were read  to  him  and  he
      adopted them.

47.   In cross-examination, the appellant  said  he  knew  that  he  has  no
      family in Somalia because his relatives in the USA told  him  in  2003
      that his family fled to Kenya and were in a refugee camp in Kenya.

48.   He has one cousin and two aunts in the USA. They went to  the  USA  in
      1988. He maintains contact with them by telephone. They knew he was in
      the United Kingdom because "the clan  is  an  address"  and  everybody
      knows where people are. People can be traced easily. His cousin in the
      USA was told by people in a refugee camp in Kenya that  his  immediate
      family had fled to Kenya. Asked how he knew that his family were still
      in Kenya, he said his cousin was told that they are in a refugee camp.



49.   The appellant said that he has tried to contact his  immediate  family
      in the refugee camp in Kenya but unfortunately he has not been able to
      contact them. Asked how he has tried, he said he asked people who come
      from Kenya. He has also contacted Somali relatives in the USA. He  has
      contacted BBC Somali radio in Kenya. He has  also  asked  some  Somali
      television stations to make announcements during their broadcasting of
      programmes.

50.   He has no contact with any relatives in  Somalia.  He  does  not  know
      where they are and he does not know where to contact with them.

51.   The appellant said Ms Salad's family members have fled to  Kenya.  Her
      family in Kenya are her mother and her siblings.  She  is  in  contact
      with them by telephone.  She speaks to them whenever she wants  to  do
      so.

52.   Asked how many siblings Ms Salad has, he said she  has  six  siblings,
      i.e. there were  seven  children  including  herself.  She  had  three
      brothers and three sisters, so four girls in total.

53.   The appellant and Ms Salad met on 1 April  2012  and  decided  to  get
      married in the middle of July 2012.  Asked who proposed, he said  they
      both did. They both suggested that they get  married.

54.   He met Ms Salad in a house in Heston. An old man  named  Muhamud  Jama
      Dirir, who was not feeling well, lived in the house. He used to  visit
      the old man, as did Ms Salad. They started talking to each other.  The
      old man was Ms Salad's "distant grandfather". He came to meet the  man
      in some Somali restaurants several years ago.

55.   The appellant and Ms Salad  moved  in  together  after  their  Islamic
      marriage ceremony in August 2012. Prior to then, neither of them had a
      house. They therefore moved into  her  aunt's  house  in  Slough.  The
      address was 10, Chalvey Park, Slough. Before moving into this address,
      the appellant lived at 111, Havelock Rd,  Southall,  with  his  friend
      named Abdi Majid.

56.   Asked where Ms Salad was living prior to their moving in together,  he
      said, at first, that she was living with her aunt at 10  Chalvey  Park
      and then said that she had also  told  him  that  she  was  living  in
      Southall before that.

57.   The appellant said that at present, he  and  Ms  Salad  lived  at  162
      Wellington Street, which is a four-bedroom house. The accommodation is
      shared. He and Ms Salad live in room no. 2. There are two rooms on the
      ground floor and two rooms on the first room. He and Ms Salad have the
      second room on the ground floor. The other occupants of  the  property
      are an old elderly white man and two African ladies.

58.   Asked how many people  attended  his  wedding,  he  said  the  "Nikah"
      ceremony took place at the mosque. There were five people  present  in
      total: the "imam" of the mosque, the appellant, Ms Salad,  Ms  Salad's
      friend named Falhado and the man in court on the hearing day  who  was
      the appellant's friend. There was a  ladies'  party  in  the  evening.
      Asked why Ms Salad's aunt did not attend the  wedding,  he  said  that
      ladies do not attend at mosques; they went to the ladies party in  the
      evening. There were up to one hundred ladies at the ladies party which
      was held at Diamond Hall. The photographs were not in the  bundle  but
      were available at the hearing.

59.   The appellant said that Ms Salad has been unemployed for the last  two
      months. She does care work. The job she had was a  temporary  one  and
      came to an end. She worked  through  an  agency.  Asked  how  she  was
      supported financially, he said she had some savings and is looking for
      a job now. She supports the appellant from her savings.

60.   The appellant started assisting the charity, Intercontinental  Charity
      Organisation (letters at pages 44-49) in October 2013. He  decided  to
      became involved with them because he was unable to work and unable  to
      study due to his status.

61.   Asked what he does for  the  charity,  the  appellant  said  he  helps
      people who come in  who  do  not  know  the  language.  He  also  does
      something with the computer and the projects. He goes there once every
      two or three weeks; sometimes, once in a few days and sometimes once a
      month. Whenever they need him, he goes to help  them.  He  chose  this
      particular charity because it is associated with Somali communities.

62.   In re-examination, the appellant clarified that  Ms  Salad  has  three
      sisters and three brothers. He clarified that a total of five  people,
      including himself, Ms  Salad  and  the  "imam"  attended  the  "Nikah"
      ceremony at the mosque. His friend and  Ms  Salad's  friend  were  the
      other two people.

63.   In answer to our questions, the appellant said he could  not  live  in
      Mogadishu. He is not from Mogadishu. Mogadishu has not been safe since
      1991.  Al-Shabaab  are  always  killing  people.  There  are  so  many
      militias. Even the majority clans are still fighting  each  other.  If
      they knew his clan, they would kill him. His clan is Ogaden.

64.   Asked whether the Ogaden is part of the Darod clan, he said  the  clan
      in control in Mogadishu is the Hawiye. The Hawiye is the majority clan
      in Mogadishu. As  member of the Darod clan, he would not be safe  from
      the Hawiye.

65.   Asked if there were any  other  reasons  why  he  could  not  live  in
      Mogadishu, the appellant said that the Al-Shabaab are  still  fighting
      in Mogadishu. They tried to assassinate the President.  They  exploded
      the Parliament. Every day there are casualties.

66.   In addition, the appellant said  that  he  does  not  have  family  in
      Mogadishu. He has been in the United Kingdom for a long time. He  left
      Somalia when he was a child. He does not know anyone in Mogadishu.  He
      does not have a house in Mogadishu. He would not know where to go.

67.   Asked why he would not be able to obtain a job in Mogadishu,  he  said
      he would not even know where to start. If he  goes  to  Mogadishu,  he
      will be recognised as someone who has come from the  West.  There  are
      gangs that will kill him. He will be identified easily.

68.   The appellant said Ms Salad could not go with  him  to  Mogadishu  for
      the same reasons. She came to the United Kingdom when she  was  young.
      She has no family in  Somalia.  Women  are  being  raped  in  Somalia,
      especially the pretty  women.  Ms  Salad  is  pretty.  Al-Shabaab  are
      forcing women to marry by force. They can marry four wives each.

69.   The appellant said that he did  not  try  to  contact  his  family  in
      Somalia after he arrived in the United Kingdom in December  2002.  His
      family does not know where he is. Asked again whether he had tried  to
      contact his family after arriving in the United Kingdom,  he  said  he
      had tried.

70.   We asked the appellant why it had  not  been  possible  to  trace  his
      family in Kenya through Ms Salad and her family  in  Kenya  given  his
      evidence, firstly, that it is possible to  trace  people  very  easily
      through the Somali community; secondly, his evidence that  his  cousin
      in the USA had had contact with  someone  who  knew  they  were  in  a
      refugee camp; and, thirdly, his evidence that Ms Salad was in  contact
      with her family in Kenya. The appellant said  that  he  had  asked  Ms
      Salad to find his family but they could not. There  was  no  trace  of
      them.

71.   The second witness was Ms Salad who adopted her witness statements  as
      her examination-in-chief.

72.   In cross-examination, she said she has no  family  in  Somalia  today.
      Her family moved to Kenya. Asked what family she  has  in  Kenya,  she
      said: "My mother and my sisters. We are seven siblings.  Two  died.  I
      have four sisters including me". She also has an aunt in Kenya.

73.   She does not speak to her family  much;  just  once  every  two  or  3
      months. They live in a refugee  camp  in  Afdab  town.  She  does  not
      remember when they moved there. It was  a  long  time  ago.  When  she
      herself left Somalia in 2004, they were still in  Somalia.  She  found
      out through a friend that they had moved to Kenya.

74.   Ms Salad said that the  appellant  does  not  have  any  relatives  in
      Somalia. She knows that because he told  her  so.  The  appellant  has
      "seven siblings, five sisters and two brothers including him", and his
      mother. His father died in 2003

75.   Ms  Salad  said  that  the  appellant  has  no  idea  at  all  of  the
      whereabouts of his family. He has not asked her to ask her  family  in
      Kenya to make enquiries about their whereabouts.  She is not aware  of
      any attempts that the appellant  has  made  to  try  and  contact  his
      family.

76.   Ms Salad met the appellant in her uncle's house in Heston on  5  April
      2012. The appellant used to visit her uncle whose  names  was  Mohamed
      Geel and she too used to visit her uncle because he was sick. Asked if
      Mohamed Geel was her uncle's full name, she said: "Not that I am aware
      of". No one introduced her and the appellant. They  just  met  at  her
      uncle's home.

77.   The appellant and Ms Salad moved in together after they  went  through
      the "Nikah" ceremony. Before that, she lived at 10  Chalvey  Park  and
      the appellant lived in Southall with friends. The "Nikah" ceremony was
      attended by five people in total, including the  appellant,  Ms  Salad
      and the "imam". There was also  a  woman's  wedding  attended  by  one
      hundred people.

78.   The property where she  and  the  appellant  live  is  a  four-bedroom
      property. There  are  two  people  who  live  upstairs.  She  and  the
      appellant  live  downstairs  and  there  is  someone  else  who  lives
      downstairs. They share the bathroom and the kitchen.

79.   Ms Salad is looking for a job at present She  has  been  out  of  work
      since August 2014. She supports herself and  the  appellant  from  her
      savings. He does not have any other forms of support.

80.   The appellant started doing voluntary work at the  charity  in  August
      2013. Asked what work he does at the charity, Ms Salad  said  he  just
      helps there. Asked how often he works there, she said he goes whenever
      they send a letter asking him to do so.  This  happens  about  once  a
      month. She does not know  why  he  chose  to  be  involved  with  this
      particular charity.

81.   Ms Salad said that the appellant cannot return  to  Mogadishu  because
      it is a dangerous country. Asked if she would return to Mogadishu with
      him if his appeal was unsuccessful, she said, without hesitation: "Yes
      I would because he is my husband".

82.   In re-examination, Ms Salad said that two siblings who had  died  were
      both brothers.

83.   Mr Shire then gave evidence. He adopted his witness  statement.  There
      were no questions in cross-examination.

      Assessment

      Burden and standard of proof

84.   We have had regard to the provisions of the Refugee or Person in  Need
      of  International  Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006  and
      related IRs.

85.   It has been accepted that the appellant is from Kismayo. In  AMM,  the
      Tribunal found that Kismayo was not safe. As explained at paras  21-22
      and 28-29 above, Ms. Ong was unable to point us  to  any  evidence  to
      persuade us to take different view.  We  therefore  find  that  it  is
      reasonably likely that, if returned to Kismayo, the appellant would be
      subjected to persecution contrary to the Geneva Convention.

86.   In relation to his asylum claim, it is for the appellant to show  that
      he has a subjective fear of persecution for a Geneva Convention reason
      in Mogadishu and that his fear  is  well-founded.  The  assessment  of
      whether his fear is well-founded must be based on the  evidence  as  a
      whole, going to past, present and future and be assessed  to  the  low
      standard of a reasonable likelihood. If, and only  if,  the  appellant
      would be safe in Mogadishu, it will be necessary for  us  to  consider
      whether it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate to Mogadishu, the
      burden of proof again resting on him.

87.   In relation to his claim  to  subsidiary  protection  or  humanitarian
      protection, it is for the appellant to show that there are substantial
      grounds for disbelieving that, if returned to Mogadishu, he would face
      a real risk of suffering serious harm as defined in Article 15 of  the
      Qualification Directive/ para 339C of the IRs.

88.   It is for the appellant to show that  there  are  substantial  grounds
      for believing that his deportation to Mogadishu would  expose  him  to
      inhuman or degrading treatment, in breach of his rights under  Article
      3.

89.   It is for the appellant to show that he has established family  and/or
      private life in the United Kingdom within the meaning of Article  8(1)
      and that his deportation would amount  to  an  interference  with  his
      right to family and private life. If that is established,  it  is  for
      the respondent to show that the decision is  in  accordance  with  the
      law. The deportation decision must be proportionate to the  legitimate
      aim(s) sought to be achieved (in this case, immigration  control  and,
      more importantly, the prevention of crime).

90.   In relation to Article 8, we deal below  with  the  interplay  between
      para 390, 390A, 398, 399 and 399A of the IRs; ss.117B, 117C  and  117D
      of the Immigration Act 2014 (the "2014 Act");  Appendix  FM  and  para
      276ADE  of  the  IRs;  the  respondent's  policy  guidance   for   the
      consideration of Article 8 claims outside the IRs; and  recent  cases,
      for example, R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and MM (Lebanon)
      and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985.

91.   We stress that our findings of fact are  made  on  the  basis  of  the
      whole of the evidence before us.

      The Devaseelan guidance and assessment of the evidence

92.   In line with the guidance in Devaseelan, the findings  of  Adjudicator
      Forrester and the 2008 panel are a starting point. Both did  not  find
      the appellant credible. The  2008  panel  considered  the  appellant's
      evidence that he did not  know  the  whereabouts  of  his  family.  It
      considered his evidence that his cousin had  informed  him  since  the
      hearing of his first appeal (in 2004) that  his  family  had  fled  to
      Kenya. It considered that this evidence was not  consistent  with  his
      evidence at his original interview (held on 27 August  2003,  question
      97) which showed that he knew then they had gone to  Kenya.  It  found
      that the appellant could not remember what he had said or to whom  and
      was therefore becoming confused "with his stories" (para 34). At  para
      37, it found that the appellant had not told the truth with regard  to
      his situation in Somalia either at the hearing before the  Adjudicator
      Forrester or at the hearing before it.

93.   It is clear from para 41 of  Devaseelan  that,  if  the  appellant  is
      seeking to rely upon facts that  are  not  materially  different  from
      those put to Adjudicator Forrester or the 2008 panel, and proposes  to
      support the claim by what is in essence  the  same  evidence  as  that
      available to the appellant  at  the  previous  hearing(s),  we  should
      regard the issues as settled by the previous determination(s) and make
      findings in line with them rather than allowing the matter to  be  re-
      litigated.

94.   Para 41 of Devaseelan therefore  applies  to  the  evidence  that  the
      appellant gave himself about the whereabouts of his  family,  evidence
      which was rejected by the 2013 panel.

95.   However, given that Ms Salad has given evidence about his  family  and
      that her evidence was not available to the  2008  panel,  we  consider
      afresh the evidence (including the appellant's) about the  whereabouts
      of his family.

96.   As will be seen from our assessment below, the evidence that Ms  Salad
      gave about the whereabouts of the appellant's family went not only  to
      that issue but also the genuineness of the relationship between them.

97.   Before the 2013 panel (see para 18 of its determination quoted at  our
      para 45 above), the appellant said that  he  did  not  know  what  had
      happened to his family and that he had made enquiries but had no  news
      of them. This is inconsistent with the evidence he gave  to  the  2008
      panel and to us that his cousin had told him in 2003 that  his  family
      had fled to Kenya and were living in a refugee camp.  No  attempt  was
      made  at  the  hearing  before  us  to   explain   this   discrepancy,
      notwithstanding the fact this was a clear opportunity for  him  to  do
      so.

98.   The evidence that both gave before us was particularly  damning.  When
      asked to explain how his  cousin  knew  that  he  was  in  the  United
      Kingdom, he said that "the clan is an address", everybody knows  where
      people are and people can be traced easily. Indeed, according  to  his
      evidence, such was the ability to find people through the clan network
      that the news reached his cousin in the USA that his (the appellant's)
      family were in a refugee camp in Kenya. In the light of this evidence,
      we did not find it credible that he was unable to locate his family in
      Kenya.

99.   This is especially so, given his evidence that he has  even  contacted
      BBC Somali radio and asked some Somali  television  stations  to  make
      announcements during their broadcasting. It was not clarified  whether
      he was referring to Somali television stations in Somalia or in Kenya.
      However, more important was the discrepancy between his evidence  that
      he had asked Ms Salad to find his family and her evidence that he  had
      not asked her to ask her family in Kenya to make enquiries about their
      whereabouts.

100.  If  the  appellant's  evidence  about  the  efforts  he  had  made  by
      contacting BBC Somali radio and Somali television stations to find his
      family is true, the evidence of Ms Salad's evidence that she  was  not
      aware of any attempts that the appellant had made to try  and  contact
      his family goes against the evidence of both that they have a  genuine
      and subsisting relationship. We found it incredible that, if there was
      a genuine relationship between them, Ms  Salad  would  be  unaware  of
      efforts the appellant had made to find his  family.  If  there  was  a
      genuine relationship between the appellant and Ms Salad, we are of the
      firm view that Ms Salad would have been eager to use the  presence  of
      her family in Kenya to help the appellant locate his family.

101.  We formed the view that Ms Salad does not know of  the  evidence  that
      the appellant gave at the hearing before the 2013 panel, to the effect
      that he had tried to contact his family.

102.  There are many documents  that  show  that  Ms  Salad  lives  at  162,
      Wellington Street. There are some documents in the appellant's name at
      that address. We allow  for  the  fact  that,  as  he  does  not  have
      immigration status in the United Kingdom, it will  be  impossible  for
      him to adduce bank statements and such documents. We have  noted  that
      there are documents in Ms Salad's name at 10, Chalvey  Park  which  do
      support the evidence that both gave, that after their Islamic  wedding
      ceremony in August 2012, they moved in together to live at 10, Chalvey
      Park. There is one document dated  12  November  2012  from  the  Home
      Office addressed to the appellant at 10, Chalvey Park (A34). All these
      documents support their credibility.

103.  The fact that  the  Islamic  "marriage  certificate"  also  gives  the
      address of 10 Chalvey Park is consistent with the  evidence  described
      in the preceding paragraph and their evidence at the hearing.

104.  Ms Ong submitted that the evidence  both  gave  about  the  number  of
      siblings each had was inconsistent. The appellant and  Ms  Salad  were
      both asked about the number of siblings Ms Salad had.  We  acknowledge
      that there was some confusion about the evidence  both  gave  in  this
      respect. In our view, this was adequately cleared up in re-examination
      by Mr Masood.

105.  However, when Ms Salad was asked about  the  number  of  siblings  the
      appellant had, she said that he had "seven siblings, five sisters  and
      two brothers including him" (para 75 above). It is  simply  impossible
      to reconcile this with the details he gave of his siblings at his "Bio-
      data information" section of his screening interview dated 21 December
      2002, a copy of which Ms Ong submitted  at  the  commencement  of  the
      hearing. According to this, he had four brothers (born,  respectively,
      in 1984, 1990, 1992 and 1994) and two sisters (born, respectively,  in
      1987 and 1989).

106.  Both the appellant and Ms Salad  said  that  there  were  five  people
      present  at  the  marriage  ceremony,  this  being  the  "imam",   the
      appellant's friend (Mr Shire), Ms Salad's friend and  themselves.  The
      appellant said that Ms Salad's friend was called  "Falhado".  However,
      the marriage certificate (A21) gives the name of  two  witnesses.  The
      first is Mr Shire. The  name  of  the  second  witness  is  given  as:
      "Abdikadir Mohamed Kahin".  There is no mention of the name "Falhado".



107.  Ms Salad was asked at the hearing  whether  she  would  accompany  the
      appellant to Somalia,  if  his  appeal  was  unsuccessful.  She  said,
      without hesitation and with a smile on her face,  expressing  none  of
      the concerns she has expressed in  his  witness  statements  (see  our
      paras 39-41 above): "Yes I would because he is my husband". Mr  Masood
      sought to rely on this evidence  to  say  that  this  shows  that  the
      relationship was a genuine one.

108.  However, it is impossible to  reconcile  her  oral  evidence  in  this
      regard with her two witness statements, the second of which was signed
      less than a week before the hearing before us. The question whether an
      individual is willing to leave all that he or she may have built up in
      the United Kingdom over the years is surely a matter  of  some  moment
      not only for the individual in question but also for both partners. If
      there was a genuine relationship between them, it is wholly lacking in
      credibility that, up until less than a week  before  the  hearing,  Ms
      Salad had firmly expressed her view that,  if  the  appellant  had  to
      leave the United Kingdom, their family life would be  severed  because
      she would be unable to join him in Somalia, and at the  hearing,  that
      she would follow him to Somalia without mentioning at all the concerns
      she had expressed in her witness statements (summarised at  our  paras
      39-40 above). We were driven to the  conclusion  that  the  statements
      were written for her to put her signature to,  and  that  she  has  no
      recollection of what she is  said  in  those  statements  because  the
      sentiments expressed therein do not mean anything to her.  She  simply
      forgot what she was meant to say at the hearing before us.

109.  We have taken into account the  evidence  of  Mr  Shire.  He  says  he
      attended the marriage ceremony  and  we  were  told  that  a  DVD  was
      available for us to see at the hearing. There is no issue that such  a
      ceremony took place. We were told  that  photographs  of  the  ladies'
      party in the evening are available for us to inspect. There  are  some
      photographs in the bundle. There is no  issue  about  whether  such  a
      party took place.

110.  We have  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  the  property  at  162
      Wellington Street is a multiple-occupancy property. The appellant  and
      Ms Salad both said that they shared the  second  room  on  the  ground
      floor. Mr Shire said that he has visited the appellant  and  Ms  Salad
      three times since the marriage ceremony and they have visited him  and
      his family many times. We take his evidence into account in  assessing
      the overall credibility of the witnesses and in making our findings of
      fact.

111.  Both the appellant and Ms  Salad  said  that  Ms  Salad  supports  the
      appellant from her savings. There is no evidence of any such  savings.
      We have been given very few banks statements. These are at A80-86  and
      relate to a Halifax account in the name of Ms Salad, for  the  periods
      from 13 September 2012 to 4 October 2012, 5 October 2012 to 2 November
      2012 and from 13 December 2012 to 8 January 2013.  Her credit  balance
      never exceeded  147.73 and the account went into overdraft on five or
      six occasions. The following letters from the Halifax Bank to Ms Salad
      show that her finances were also in a  poor  state  in  September  and
      October 2014:

      i.    a letter dated 15 September 2014 (p58) stating that the bank had
           decided not to make a payment of 37.94 to EE & T-Mobile because
           the payment would  have  caused  her  account  to  go  over  her
           "Planned Overdraft" limit;  and


      ii.   a letter dated 13 October  2014  (p57)  stating  that  the  bank
           required her to repay the amount of her unplanned  overdraft  of
           166.98 within two days, failing which the administration of the
           account would pass to the bank's "Collections Centre".

112.  We do not take into account against the  appellant's  and  Ms  Salad's
      credibility the fact that he said that he met Ms Salad at the house of
      her "distant grandfather" named Muhamud Jama Dirir and she  said  that
      they met at the house of her uncle named Mohammed  Geel.  The  way  in
      which one person is related to another can be quite a complex issue in
      some cultures and does not always translate well. Likewise, it is easy
      for mistakes to be made when names are translated.  Depending  on  how
      one pronounces "Geel" - whether the "G" is accentuated and whether the
      "l" is silent, the pronunciation could be similar to  "Dirir"  if  the
      middle 'r' is silent. There is no such scope in  relation  to  whether
      "Falhado" is the same person as "Abdikadir Mohamed Kahin".

      Findings of fact

113.  We found the appellant,  Ms  Salad  and  Mr  Shire  completely  lacked
      credibility. On the whole of the evidence  and  bearing  in  mind  the
      burden and standard of proof, we make the following findings fact:

      i.    We reject the appellant's evidence that his family  are  not  in
      Somalia.

      ii.   We reject his evidence that he has no one in Mogadishu.

      iii.  We reject the evidence that the appellant and Ms  Salad  have  a
           genuine and subsisting marital relationship. We  find  that  the
           Islamic marriage ceremony they have both undergone is a charade,
           entered into for the sole purpose of deceiving  the  immigration
           authorities. If they both live at  162,  Wellington  Street,  we
           reject the evidence that they cohabit in  the  sense  that  they
           live in the same room as husband and wife.

      iv.   We reject the evidence of the appellant and  Ms  Salad  that  Ms
           Salad supports the appellant financially. It follows that he  is
           being supported by himself and/or by  some  means  that  he  has
           chosen not to share with us.

      v.    There is no credible  evidence  before  us  to  persuade  us  to
           depart from the finding of the 2013 panel that the appellant  is
           young, fit and healthy male (para 37 of the 2013 determination).
           There is no credible evidence before us to persuade us to depart
           from its findings (at para 38) that the appellant is  "certainly
           not vulnerable" and that he is intelligent and manipulative.

      Assessment of the asylum  claim,  humanitarian  protection  claim  and
      Article 3 claim

114.  Mr Masood asked us to bear in mind that the country guidance  case  of
      MOJ is under appeal. We do not accept that the mere fact that  MOJ  is
      under appeal means that it should not be applied (see SG (Iraq) v SSHD
      [2012] EWCA Civ 940; in  particular,  paras  62-71).  Mr  Masood  also
      relied upon the background material in his bundle in  submitting  that
      Mogadishu was not safe for the appellant.

115.  Before we turn to that material,  we  will  remind  ourselves  of  the
      country guidance in MOJ. We must, of course look  to  the  case  as  a
      whole. However, for present purposes, we quote the  relevant  part  of
      the head note, which reads:

     "(i)  The country guidance issues addressed in this determination  are
           not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in  AMM  and
           others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia
           CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance  has
           been given by the Tribunal in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not
           addressed in this determination then the  guidance  provided  by
           AMM shall continue to have effect.


     (ii)  Generally, a person who is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
           associated with the security forces; any aspect of government or
           official   administration   or   any   NGO   or    international
           organisation) on  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
           absence will face no real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm
           such as to require protection under Article 3  of  the  ECHR  or
           Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. In particular,  he
           will not be at real risk simply on account of having lived in  a
           European location for a period of  time  of  being  viewed  with
           suspicion either by the authorities as a possible  supporter  of
           Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose
           Islamic integrity has been compromised by living  in  a  Western
           country.


     (iii) There has been durable change in the sense that the  Al  Shabaab
           withdrawal from Mogadishu is  complete  and  there  is  no  real
           prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That  was
           not the case at the time of the country guidance  given  by  the
           Tribunal in AMM.

     (iv)   The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding   non-military
           casualties that clearly fall within  Al  Shabaab  target  groups
           such as politicians, police officers, government  officials  and
           those associated  with  NGOs  and  international  organisations,
           cannot be precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence
           which is incomplete and unreliable. However, it  is  established
           by the evidence considered as a whole  that  there  has  been  a
           reduction in  the  level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
           largely due to the cessation of confrontational  warfare  within
           the city and Al Shabaab's  resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on
           carefully selected targets.  The  present  level  of  casualties
           does not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians  such
           as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.

     (v)   It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to reduce further
           still his personal exposure to the risk of  "collateral  damage"
           in being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was not targeted
           at him by avoiding areas and  establishments  that  are  clearly
           identifiable as  likely  Al  Shabaab  targets,  and  it  is  not
           unreasonable for him to do so.

     (vi)  There is no real risk of forced recruitment to  Al  Shabaab  for
           civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for  recent  returnees
           from the West.

     (vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence  will
           look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the  city,
           for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
           livelihood. Although a returnee may also  seek  assistance  from
           his clan members who are not close relatives, such help is  only
           likely to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as  minority
           clans may have little to offer.

     (viii)      The significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
           changed.  Clans  now  provide,   potentially,   social   support
           mechanisms and assist with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing
           less of a protection function than previously. There are no clan
           militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based
           discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.

     (ix)  If it is accepted that a person facing  a  return  to  Mogadishu
           after a period  of  absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
           relatives in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself
           on return, there will need to be a careful assessment of all  of
           the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but  are
           not limited to:

            . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
            . length of absence from Mogadishu;
            . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
            . access to financial resources;
            . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
              or self employment;
            . availability of remittances from abroad;
            . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
            . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
              enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.


     (x)   Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing  return  to
           explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
           opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
           especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are
           taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.


     (xi)  It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family support
           who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and  who
           have no real prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
           return who will face the prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
           falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in   humanitarian
           protection terms.

     (xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply  those  who
           originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to  live
           in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
           facing a real risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocation
           in Mogadishu for a person of a minority  clan   with  no  former
           links to the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,
           family or social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the
           absence of means to establish a home and some  form  of  ongoing
           financial support there  will  be  a  real  risk  of  having  no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is a real possibility  of  having  to  live  in
           conditions   that  will  fall  below   acceptable   humanitarian
           standards."

116.  The appellant said in his witness statements and at the  hearing  that
      he would not be safe in Mogadishu. In oral evidence, he said that  the
      clan in control in Mogadishu is the Hawiye and that he  would  not  be
      safe from the Hawiye, as he is a member of the Darod clan.

117.  MOJ makes it clear that, on the evidence that  was  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal in that case, there was no longer a real risk  of  clan-based
      violence in Mogadishu. Our attention was not drawn to any material  in
      appellant's bundle entitled "Latest Country Information" (the "country
      bundle") that referred to any clan-based violence in Mogadishu. To the
      contrary, we found, at pages 123 and 24 of  the  country  bundle,  the
      following in the report of  the  Danish  Immigration  Service/Landinfo
      dated 12 March 2014 (the "Danish report")  and  entitled:  "Update  on
      security  and  protection  issues  in  Mogadishu   and   South-Central
      Somalia":

         [p123] "2. Protection and livelihood issues in Mogadishu


         2.1      Clan affiliation and protection


         Regarding clan identity and security an  international  agency  (A)
         explained that there are fewer warlords than previously,  but  clan
         identity is still very important.


         According to the international  agency  (A)  there  is  no  one  in
         Mogadishu who is at risk of attacks or persecution only because  of
         his or her clan affiliation.


         ... Protection is not dependent on one's clan affiliation."

         [p124] Asked to comment on the importance  of  clan  protection  in
         Mogadishu today, a Somali NGO in Mogadishu explained that people do
         not need the protection of  their  clan  any  longer,  but  if  the
         government should collapse, the situation would change  and  people
         would once again need the protection of their clan. However, as  of
         today no one is killed because of one's clan affiliation."

            (our emphasis)

118.  We therefore apply the country guidance in  MOJ  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's alleged fear of clan-based persecution  in  Mogadishu.  We
      find that there is no real risk  at  he  will  be  subjected  to  such
      violence in Mogadishu. His alleged fear of persecution from the Hawiye
      in Mogadishu is not well-founded.

119.  The appellant also asserts a  fear  of  Al-Shabaab  in  Mogadishu.  Mr
      Masood submitted that Al-Shabaab had not been driven out of  Mogadishu
      entirely. He took us to his "key passages index" which is at pages 196-
      209 of the country bundle. Before we  quote  extracts  from  the  full
      reports, we should make the general point that there  were  more  than
      just a few documents in the  appellant's  country  bundle  which  were
      reports that were considered by the Tribunal in MOJ. For example:

      i.    The Amnesty International Report dated 26 September 2013  (p167-
           171) entitled: "Mogadishu cannot qualify as an  Internal  Flight
           Alternative" was document 153 on page 224 of MOJ;


      ii.   The Amnesty International Report dated 15  May  2013  (p172-178)
           entitled: "Returns to South and Central Somalia: A Violation  of
           International Law" was document number 335 on page 234;


      iii.  The Human Rights Watch "dispatch" dated 19 November 2013  (p179)
           entitled: "Deported to Danger in Somalia" was document number 78
           on page 220; and


      iv.   The Human Rights Watch "Memo to the  Hague"  dated  27  November
           2013 (p180-181) entitled: "Somalia is  not  safe"  was  document
           number 67 on page 219.

120.  We did not find it at all helpful for the appellant to include in  the
      bundle documents that had already been considered by the  Tribunal  in
      MOJ. It is not for the Upper Tribunal to  trawl  through  the  country
      bundle and separate those documents that have already been  considered
      in MOJ and those that have not.

121.  Of the documents that were not before the Tribunal in MOJ,  we  stress
      that we have considered all of the material. The following are  but  a
      selection of quotes from the full reports in the country bundle:

      Amnesty International,  Netherlands:  "Forced  Returns  to  South  and
      Central Somalia, including to Al-Shabaab areas: A blatant violation of
      international law", 23/10/2014 (p4-13):

         [p4] "Amnesty International stated in May 2013 that forced  returns
         to south and central Somalia amount to a violation of international
         law. In October 2014, Amnesty International  is  gravely  concerned
         about continued attempts by the Dutch  government  to  effect  such
         forced returns.

         [p5] Generalised violence in south and central Somalia

      Somalia remains  a  country  experiencing  a  non-international  armed
         conflict.  In 2013, Somalia  had  the  highest  level  of  conflict
         events in Africa. Armed clashes take place outside of Mogadishu and
         in rural areas of south central Somalia.  Fragile security gains in
         Mogadishu are short-lived.  Though al-Shabaab  no  longer  controls
         parts of Mogadishu, it engages in guerrilla warfare routinely using
         improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and carrying  out  grenade  and
         suicide attacks.  Despite the ongoing lack of a  civilian  casualty
         tracking system, it is widely documented that  military  operations
         result in civilian casualties, with civilians killed and wounded in
         crossfire during armed clashes, through IEDs as well as grenade and
         suicide attacks.

         There has been a reported increase  in  al-Shabaab's  targeting  of
         civilians since the Kenyan incursion  to  Somalia  in  2011,  which
         continues to play out in 2014.  Violence against civilians seems to
         increase during periods when territories are contested - both prior
         to a change of control of territory when  people  are  accused  and
         punished by al-Shabaab for allegedly spying, as well  as  following
         the  SFG  gaining  control  of  territory.   In   both   instances,
         retaliatory  attacks  are  carried  out  by  al-Shabaab  in   which
         civilians are deliberately targeted."

    The UNHCR: "UNHCR urges continued protection for  asylum  seekers  from
    Southern and Central Somalia", 28/01/2014 (p20-21):

         [p20] "UNHCR has released updated guidelines on  the  international
         protection needs of people fleeing Southern  and  Central  Somalia.
         Although security has  improved  in  some  parts  of  Southern  and
         Central Somalia, armed conflict continues.   Widespread  insecurity
         and human rights abuses continue to compel Somalis to  leave  their
         country.  More than 42,000 Somalis sought  asylum  in  neighbouring
         countries and elsewhere in 2013.

         We are appealing  to  all  states  to  uphold  their  international
         obligations with regard to no forced returns,  or  non-refoulement.
         Somali nationals should not be forcibly returned to Somalia  unless
         the returning state is convinced that the  persons  involved  would
         not be at risk of persecution.

         Southern and Central Somalia remains a very dangerous place.  While
         there are no complete statistics  on  conflict-related  casualties,
         data compiled by ACLED, a research group,  shows  there  were  more
         casualties in 2012 and early 2013 than in 2011.  Monthly fatalities
         fluctuated between 100  and  600  people.   In  June  2013,  fierce
         fighting resulted in 314 casualties in  Kismayo  alone.   Civilians
         are at risk  of  being  killed  or  wounded  in  crossfire  between
         government forces and Al-Shabaab  militants  as  well  as  by  bomb
         attacks and as bystanders in targeted attacks.  Even in  Mogadishu,
         nominally under government control with the backing of the  African
         Union  Mission  in  Somalia  (AMISOM),  Al-Shabaab  has  repeatedly
         demonstrated its ability to stage deadly attacks."

    Human Rights Watch World Report 2014: "Somalia", 21/01/2014 (p74-77):

      [p74] "Civilians continue to suffer human rights  abuses  as  the  new
         Somali government  struggled  to  extend  its  control  beyond  the
         capital, Mogadishu, and to some key towns in south-central  Somalia
         in 2013.  Parties to Somalia's  long-running  armed  conflict  were
         responsible for serious violations  of  international  law,  abuses
         include indiscriminate  attacks,  sexual  violence,  and  arbitrary
         arrests and detention.

      The Islamist armed group  Al-Shabaab  maintains  control  of  much  of
         southern Somalia, and the group increased attacks  on  high-profile
         civilian locales in Mogadishu, including the courthouse, a  popular
         restaurant, and the United  Nations  compound,  killing  scores  of
         civilians.  Those fighting against Al-Shabaab -  a  combination  of
         Somali government  armed  forces,  the  African  Union  Mission  in
         Somalia (AMISOM), Ethiopian government troops, and allied  militias
         - have also committed abuses.

      Civilians were killed  and  wounded  by  crossfire,  including  during
         infighting between government soldiers over control of roadblocks."

    The Danish report: p101-157

         [106] "1.1    Security in Mogadishu and its outskirts


         UNDSS explained that the outskirts of  Mogadishu  remain  prone  to
         different types of guerrilla  and  terrorist  attacks.   There  are
         still some hit and run actions against AMISON positions in Daynile,
         Hurriwa and Dharkenley.  But these  are  probably  carried  out  by
         groups staying there rather than movements of  al-Shabaab  fighters
         coming from other areas of Somalia.

         An international NGO (C) explained that security must  be  seen  at
         two levels.  There is a general security  situation  which  affects
         everyone in Somalia.  This situation is due to the  fact  that  the
         government is not  in  full  control  and  in  addition  there  are
         internal political issues which are  causing  specific  challenges.
         However, the security situation has improved since  April  2013  in
         certain areas of S/C Somalia.

         The international NGO (C) stated that on the other hand, there  are
         the security related issues which directly  affect  all  government
         people, government affiliates, international employees, contractors
         who deal with the international community and UN staff as  well  as
         many others.   As  long  as  al-Shabaab  is  around  this  security
         situation will continue.  Although al-Shabaab is not in control  of
         any part of Mogadishu it can still reach all over the city.   Thus,
         there are no safe places in Mogadishu.  This situation is not going
         to change unless the government strengthens security.  The targeted
         killings continue and there are criminal actions as well.

      [p107] Al reported on 26 September 2013 that  "Al-Shabaab  have  faced
         internal divisions and infighting since the beginning of  the  year
         [2013], which has resulted in scores of deaths".

      [p108] 1.2       Influence of al-Shabaab in Mogadishu

         Regarding security developments in Mogadishu  the  UNDSS  explained
         that overall there has been an improvement in terms of  the  Somali
         forces expanding their reach in Mogadishu,  but  the  city  remains
         very fragmented.  Even if there are Somali forces  and  police,  at
         the level of the district the DC with his  militia  still  has  the
         power, and it depends on him if he collaborates with the government
         or if he is the government.  According to UNDSS these militias  are
         technically not clan-militias since there is a  certain  clan  mix,
         but in reality they are clan-based.  However, these militias are to
         be seen as security forces rather than clan militias.


         [p109]  A Somali NGO in Mogadishu  explained  that  the  staffs  of
         NGOs, INGOs and other international organizations  fear  al-Shabaab
         because they are perceived by it as activists and anti al-Shabaab.


         The  Somali  NGO  in  Mogadishu  explained   that   al-Shabaab   is
         threatening  international  organisations,  but  since   al-Shabaab
         withdrew  from  Mogadishu  in  August  2011,  it  no   longer   has
         strongholds or specific territories it controls in  Mogadishu.  Al-
         Shabaab members and sympathizers are however still present  in  the
         city, but not as a regular military force. The NGO also stated that
         people no longer support  al-Shabaab  because  it  is  a  terrorist
         movement and it is killing people indiscriminately.


         Regarding  al-Shahaab  a  well-informed  journalist  in   Mogadishu
         explained that it is very weak and spread out. This is  the  reason
         why it has intensified its attacks. These  attacks  were  very  bad
         during the Ramadan, i.e. in August 2013. The biggest problems is al-
         Shabaab's suicide bombers, as they present a serious threat to  the
         people of Mogadishu."

      (our emphasis)

122.  It is to be noted that, whilst the material in  general  continued  to
      portray the fact that there were attacks by Al-Shabaab  in  Mogadishu,
      the Danish report as well as the Amnesty International report dated 23
      October 2014 (p5 of the country bundle) and the UNHCR report dated  28
      January 2013 (p20) make it plain that it is still the  case  that  Al-
      Shabaab does not have any strongholds or territories that it  controls
      in Mogadishu. Accordingly,  it  is  still  correct  to  say  that  the
      withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu is complete.

123.  In relation to the appellant's fear of being caught up  in  Al-Shabaab
      attacks  or  being  targeted  by  the  Al-Shabaab,  we  find,   having
      considered the country bundle as a whole,  that  the  material  relied
      upon on the appellant's behalf does not  justify  departing  from  the
      country guidance in MOJ. Accordingly, we find that there  is  no  real
      risk of the appellant being persecuted by the Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu.



124.  The appellant asserted that he would be  recognised  in  Mogadishu  as
      someone who has come  from  the  West  and  that  he  will  be  easily
      identified. The Tribunal in MOJ did not regard this as a  risk  factor
      that was reasonably likely in Mogadishu. The evidence in  the  country
      bundle is not such as to persuade us to depart from  the  guidance  in
      MOJ in this respect.

125.  As to the reasonableness of internal relocation to  Mogadishu,  it  is
      clear from MOJ that relocation for a person who belongs to a  minority
      clan and who does  not  originate  from  Mogadishu  will  have  to  be
      assessed very carefully. We must consider whether the  appellant  will
      have a means of establishing a home and some form of  ongoing  support
      in the absence of which there will be a real risk  of  his  having  no
      alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP  camp
      and thus having to live in conditions that will fall below  acceptable
      humanitarian standards (Article 15(c)). The Upper Tribunal in MOJ  did
      not consider that relocation to Mogadishu would  be  unduly  harsh  in
      general  for  the  purposes  of  the  Geneva  Convention  for  persons
      relocating to Mogadishu if there is no reasonable likelihood that they
      will be forced to live in IDP camps.

126.  We have set out at para 115 above the head note  from  MOJ  concerning
      internal relocation to Mogadishu. To state the obvious, this  guidance
      was drawn from the evidence that was before the  Upper  Tribunal.  For
      example, at para 214, the Tribunal referred to evidence from the UNHCR
      in a report published on 25 September 2013 as follows:

      "214. The respondent points to a shift in the position of UNHCR  as  a
           stark illustration of the improvement in security conditions  in
           Mogadishu. Having intervened in the  AMM  appeal,  the  view  of
           UNHCR was then that all civilians were at risk of indiscriminate
           violence, by reason  only  of  their  presence  there.  However,
           recent statements by UNHCR demonstrate that its view,  based  on
           sources rather than direct assessment, has changed from  one  of
           there being a blanket risk to "all civilians" to the need for  a
           more  individualised  risk  assessment.  The  following  is  the
           conclusion reached in a report published on  25  September  2013
           "UNHCR guidance on the application of  the  internal  flight  or
           relocation alternative, particularly in  respect  of  Mogadishu,
           Somalia":

               "Conclusion
               27. In light  of  the  overall  situation  in  South  Central
               Somalia (outside Mogadishu), UNHCR  considers  that,  on  the
               whole, an IFA or IRA would  not  be  relevant  or  reasonable
               given, in particular, the existence  of  widespread  violence
               and prevalent human rights  violations,  the  physical  risks
               and legal or physical barriers encountered in reaching  other
               areas,  as  well  as  the  serious  difficulties   faced   in
               accessing basic services and ensuring economic survival in  a
               situation of displacement.


               28. With regard to Mogadishu, the personal  circumstances  of
               an individual need to be carefully assessed. UNHCR  considers
               an IFA/IRA  as  reasonable  only  where  the  individual  can
               expect to benefit from  meaningful  nuclear  and/or  extended
               family support and clan protection mechanisms in the area  of
               prospective relocation. When assessing the reasonableness  of
               an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu in an individual case, it  should  be
               kept  in  mind  that  the  traditional  extended  family  and
               community structures of Somali society no  longer  constitute
               as strong a protection and coping mechanism in  Mogadishu  as
               they did in the past. Additionally, whether  the  members  of
               the traditional networks are able to genuinely offer  support
               to the applicant in practice  also  needs  to  be  evaluated,
               especially  given  the  fragile  and  complex  situation   in
               Mogadishu at present.


               29. For the following  categories  of  Somalis,  UNHCR  would
               consider that an IFA/IRA will not be reasonably available  in
               the absence of  meaningful  nuclear  and/or  extended  family
               support  and  functioning  clan   protection:   unaccompanied
               children or adolescents at risk  of  forced  recruitment  and
               other  grave  violations;  young  males  at  risk  of   being
               considered  Al  Shabaab  sympathizers  and  therefore  facing
               harassment from government security forces;  elderly  people;
               people with physical or  mental  disabilities;  single  women
               and  female  single  heads  of  households   with   no   male
               protection and especially originating  from  minority  clans.
               In any other exceptional cases, in which the  application  of
               an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu is considered even in the absence  of
               meaningful family or clan  support  to  the  individual,  the
               person would  need  to  have  access  to  infrastructure  and
               livelihood opportunities and to other  meaningful  protection
               and  support  mechanisms,  taking  into  account  the   state
               institutions'  limited  ability  to  provide   security   and
               meaningful protection."

127.  The appellant is from the Darod clan. If he  relocates  to  Mogadishu,
      he will be a member of a minority clan  because  the  Hawiye  are  the
      majority in Mogadishu. We therefore considered the appellant's country
      bundle carefully to ascertain  whether  the  evidence  concerning  the
      situation of an individual who is relocating to  Mogadishu  where  his
      clan is in the minority now justified departing from the  guidance  in
      MOJ. In other words, whether the living conditions of such individuals
      in Mogadishu are such that they can now  more  readily  show  that  it
      would be unduly harsh for them to relocate the  Mogadishu  or  whether
      they are more likely than was the case when MOJ was decided,  to  find
      themselves in an IDP camp.

128.  We found that the evidence in the appellant's country bundle  was  not
      significantly different. For example, the Danish report had  a  useful
      section entitled: "Needs in order to settle or  reestablish  [sic]  in
      Mogadishu".  This  refers  (at  p127)  to  the  UNHCR  stressing  that
      individuals will need access  to  clan  protection  for  security  and
      nuclear family for livelihood support and that it  was  emphasised  by
      UNHCR that a person's extended family will  not  be  able  to  provide
      sufficient support in Mogadishu. Page 127 also states:

      "... an international NGO (A) explained that ...if you  are  not  from
           Mogadishu you would need sufficient funds. Education and  skills
           and a cash grant in order to start up business would also be  an
           advantage, and local NGOs could also assist.

      ... the international NGO (A) explained that these NGOs  have  limited
           resources and cannot assist a huge number of people in need.  In
           a Mogadishu context however the basic condition is  the  support
           of the immediate family."

129.  Section 2.3 of the Danish report, which is entitled: "Internal  Flight
      Alternative/Relocation", relies entirely upon two documents that  were
      considered in MOJ: the Amnesty International Report dated 26 September
      2013 that we have already  mentioned  and  a  UNHCR  report  dated  17
      January 2014 entitled: "International Protection  Considerations  with
      regard to people  fleeing  Southern  and  Central  Somalia"  which  is
      document number 40 on page 218 of MOJ.

130.  In our judgment, the evidence before us  does  not  justify  departing
      from the guidance in MOJ. We therefore apply the guidance  in  MOJ  in
      deciding whether it would be unduly harsh to expect the  appellant  to
      relocate to Mogadishu and whether there is a reasonable likelihood  of
      his being forced to go to an IDP camp.  The guidance in the head  note
      should of course be read in conjunction with the guidance in the  body
      of the determination, which began at para 407. Of particular relevance
      in this case are the following:

      "419. ... we heard evidence that the cost of the journey  that  brings
           a Somali  citizen,  irregularly,  to  Europe  would  be  between
           $15,000 and $25,000 which the person concerned had been able  to
           raise before departure or which was raised on his behalf.

      423.  Two observations might be made about  financial  considerations.
           Financial assistance from the Home Office may  be  available  to
           voluntary returnees, in the form of a grant of up to 1,500, and
           may of significant assistance  to  a  returnee.  Second,  if  an
           individual was able to raise the level of funds necessary to pay
           for a journey  to  Europe  arranged  by  an  agent,  it  may  be
           difficult for him to  assert  that  he  now  has  no  access  to
           financial resources unless  he  is  able  to  explain  what  has
           changed and why, especially if he  has  been  found  not  to  be
           credible in the  factual  account  he  advanced  in  his  appeal
           hearing.



           Mogadishu as a destination for internal relocation.


      424.  The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply  those  who
           originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to  live
           in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
           facing a real risk  of  destitution.  Large  numbers  of  Somali
           citizens have moved to Mogadishu where, as we have seen there is
           now freedom of movement and no clan based discrimination. Such a
           person seeking to settle in Mogadishu but who has not previously
           lived there would be able to do so provided he had  either  some
           form of social support network, which might be in  the  form  of
           membership of a majority clan or having relatives living in  the
           city, or having access to funds such as  would  be  required  to
           establish accommodation and a means of  on-going  support.  That
           might be in  terms  of  continuing  remittances  or  securing  a
           livelihood, based on employment or self employment.


      425.  On the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for  a  person  of  a
           minority clan  with no former links to the city,  no  access  to
           funds and no other form of clan, family  or  social  support  is
           unlikely to  be  realistic  as,  in  the  absence  of  means  to
           establish a home and some  form  of  ongoing  financial  support
           there will be a real risk of having no alternative but  to  live
           in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there  is  a
           real possibility of having to live in conditions  that will fall
           below acceptable humanitarian standards."

131.  We have said above in our findings  that  we  reject  the  appellant's
      evidence that he has  no  one  in  Mogadishu.  We  have  rejected  the
      evidence that he and Ms Salad are in a genuine relationship.  We  have
      found that he is being supported by himself and/or by  some  means  he
      has  chosen  not  to  share  with  us.  He  is  young,  fit,  healthy,
      intelligent and manipulative.

132.  The appellant arranged his travel to the  United  Kingdom  through  at
      least two agents, according  to  para  8.4  of  the  determination  of
      Adjudicator Forrester. Para 8.4 of  that  determination  also  records
      that the appellant took US$3,500 from his father's home. The fact that
      his father had such a sum of money which just happened to  be  in  the
      house when he went to get the money  tells  one  something  about  his
      financial resources and those of his family.  He  has  chosen  not  to
      reveal to the Upper Tribunal the whereabouts of his family.

133.   At  the  hearing  before  the  2008  panel  (para  15  of  the   2008
      determination), the appellant maintained that the US$3,500 represented
      some of his fathers savings. In relation to the crime he committed  in
      2006, he said that he had paid 300 for the ticket to Canada and  400
      for a false passport. He said that this money had been sent to him  by
      his aunt in the USA. He admitted to the 2008 panel that he had  worked
      in the United Kingdom.

134.  On the whole of the evidence  and  bearing  in  mind  the  burden  and
      standard of proof, we find that it would not be unduly harsh to expect
      the appellant to relocate to Mogadishu. It is  not  reasonably  likely
      that he will not have access to funds such as  would  be  required  to
      establish accommodation and a means of on-going  support.  It  is  not
      reasonably likely that he will find himself in an IDP camp.

135.   Accordingly,  we  dismiss  his  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and   on
      humanitarian protection grounds.

136.  For all of  the  above  reasons,  there  is  no  real  risk  that  the
      appellant will be subjected to treatment in breach of his rights under
      Article 3 in Mogadishu.

      The applicable regime in relation to the Article 8 claim

137.  Paras 390 and 390A of the IRs provide:

      "Revocation of deportation order


      390.  An application for revocation of a  deportation  order  will  be
           considered in the light of all the circumstances  including  the
           following:
           (i)   the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii)  any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
               of an effective immigration control;
           (iv)   the   interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
               compassionate circumstances.


      390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,  it
           will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
           interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed
           by other factors."

138.  Accordingly, pursuant to para 390A,  the  first  issue  is  to  decide
      whether the regime set out para 398, 399 and 399A of the IRs  applies.
      This would only be the case if one of the sub-paragraphs of  para  398
      applied. Para 398 provides:


      "398. Where a person claims that their deportation would  be  contrary
           to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
           Convention, and


           (a)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
               the public good because  they  have  been  convicted  of  an
               offence for which they have been sentenced to  a  period  of
               imprisonment of at least 4 years;


           (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
               the public good because  they  have  been  convicted  of  an
               offence for which they have been sentenced to  a  period  of
               imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or




           (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
               the public good because, in the view  of  the  Secretary  of
               State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are a
               persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
               law,


           the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,  it
           will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
           interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

139.  We have no hesitation in rejecting the argument  at  para  38  of  the
      RFRTR, that para 398(c) applies just because (as at the  date  of  the
      decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order) the appellant  did
      not have family in the  United  Kingdom.  In  our  view,  that  is  an
      irrational interpretation of para 398. In our judgment,  it  is  clear
      that, in cases where the individual receives a sentence of  less  than
      12 months, the regime in para 398, 399 and 399A only  applies  if  the
      individual's offending has caused serious harm or if the individual is
      a persistent offender. We therefore assess for ourselves whether  para
      398 applies.

140.  The appellant plainly does not fall within para 398(a) or (b). In  our
      view, the offence of which he had been  convicted  was  not  one  that
      could be said to have caused "serious harm", although in saying so  we
      emphasise that we do not minimise in any way the  seriousness  of  his
      conviction. We rely on the same reasons we gave in relation to whether
      the appellant's conviction was a "serious crime" for the  purposes  of
      para 339D, although we recognise that  "serious  crime"  and  "serious
      harm" are not synonymous in meaning. The appellant is  plainly  not  a
      persistent offender, as the conviction in January  2006  is  the  only
      conviction as far as we are aware.

141.  Accordingly, although this is a deportation case, the regime  set  out
      in paras 398, 399 and 399A does not apply in assessing the appellant's
      Article 8 claim.

142.   Mr.  Masood  accepted  that  the  appellant  did  not   satisfy   the
      requirements of Appendix FM in relation to the right  to  family  life
      because he did not satisfy the suitability requirement as  he  is  the
      subject of a deportation order.  We have found  that  the  appellant's
      relationship with Ms Salad is not a  genuine  and  subsisting  marital
      relationship. We have found that the Islamic  marriage  ceremony  they
      have both undergone is a charade, entered into for the sole purpose of
      deceiving the immigration authorities. It follows that  we  find  that
      the appellant has not established family life within Article 8(1).  We
      find that this finding is an additional,  also  determinative,  reason
      why he does not  qualify  under  Appendix  FM.  It  follows  that  the
      submission in  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument,  about  it  being
      disproportionate to expect the appellant to return to Somalia to  make
      an entry clearance in order to re-join Ms Salad in the United Kingdom,
      is irrelevant.

143.  As to private life, para 276ADE(vi) of the IRs  provides  (insofar  as
      relevant):

      "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave  to
           remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
           date of application, the applicant:


            (i)   ...
            (ii)  ...; and
            (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
                 (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
            (iv)  is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
                 the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
                 imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect  the
                 applicant to leave the UK; or (v) is aged 18 years or above
                 and under 25 years and has spent at least half of his  life
                 living continuously in the UK (discounting  any  period  of
                 imprisonment); or
            (vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
                 has lived continuously in the  UK for less  than  20  years
                 (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be
                 very significant obstacles to the  applicant's  integration
                 into the country to  which he would have to go if  required
                 to leave the UK."

144.  The appellant has been living in the United Kingdom since his  claimed
      arrival on 21 December 2002, i.e. 12 years ago.  Mr.  Masood  accepted
      that the appellant did not satisfy the requirements of para 276ADE  in
      relation to the right to private life because he does not satisfy  the
      relevant requirements as to continuous residence. However, this  means
      that it is also accepted on the appellant's behalf that  he  does  not
      satisfy the requirement in para 276ADE(vi) that there  would  be  very
      significant obstacles to his integration into Somalia. In  any  event,
      we find that there will not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration in Mogadishu, for  the  reasons  given  at  paras  131-133
      above.

145.  We therefore need to decide whether it is necessary  to  consider  the
      position outside the IRs. If it is, there is guidance  issued  by  the
      Secretary of State for the consideration of Article 8 outside the IRs.
      The precise wording of the guidance has not been produced  to  us.  We
      therefore take the version that was before the court in  Nagre,  which
      reads:

      "3.2.7d Exceptional circumstances

      Where the applicant does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules
      refusal of the application  will  normally  be  appropriate.  However,
      leave can be granted outside the rules where exceptional circumstances
      apply.  Consideration  of   exceptional   circumstances   applies   to
      applications for leave to remain and  leave  to  enter.  "Exceptional"
      does not mean "unusual" or "unique". Whilst  all  cases  are  to  some
      extent unique, those unique  factors  do  not  generally  render  them
      exceptional. For example, a case is not exceptional just  because  the
      criteria set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM have been missed  by  a  small
      margin. Instead, "exceptional" means circumstances  in  which  refusal
      would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  individual
      such that refusal of the application would not be proportionate.  That
      is likely to be the case only very rarely.


      In  determining  whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances,  the
      decision maker must consider all relevant factors, such as:

      (a)   The circumstances around the applicant's entry to the UK and the
           proportion of the time they have  been  in  the  UK  legally  as
           opposed to illegally. Did  they  form  their  relationship  with
           their partner at a time when they had no immigration  status  or
           this was precarious? Family life which involves the  application
           putting down roots in the UK in the full  knowledge  that  their
           stay here is  unlawful  or  precarious,  should  be  given  less
           weight, when balanced against the factors weighing in favour  of
           removal, than family life formed by a person lawfully present in
           the UK.


      (b)   Cumulative factors should be considered. For example, where  the
           applicant has family members in the UK  but  their  family  life
           does not provide a basis for stay and they  have  a  significant
           private life in the UK. Although under the rules family life and
           private life are considered separately, when considering whether
           there are exceptional circumstances private and family life  can
           be taken into account.


      If the applicant falls to be granted because exceptional circumstances
      apply in their case, they may be granted leave outside the rules for a
      period of 30 months and on a 10 year route to settlement."

146.  In Nagre, Sales J (as he then was) said (para 30):

           "...if, after the process of applying the new rules and  finding
           that the claim  for  leave  to  remain  under  them  fails,  the
           relevant official or tribunal judge considers it is  clear  that
           the consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any family
           life or private life issues arising under Article 8, it would be
           sufficient simply to say that; they would not have to go on,  in
           addition, to consider the case separately  from  the  Rules.  If
           there is no arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
           granting leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  by  reference  to
           Article 8, there would be no point in introducing full  separate
           consideration of Article 8 again after having reached a decision
           on application of the Rules."

147.  Any assessment of the applicant's  private  life  claim  outwith  para
      276ADE must take account of the provisions of  s.117A-D  of  the  2014
      Act. These provisions are important. They provide:


      "117A Application of this Part





      (1)   This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
            (a)   breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
      family life under Article 8, and
            (b)   as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
      Rights Act 1998.


      (2)   In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
      tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
            (a)   in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
      117B, and
            (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
                 to the considerations listed in section 117C.


      (3)   In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
           question of whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).





      117B  Article 8: public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
      cases



      (1)   The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
      public interest.


      (2)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
           of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons
           who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to
           speak English, because persons who can speak English-
            (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
            (b)   are better able to integrate into society.


      (3)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
           of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons
           who  seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom   are
           financially independent, because such persons-
            (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and
            (b)   are better able to integrate into society.


      (4)   Little weight should be given to-
            (a)   a private life, or
            (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
            that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.


      (5)   Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
           person at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.


      (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and
            (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
      the United Kingdom."


      117C  Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving  foreign
      criminals


      ...

     117D  Interpretation of this Part

            (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person -
           (a)   who is not a British citizen,
           (b)   who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
           offence, and
           (c)   who -
                 (i)   has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                 least 12 months,
                 (ii)  has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                 serious harm, or
                 (iii) is a persistent offender."

148.  As we  said  at  the  hearing,  s.117C  does  not  apply  because  the
      appellant does not fall within the definition of "foreign criminal" in
      s.117D(2). This is because:

      i.    He does not come within section 117D(c)(i) because  he  received
           a sentence of 9 month's imprisonment.

      ii.   As far as we are aware, the conviction in January  2006  is  the
           only crime he has committed. On that basis,  he  does  not  come
           within s.117D(2)(c)(iii).


      iii.  As for s.117D(2)(c)(ii), the sentence that he received  reflects
           not  only  the  serious  of  the  crime  itself  but  also   the
           seriousness of the harm caused by the crime. Whilst  an  offence
           of attempting to obtain a service by deception causes harm,  the
           offence is not such that it caused  "serious  harm"  within  the
           meaning of s.117D(2)(ii), in our judgment.

149.  Following  Nagre,  we  consider  first  whether  it  is  necessary  to
      consider the appellant's Article 8 outside the IRs.

150.  The length of residence has  been  implicitly  accounted  for  in  the
      requirement in para 276ADE(vi). His situation in  Mogadishu  has  been
      considered in reaching the finding that there are not very significant
      obstacles to his integration in Mogadishu.

151.  That leaves his evidence that he arrived in the United  Kingdom  as  a
      child; that  he  has  learnt  the  English  language;  that  he  began
      voluntary work  with  the  Intercontinental  Charity  Organisation  in
      January 2013 and that he has worked in the United Kingdom according to
      the evidence he gave to  the  2008  panel.  We  assess  this  evidence
      outside the IRs as follows:

      i.    The appellant did not arrive in the United Kingdom as  a  child.
           He arrived at the age of 21 years.

      ii.   His work for the charity is some evidence  of  integration  with
           society in the United Kingdom. However, he has  only  done  this
           work for a period of  about  a  year.  In  addition,  given  his
           evidence  that  the  organisation  is  associated  with   Somali
           communities, any such integration is more limited than  if,  for
           example, the organisation had multi-cultural links. Furthermore,
           there is no reason why he will not be able to involve himself in
           voluntary work in Mogadishu.

      iii.  The appellant says he has learnt the  English  language  but  he
           found it necessary to  give  evidence  through  an  interpreter.
           Furthermore, there is no evidence that he has passed any English
           language tests.  As  we  do  not  have  any  evidence  that  the
           appellant is able to speak English and as we did not find him  a
           reliable witness, he cannot avail himself of  s.117B(2)  of  the
           2014 Act. In any event, any skill  he  has  gained  in  speaking
           English amounts to limited evidence only of integration.

      iv.   The appellant has worked in the  United  Kingdom  but  there  is
           little evidence of the quality of any private life  established.
           Overall, there is indeed scant evidence about the quality of the
           appellant's private life. On the whole of the evidence, we  find
           that the quality of his private life is shallow indeed.

      v.    We have found that the appellant has not been  supported  by  Ms
           Salad. If he  is  working  to  support  himself,  such  work  is
           illegal. We have no evidence upon which to make any  finding  as
           to whether s.117B(3) is in his favour.

      vi.   The appellant has never had leave to be in the  United  Kingdom.
           He entered illegally, pursued a  false  asylum  claim  and  then
           entered  into  a  bogus  marriage  in  order  to   deceive   the
           immigration authorities.

152.  There is significant public interest in the deportation of  those  who
      have committed crimes. Notwithstanding the fact that  the  appellant's
      crime was not a serious crime and that it  was  not  one  that  caused
      serious harm, there is nevertheless  significant  public  interest  in
      deterrence. There is also significant public interest  in  this  case,
      having  regard  to  para  151.vi.  above.  Balancing  the  appellant's
      personal circumstances cumulatively (including  the  assessment  under
      the IRs as to whether there are  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration in Mogadishu) against  the  interests  of  the  state  and
      applying s.117A-B, we find that his deportation as  a  consequence  of
      the  refusal  to  revoke  the   deportation   order   would   not   be
      disproportionate

153.  For all of these reasons,  we  find  that  there  are  no  exceptional
      circumstances within the meaning  of  the  respondent's  guidance.  We
      stress that, in using the phrase "exceptional circumstances",  we  are
      not applying exceptionality as a test.  We  are  merely  acknowledging
      that the general rule in a deportation case, including one  that  does
      not fall within para 398 of the IRs, is that the public interest is in
      the individual being deported.

154.  On 11 November 2014, we  received  a  document  from  the  appellant's
      representatives entitled: "Brief Note by  appellant's  representative"
      in which  Mr  Masood  argues  that,  as  the  IRs  do  not  cover  the
      appellant's position  and  given  para  134  of  the  judgment  in  MM
      (Lebanon), the five-step approach explained at para  17  of  Razgar  v
      SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  should  be  followed.  In  relation   to   the
      respondent's guidance, which provides for leave to be granted  outside
      the IRs in the exercise of the residual discretion only if  there  are
      exceptional circumstances, he submits, firstly, that  the  application
      of an exceptionality test is contrary to the guidance in Huang v  SSHD
      [2007] UKHL 1 and, secondly,  that  the  respondent's  decision  would
      result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant  and  his
      wife/partner such that refusal (presumably to revoke  the  deportation
      order) would be not be proportionate.

155.  Although it was said that a copy of the "Brief Note" was sent  to  the
      Presenting Officers' Unit, we have not received any response  from  Ms
      Ong. We did not consider it necessary to invite  her  submissions.  We
      respond to  the "Brief Note" as follows:

      i.    Both in oral submissions before us and in the "Brief  Note",  Mr
           Masood appeared to think that the fact that  the  appellant  did
           not satisfy the requirements for leave under the IRs  of  itself
           meant that his Article 8 claim fell to be determined outwith the
           IRs in line with the step-by-step approach  in  Razgar,  to  all
           intents and purposes as if the IRs did not  exist.  We  consider
           this to be misconceived. In the appellant's case,  there  was  a
           rule which applied, i.e. para 276ADE. The fact that he  did  not
           satisfy para 276ADE did not obviate the need to begin  assessing
           his Article 8 claim by considering the  requirements  under  the
           IRs before deciding whether it  is  necessary  to  consider  his
           Article 8 claim outwith the IRs and, if so, proceeding to do so.

      ii.   The submission that the Secretary of  State's  guidance  applies
           an "exceptionality test" contrary to Huang ignores the Court  of
           Appeal's judgment in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192
           and the Upper Tribunal's determination in Kabia (MF: para 398  -
           "exceptional circumstances") [2013] UKUT 569 (IAC) to the effect
           that the fact that para 398/the Secretary  of  State's  guidance
           (as the case may be) refers to "exceptional circumstances"  does
           not mean that the exceptionality test is being applied.

      iii.  There is nothing of  any  substance  in  the  remainder  of  the
           "Brief Note". It will be obvious from  our  reasoning  that  our
           finding that there are no exceptional  circumstances  under  the
           Secretary of State's guidance flows from our conclusion  on  the
           balancing  exercise   we   have   conducted   in   relation   to
           proportionality   in   line   with   domestic   and   Strasbourg
           jurisprudence and pursuant to s.117A-B. Accordingly, para 134 of
           MM (Lebanon) does not assist the appellant.

156.  Finally, we should say that we took  the  submissions  in  the  "Brief
      Note" into account in assessing this  case,  notwithstanding  that  we
      have only responded to it in terms at the end of our determination.

      Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
     error on a point of law that that it fell to be set aside. We have  re-
     made the decision on the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's
     decision. Our decision is  that  his  appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum
     grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds.







Upper Tribunal Judge Gill         Date: 9 January 2015

                                 APPENDIX A

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01182/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 April 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                            Hussein Omar Mohamed

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Masood of Aden & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.    This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Widdup and Dr O J de Barros) dismissing the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision  of  21  November  2012  refusing  to
    revoke a deportation order.

Background

2.    The background to this appeal can briefly be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant claims to have entered  the  UK  in  December  2002.   He
    applied for  asylum  but  his  claim  was  rejected.   His  appeal  was
    unsuccessful and his appeal rights became exhausted on 1 November 2004.
     On 12 January 2006 he was convicted of attempting to obtain a  service
    by deception, the use of a false passport so that he could leave the UK
    for Canada.  He was sentenced to  nine  months'  imprisonment  and  the
    court recommended deportation.

3.    The appellant was notified of a decision to make a  deportation  order
    but this was withdrawn because of procedural errors.  On 9 April 2008 a
    fresh decision was made.  The appellant appealed against this  decision
    but his appeal was dismissed on 5 August  2008.   Subsequently  further
    representations were made on his behalf  and  on  21  December  2012  a
    decision was made refusing to revoke the deportation order.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it was argued  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to  Somalia  from  Al-Shabaab  and
    other militant groups controlling the country and that  as  a  returnee
    from the West he would be perceived as someone who had  breached  their
    religious code.  He also relied on his private and family life with his
    wife following his marriage on 1 August 2012.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

5.    The Tribunal took into account the  previous  determinations  firstly,
    by Mr H O Forrester, Adjudicator, following a hearing on 14 April  2004
    against the original refusal of asylum and secondly,  by  the  AIT  (IJ
    Verity and Mr C P O'Brian) against the decision to make  a  deportation
    order on 4 August 2008.  It accepted  in  the  light  of  the  previous
    findings that the appellant was from Kismayo, from a majority clan  and
    that he was not therefore at risk as a result of his  clan  membership.
    It described his evidence in support  of  his  new  claim  as  likewise
    riddled with contradictions on important issues and  found  him  to  be
    wholly lacking in credibility, setting out a number of examples of  the
    contradictions in his evidence in [33].

6.     Looking  at  the  situation  in  Somalia,  it  found,  based  on  the
    information contained in the Political  Geography  Now  (PGN)  December
    2012 report, that there was an area around Mogadishu and  Afgoye  which
    had been liberated from Al-Shabaab, who had  also  been  expelled  from
    Kismayo in the south.  It accepted that Al-Shabaab controlled the roads
    south of Mogadishu to Kismayo and commented that  the  map  showed  the
    situation as it was very recently, the situation appeared to  be  fluid
    and a map showing areas of control in one  month  might  well  be  very
    different months or even weeks later [34].  It also took  into  account
    the report that Al-Shabaab was continuing to lose  territory  gradually
    after government and allied forces captured  its  main  stronghold  two
    months before.

7.    The panel went on to consider the country guidance in AMM  and  Others
    (Conflict; humanitarian crisis; refugees; FGM) Somalia CG  [2011]  UKUT
    445. It found  that  the  appellant  would  be  returned  to  Mogadishu
    Airport; he could not reasonably be  expected  to  travel  by  road  to
    Kismayo while Al-Shabaab controlled the roads south; he would not be at
    risk using a  commercial  flight  from  Mogadishu  to  the  airport  in
    Kismayo, page 9 of the background  evidence  bundle  referring  to  the
    bombing of the airport in December 2011.  It said  that  the  appellant
    had not addressed that issue but had concentrated his attentions on the
    difficulties he would face in Afgoye, put forward as a place  where  he
    could relocate internally, or in travelling by road to Kismayo.

8.    It said that in doing so the appellant had  not  considered  the  best
    and most obvious means of access to his home area by air.  It  rejected
    a submission made on his behalf that he would have to pass through  Al-
    Shabaab  territory  to  reach  Kismayo.   It  took  into  account   the
    respondent's submission that the appellant could  relocate  to  Afgoye,
    saying that might also be an option for the appellant if  circumstances
    there had improved but in [602] of AMM the Tribunal had pointed to  the
    need for evidence that an appellant could achieve the lifestyle of  the
    better-off inhabitants of the Afgoye Corridor and there was no evidence
    to that effect, although it had  noted  the  AIT's  decision  that  the
    appellant was not vulnerable or poor by Somali standards.

9.    It then considered  Article  8.   It  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's wife that she knew of his status before the wedding but was
    only told  of  the  deportation  order  and  the  failed  asylum  claim
    afterwards.  It commented that the appellant's marriage in August  2012
    was at a time when on his own evidence he was awaiting the  outcome  of
    his application to revoke the deportation order and as a result of  the
    marriage, he was able to claim that he had established a family life in
    the UK.  It accepted  the  respondent's  submission  that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience in the sense  that  the  appellant  married  in
    order to reinforce his claims in this application.  It found  that  his
    wife was aware of his lack of status before the marriage but  he  chose
    only to tell her of the deportation order and failed asylum claim after
    the marriage and inferred that if this were a genuine marriage based on
    love and affection, he would have told her before but did not do so  in
    case that dissuaded her from proceeding with the marriage [41].

10.   The Tribunal, therefore, found that he did  not  have  a  family  life
    within Article 8(1) but alternatively,  his  wife  was  a  Somali  from
    Kismayo who had married him knowing his lack of status in the  UK.   If
    the marriage was genuine, which it did not accept, there  had  been  no
    interference with the appellant's family life as, if it was  reasonable
    to expect the appellant to relocate within Somalia to Kismayo,  it  was
    reasonable to expect his wife to accompany him there.  If Article 8 was
    engaged the Tribunal found the respondent's decision was lawful and for
    a legitimate aim, the pursuit of a policy of  immigration  control  and
    the deportation of those who had  committed  a  serious  offence.   The
    appellant had lived in the UK since 2002 but since 2004 when his appeal
    rights were exhausted, he had had no lawful status.  His wife had  been
    granted indefinite leave  to  remain  but  her  own  asylum  claim  was
    dismissed and her grant of leave to remain was made  under  the  legacy
    policy.  The appellant had social and cultural ties with Somalia  where
    he had lived until he was 23 and the panel did not accept that  he  had
    no family in Kismayo.  It described the appellant as a  fit  young  man
    who was a member of a majority clan and his interests  were  outweighed
    by the public  interest.   The  respondent's  decision  to  deport  was
    proportionate.

The Grounds and Submissions

11.   The grounds argue firstly that the Tribunal was wrong  not  to  follow
    the country guidance in AMM as there was insufficiently cogent evidence
    for taking a different view.  The Tribunal relied on extremely  limited
    information in the PGN map and report,  which  showed  that  Al-Shabaab
    still controlled vast areas of Somalia including the route by road from
    Mogadishu to Kismayo.  Secondly, it is argued that the  Tribunal  erred
    by finding that the appellant would be able to take a commercial flight
    from Mogadishu to Kismayo simply because there  was  an  airport  there
    despite noting that the background evidence referred to the bombing  of
    the airport in December 2011.  There was no evidence  to  suggest  that
    the airport in Kismayo was operational whereas previous Somali  country
    guidance cases had proceeded on the basis that only  Mogadishu  Airport
    was operational.  Thirdly, it is argued that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    appreciate that as the appellant had no recent experience of living  in
    Somalia having arrived in the UK in December 2002, his position clearly
    fell within [598] of AMM and he would therefore be  at  risk  from  Al-
    Shabaab.  Finally, the grounds challenge the findings about whether the
    appellant's relationship with his wife was genuine and subsisting.  The
    reason given by the panel for not accepting the relationship was solely
    that the appellant's wife had not known about the deportation order and
    him being a failed asylum seeker  until  after  the  marriage.   It  is
    argued that there was no rational basis for this inference and that the
    panel failed to give proper weight to the evidence from the appellant's
    wife that this was a genuine marriage.

12.   Mr Masood adopted these grounds in his submissions.   He  referred  to
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940 and in particular to [47] where Stanley Burnton  LJ
    confirmed that decision makers and Tribunal  judges  were  required  to
    take country guidance determinations into account and  to  follow  them
    unless "very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence" were  adduced
    justifying their not doing so.  The evidence in the PGN map and  report
    was extremely limited and not enough to justify not following AMM.   He
    argued that there was no evidence at all of flights from  Mogadishu  to
    Kismayo and the Tribunal had been wrong simply to make that assumption.
     The appellant in his circumstances  was  someone  who  had  no  recent
    experience of living in Somalia and for this reason alone would  be  at
    real risk on return.  There had been good evidence  that  the  marriage
    between the appellant and his wife was subsisting and no adequate basis
    for the Tribunal to find that it was not genuine.

13.   Mr Allen submitted that the Tribunal had not erred  in  law.   It  was
    entitled to take the view that the situation had changed since AMM  was
    issued in 2011.  There was clear evidence that  Mogadishu  and  Kismayo
    were no longer under the control of Al-Shabaab.  Such a change had been
    anticipated in AMM [363] and the Tribunal was entitled to take the view
    that the change was durable.  Therefore, this was not simply a case  of
    the Tribunal  relying  on  one  piece  of  evidence:  it  was  evidence
    confirming the change anticipated in AMM.  In these  circumstances,  it
    had been open to the Tribunal to depart from the country guidance.   In
    any event, he submitted that any question of relocation to Kismayo  was
    predicted on there being an article 15(c)  risk  in  Mogadishu  but  if
    there was no such risk the issue of relocation and  travel  to  Kismayo
    ceased to be relevant.  So far as the question of air travel to Kismayo
    was concerned, he submitted that the inference which could properly  be
    drawn from AMM at [606] was that there were  commercial  flights.   The
    Tribunal's findings on Article 8 had been open to  the  panel  for  the
    reasons given.  The Tribunal had not simply found that  Article  8  was
    not engaged but had gone on to consider what the position would  be  in
    the alternative and had been entitled to find  that  removal  would  be
    proportionate.

Assessment of the Issues

14.   The issue before me at  this  stage  of  the  appeal  is  whether  the
    Tribunal erred in law such that its decision should be set aside.   The
    first issue is whether it erred in law by departing  from  the  country
    guidance  in  AMM.   It  is  common  ground   that   country   guidance
    determinations must be followed in the absence of  proper  reasons  for
    departing from them.  The Senior President's Practice Direction at 12.4
    says:

         "Because of the principles that like cases  should  be  treated  in
         like manner, any failure to follow a clear,  apparently  applicable
         country guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the  case
         in question is likely to be regarded as grounds  for  appeal  on  a
         point of law."


    Mr Masood relies on [47] of SG (Iraq) where  Stanley  Burnton  LJ  said
    that  Tribunal  judges  were  required  to  follow   country   guidance
    determinations unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence
    were adduced to justify their not doing so.  His submission is that the
    evidence in the PGN map and report was not sufficient whereas Mr  Allen
    argues that that information should not be looked at in isolation as it
    confirmed that a durable change had taken place as anticipated in  AMM.
    At [363] the Tribunal said:


         "363.    Before leaving the issue of article 15(c) in Mogadishu, it
                is necessary to say something with an eye to  the  use  that
                will be made of our country guidance findings  in  the  next
                few weeks and  months.   In  assessing  cases  before  them,
                judicial  fact-finders  will  have  to  decide  whether  the
                evidence is the same or similar to that before us  (Practice
                Direction 12).  To the  extent  it  is  not,  they  are  not
                required to regard our findings  as  authoritative.   As  we
                have emphasised, it is simply not possible on  the  evidence
                before us to state  that  the  changes  resulting  from  Al-
                Shabaab's  withdrawal  from   Mogadishu   are   sufficiently
                durable.  Far too much is  presently  contingent.   As  time
                passes, however, it may well be that  judicial  fact-finders
                are  able  to  conclude  that  the  necessary   element   of
                durability has been satisfied.  How, if at all, that impacts
                on the assessment of risk on return will, of course,  depend
                on all the other evidence."

15.   The Tribunal set out its findings about the situation in Somalia  [34]
    as follows:


        "34.     We find as a fact based on the  information  contained  in
               the December 2012 PGN map  that  there  is  an  area  around
               Mogadishu and Afgoye  which  has  been  liberated  from  Al-
               Shabaab and that Al-Shabaab have been expelled from  Kismayo
               in the south. We accept the  background  evidence  that  Al-
               Shabaab controlled the road south from Mogadishu to  Kismayo
               at that time. While  we  accept  that  this  map  shows  the
               situation as it was very recently we also take into  account
               that the situation appears  to  be  fluid  and  that  a  map
               showing areas of control in one month  might  well  be  very
               different months or even weeks later.  We  have  taken  into
               account that the text which accompanies the map states  that
               Al-Shabaab has continued to lose territory  gradually  since
               government allied forces captured its  main  stronghold  two
               months earlier also that evidence is dated 13 December  2012
               whereas the guidance in AMM dates back to 2011"

16.   The appellant's home area is Kismayo and therefore the first issue  to
    consider was whether he would be at real risk of serious harm there  or
    of generalised violence under  article  15(c).   At  the  time  of  the
    hearing in AMM Kismayo  was  under  the  control  of  Al-Shabaab.   The
    evidence before the Tribunal in the present appeal was that  Al-Shabaab
    had been driven out of Kismayo in August-September 2012, the PGN report
    indicating that it were  no  longer  in  control  of  Kismayo  but  the
    Tribunal did not consider how durable that change was  particularly  in
    the light of its reference to the situation being fluid and that  areas
    of control could  change  on  a  monthly  or  even  weekly  basis.  The
    Tribunal, following the guidance in HH and others [2010] EWCA Civ  426,
    then considered in  [35]  and  [36]  how  the  appellant  could  access
    Kismayo. It accepted that  it  would  not  be  possible  by  road  from
    Mogadishu but found that there was no reason why he  could  not  use  a
    commercial flight from Mogadishu to Kismayo.  However, the issue of how
    an appellant will reach his home area presupposes a sustainable finding
    that that area is safe. It is also  very  unclear  on  what  evidential
    basis the Tribunal found that the appellant would be able to travel  by
    air from Mogadishu to Kismayo and I am not  satisfied  that  sufficient
    reasons were given for this finding.

17.   The submission on behalf of the respondent (as recorded at  [26])  was
    that the appellant would be returned  to  Mogadishu  and  could  travel
    through government controlled territory to Afgoye.  On  behalf  of  the
    appellant it was argued [29] that the situation was generally unsafe in
    Mogadishu in the light of AMM and the question  was  whether  he  could
    relocate to Afgoye or safely get through to Kismayo.    If  Kismayo  is
    unsafe or inaccessible for the appellant,  the  issue  then  arises  of
    whether he can relocate in  Mogadishu  in  the  light  of  the  changes
    referred to by the Tribunal since the decision in AMM  but  this  issue
    does not appear to have been considered by the Tribunal as  opposed  to
    whether he could move into the Afgoye  Corridor.   In  so  far  as  the
    Tribunal considered the issue of internal relocation,  the  submissions
    and decision appear to focus on Afgoye. In [38] the  Tribunal  referred
    to [602] of AMM and the need for  evidence  that  the  appellant  could
    achieve the lifestyle of the  better  off  inhabitants  of  the  Afgoye
    corridor, commenting that there was no evidence to that effect although
    it noted the decision of the AIT that the appellant was not  vulnerable
    or poor by Somali standards. The Tribunal  therefore  did  not  make  a
    clear finding in the alternative that the appellant would  be  able  to
    relocate in Afgoye and it did not consider whether he could relocate in
    Mogadishu or elsewhere in Somalia.

18.   For these reasons I am satisfied that the Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
    failing to make clear findings on whether the  change  in  Kismayo  had
    been durable, whether he could travel there without risk and whether he
    could relocate without undue hardship in Mogadishu, Afgoye or elsewhere
    and further, the lack of adequate reasons raises a  real  doubt  as  to
    whether all the relevant factors were taken into account when  reaching
    the conclusion that the appellant was not  entitled  to  protection  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection or Article 3 grounds.

19.   I am also satisfied that the Tribunal erred in law in  its  assessment
    of whether the appellant has family life  in  the  UK.   I  accept  the
    submission that it has focused unduly on his wife's knowledge about the
    extent of his lack of status before the  marriage  as  opposed  to  him
    being a failed asylum seeker and subject to a deportation  order  which
    apparently she only learnt about after the marriage.   The  nature  and
    quality of family life within Article 8(1) inevitably  impacts  on  the
    assessment of proportionality under Article 8(2).

20.   I find that the errors of law are such that the  determination  should
    be set aside.  The appellant's representatives have made submissions by
    a letter dated 9 April 2012 as to how the appeal should proceed  if  an
    error of law was found.  A number of issues are  raised  which  require
    further submissions and for this reason the appeal will be relisted for
    further directions.






Signed                                             Date: 17 May 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

