
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01177/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice            |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 15th July 2013                               |On 22nd July 2013          |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER

                                   Between

                                Ismail Deria
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms F Allen, counsel, instructed by Polpitiya & Co.
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on  15th  July  1953.   His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent, made  on  29th  November
    2012, that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied, so that he
    was subject to automatic deportation  was  dismissed  after  a  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal, comprising  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Elek and Mrs R M Bray JP, in a determination  promulgated  on  3rd  May
    2013.

 2. The offence which triggered the automatic deportation provisions of the
    UK Borders Act was an offence of wounding with intent  to  do  grievous
    bodily harm, in respect of which at the Crown Court  at  Manchester  on
    14th  December  2002  the  appellant  received  a  sentence   of   life
    imprisonment with a tariff  of  four  years  under  the  provisions  of
    section 109 of the Powers of Criminal  Courts  (Sentencing)  Act  2000,
    which provided for a mandatory sentence  of  life  imprisonment  for  a
    second section 18 offence.   He  remained  in  prison  until  sometime
    towards the  end  of  2012  when  he  was  transferred  to  immigration
    detention. The circumstances  of  the  second  offence  were  that  the
    appellant had an argument with a man whom he knew and with whom he  was
    having a drink, in the course of which the appellant produced  a  knife
    and repeatedly stabbed him, causing a very serious wound from which  he
    could easily have died.  When arrested he was found to be in possession
    of a four inch  kitchen  knife,  which  he  claimed  was  for  his  own
    protection.  The first such offence was an  offence  of  wounding  with
    intent, of which he  was  convicted  in  1991,  in  respect  of  which,
    together with an offence of possessing an offensive weapon, he received
    a total of twelve months' imprisonment.  On that occasion the appellant
    went to meet the victim of the offence, with whom he had previously had
    an altercation, armed with a knife.  On his arrival a fight ensued  and
    the appellant picked up a bottle and smashed it into the victim's face,
    causing cuts and bruises.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on a number of grounds,  to  which  he  made
    specific reference.  First it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal
    erred in law  by  refusing  to  adjourn  the  hearing  to  enable  more
    information to be provided by the parties in relation to the  route  of
    return to Hargeisa, Somaliland to  which  the  respondent  proposed  to
    deport the appellant.   The  second  ground  was  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge made no finding in  respect  of  the  presumption  under
    section 72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  that
    for the  purposes  of  Article  33(2)  of  the  Geneva  Convention  the
    appellant was presumed to have been convicted of a particularly serious
    crime and constituted a danger to the community of the United  Kingdom.
    The third ground was that it was arguable that in  determining  whether
    or not the  appellant's  deportation  would  infringe  the  appellant's
    article 8 rights the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  take  account  of
    relevant matters, particularly the appellant's low risk of re-offending
    and his health.

 4. At the hearing before me it became apparent that the issue  of  whether
    or not the First-tier Tribunal had made an error of law in  failing  to
    adjourn the  hearing  was  academic.   In  the  notice  of  immigration
    decision the respondent indicated that the appellant would be  deported
    to Somaliland by air to Hargeisa Airport.  The expert whose report  was
    relied upon by the appellant  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal expressed the opinion that the appellant would be at  risk  if
    he were obliged to leave Mogadishu Airport  if  there  was  a  stopover
    en route to Hargeisa.  Mr Walker gave an undertaking on behalf of  the
    respondent that the appellant would be deported to Hargeisa either by a
    flight which did not land in Mogadishu or by a flight which, if it  did
    land in Mogadishu, would not involve the  appellant  leaving  Mogadishu
    Airport.  Ms Allen expressed concern that the appellant  might  not  be
    appropriately documented  which  would  oblige  him  to  obtain  travel
    documents in Mogadishu, but Mr Walker gave  a  further  undertaking  on
    behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    deported from the  United  Kingdom  without  appropriate  documentation
    which would enable him to enter Somaliland and remain there.   On  this
    basis Ms Allen conceded that if there had been an error of law  in  the
    determination of the appeal the decision would not be able  to  be  re-
    made in favour of the appellant on the grounds that he would be at risk
    en route to Hargeisa.

 5. The consequence of these undertakings is that if the respondent  wished
    to depart from their terms  a  fresh  removal  decision  affording  the
    appellant a fresh right of appeal would have to be made.

 6. So far as the section 72  point  is  concerned,  it  is  apparent  from
    paragraphs 14 and 15 of its determination that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had regard to the Parole Board Oral Hearing Decision letter, dated  9th
    October 2012, which followed a panel hearing on 9th  October  2012,  in
    which the panel expressed itself satisfied that the appellant's risk to
    the public and in the community were low.  The First-tier Tribunal said
    that it did not accept, in view of the Parole Board's conclusions, that
    the appellant was excluded  from  humanitarian  protection.   Ms  Allen
    conceded that that inevitably meant that the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    satisfied that were the appellant to be at  risk  of  serious  harm  on
    return to Hargeisa he would not be excluded from protection  under  the
    Refugee Convention by virtue of the provisions of section 72,  although
    it did not expressly say so.

 7. As the terms of the permission to appeal permitted all  grounds  to  be
    argued Ms Allen drew my attention to paragraph 5  (IV  to  VI)  of  the
    grounds of appeal in relation  to  the  appellant's  article  3  claim.
    Paragraph (IV) criticised the finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  that
    the appellant would have contacts through two friends who had  recently
    visited Somaliland and its conclusion  that  he  would  have  financial
    support from  his  relations  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  Somaliland.
    Paragraph (V) asserted that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  have
    regard to the expert evidence that  the  appellant  would  be  socially
    isolated in Somaliland.  Paragraph (VI) asserted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not address the evidence that the appellant was likely  to
    be kidnapped on return and held to ransom.

 8.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  took  the  view,  despite  the  appellant's
    assertion to the contrary, that  the  financial  support  that  he  had
    obtained in prison from his family would be able to continue if he were
    returned to Hargeisa.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant
    would have clan protection there.  In paragraph 18 of its determination
    it considered the evidence that he would be viewed as someone likely to
    have wealth and a prime target.  It took account of  the  statement  in
    the expert's report that on return someone  like  the  appellant  would
    face huge expectations by close or  distant  relatives  or  friends  to
    'bring something' and if he had nothing they would suspect him of being
    stingy and hiding his wealth.  In his view  that  would  not,  however,
    lead to physical attacks but  rather  to  increase  psychological/moral
    pressure.  Social isolation would be the probable result.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal said that they considered that the  expert's  conclusions
    did not in  their  severity  engage  article  3.   In  any  event,  the
    appellant told the court he had two lady friends, who recently returned
    from holidays in Hargeisa, where they visited relatives.  They came  to
    no harm and the First-tier Tribunal did not doubt  that  the  appellant
    would have contacts through them to protect him from social  isolation,
    if indeed he did not have any relatives at  all  in  Somaliland,  about
    which  they  were  sceptical.   In  any  event,  he  would  have   clan
    protection.  In my view all of these conclusions were open to the First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  it  and  it  was
    perfectly entitled to conclude that  the  high  threshold  involved  in
    article 3 was not reached as a result of the  matters  which  had  been
    advanced on the appellant's behalf.

 9. This leaves the third ground mentioned  in  the  grant  of  permission,
    namely that the First-tier Tribunal judge made an error of law  in  the
    assessment of the proportionality of  the  appellant's  deportation  in
    failing to take account of material matters, particularly his low  risk
    of re-offending and his health.  As to the general matters advanced  on
    the appellant's behalf in the grounds of appeal, I take the  view  that
    they involved matters of advocacy.  In some  respects  they  rely  upon
    matters, such as the length of time which the appellant  had  spent  in
    the United Kingdom, the fact  that  he  had  relations  in  the  United
    Kingdom who supported him financially and  his  lack  of  relations  in
    Somaliland, which were accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  is
    apparent from reading its determination.   In  other  respects,  as  in
    relation to the risk of destitution and the risk  of  kidnapping,  they
    amount to disagreement with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, as
    has been seen.

10. In relation to the appellant's low risk of re-offending, it is apparent
    from what has already been said that the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    the conclusion of the Parole Board that the appellant's  risks  to  the
    public and  in  the  community  were  low.   In  paragraph  14  of  its
    determination it said that in assessing whether he remained a danger to
    the community it took into consideration the Parole Board Oral  Hearing
    Decision letter.  It said the panel noted that in the OASys, dated  9th
    September 2011, it was said that the appellant's risk of  serious  harm
    in the community was assessed as medium to  the  public  and  to  known
    adults and all other  risks  in  the  community  and  in  custody  were
    assessed as low.  The First-tier Tribunal cited the  panel's  statement
    that it was noted that the CALM programme  taught  him  how  to  manage
    anger.  In paragraph 15 of its determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    set out the Parole Board's conclusions that the appellant's risks  were
    low  and  that  his  current  risks  were  manageable  in  either  open
    conditions or in  the  community.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  said  it
    accepted  the  appellant's  representative's  submission  that  "having
    regard to the totality of  the  evidence  this  is  a  case  where  the
    appellant has very carefully and seriously focused on the cause of  his
    offending in particular alcohol and addressed such issues as guilt  and
    remorse".

11. Notwithstanding the acknowledgement by the First-tier Tribunal that the
    appellant's risks to the public and in the community were low, Ms Allen
    argued that in paragraph 26 of its determination when dealing with  the
    question of the proportionality  of  the  appellant's  deportation  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to make mention of  these  low  risks.   She
    relied upon a passage in paragraph 30 of the judgment of Moses LJ in MM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ
    279, in which he said that an assessment of the  risk  of  re-offending
    was a vital ingredient in reaching the conclusion that deportation  was
    necessary for the purposes of protecting the public.  She  also  relied
    on a further passage in paragraph 35 in  which  he  said  that  if  the
    correct view was that there was no realistic risk of further  offending
    and the prognosis was excellent then it was difficult  to  see  how  it
    could be proportionate to deport that appellant.  So far as the  latter
    statement is concerned, it is to be remembered that each appeal has  to
    be determined on its own facts.  In MM the  appellant's  offending  had
    been caused by his schizophrenia and there was evidence that  continued
    medication and support would remove the risk of further offending.   In
    that case there was no realistic risk  of  further  offending,  whereas
    such cannot be said to be the case here.

12. It is clear that the appellant's risk had been assessed.   In  relation
    to the issue of whether or not the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  take
    account of the appellant's low risk of re-offending, it is evident that
    in paragraph 26  of  its  determination  it  said  that  it  noted  the
    principle considered in the case of AM v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, that deportation  in  pursuit  of
    the legitimate aim of preventing crime and disorder was not to be  seen
    as one-dimensional.  The public interest in deterrence was  a  material
    and necessary consideration in measuring  proportionality  and  was  an
    important component of the balancing exercise.  It was in paragraph  24
    of the judgment that Pitchford LJ said this:

         "Deportation in pursuit of the legitimate aim of  preventing  crime
         and disorder is not, therefore, to be seen  as  one-dimensional  in
         its effect.  It has the effect not only of removing the risk of re-
         offending by the deportee himself,  but  also  of  deterring  other
         foreign nationals in a similar position.  Furthermore,  deportation
         of foreign criminals preserves public confidence  in  a  system  of
         control whose loss would itself tend towards crime and disorder."

    In my view the reference by the First-tier Tribunal to deportation  not
    being seen as having a one-dimensional effect demonstrates a regard  to
    the risk  of  re-offending  and  shows  that  it  considered  that  the
    appellant's low risk of re-offending was not in  itself  sufficient  to
    make his deportation disproportionate.  In my view it is impossible  to
    conclude that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    appellant's  low  risk  of  re-offending  since  it  specifically  made
    reference to it in paragraphs 14  and  15  of  its  determination.   It
    cannot be assumed that thereafter the  First-tier  Tribunal  completely
    forgot about it.

13. So far a the question  of  the  appellant's  health  is  concerned,  in
    paragraph 20 of its determination the First-tier Tribunal observed that
    in relation to the appellant's health problems no medical evidence  had
    been submitted.  It said the appellant said he suffered from  diabetes.
    His expert  stated  that  the  prevalence  of  persons  suffering  from
    diabetes was quite high in Somaliland.  His impression  was  that  most
    diabetes patients could get some form of  treatment.   His  explanation
    was that if one had the financial means and family  support  one  could
    secure reasonably  well  diabetes  treatment  in  most  open  areas  in
    Somaliland.  In  paragraph  19  of  its  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal referred to remittances which the appellant received from  his
    family in the United Kingdom and said it  had  no  reason  to  believe,
    despite his assertion to the  contrary,  that  the  support  would  not
    continue were he to be removed to Hargeisa.  It  said  the  appellant's
    expert  stated  that  family  survival  in  Somaliland  depended  to  a
    considerable degree on sharing within kinship networks and  remittances
    sent by (sic) the diaspora.  It did not doubt the  appellant  would  be
    supported in this way on return.

14. The First-tier Tribunal had already found  that  the  appellant  was  a
    member of the Isaaq clan from whom he would  have  clan  protection  in
    Somaliland.  In  paragraph  20  of  its  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal went on  to  say  that  it  had  already  concluded  that  the
    appellant would not be without financial support from his family in the
    United Kingdom and that he already had  contacts  with  friends  and/or
    clan protection.  The expert was not sure about medication for glaucoma
    and raised concerns about the appellant's injuries sustained whilst  in
    prison but the First-tier Tribunal reiterated that no medical  evidence
    was adduced.  The appellant appeared in court  and  it  noted  that  he
    walked with a stick and  gave  evidence  without  difficulty.   It  was
    satisfied that there was a hospital in Hargeisa.  It found that article
    3 was not engaged as far as the  appellant's  medical  conditions  were
    concerned.

15. Ms Allen submitted that when the First-tier Tribunal came to assess the
    proportionality of the appellant's deportation it made  no  mention  of
    his medical problems.  In paragraph 26 of its  determination,  however,
    the First-tier Tribunal did point to the fact that the appellant  would
    be able to return to Hargeisa in Somaliland, where it did not doubt  he
    had social contacts and would be supported financially from the  United
    Kingdom.  The First-tier  Tribunal  had  previously  pointed  out  this
    support would prevent the appellant's medical conditions from  engaging
    article 3.

16. In paragraph 17 of his judgment in MM, Moses LJ said that the essential
    principle was that the ECHR  did  not  impose  any  obligation  on  the
    contracting states to provide those liable to deportation with  medical
    treatment lacking in their "home countries".  In paragraph 18  he  said
    although that principle was expressed in those  cases  in  relation  to
    article 3, it was a principle which must apply to article 8.   It  made
    no sense to refuse to recognise a "medical care" obligation in relation
    to article 3, but to acknowledge it in  relation  to  article  8.   In
    paragraph 23 he said the only cases he could foresee where the  absence
    of adequate medical treatment in the country to which a person  was  to
    be deported would be relevant  to  article  8,  was  where  it  was  an
    additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance,  with  other  factors
    which by themselves engaged article 8.  It is not  the  case,  however,
    that the appellant had established that there would be  an  absence  of
    adequate medical treatment in Somaliland for  his  medical  conditions.
    In these circumstances in my view  no  reasonable  First-tier  Tribunal
    could have been  persuaded  that  the  appellant's  medical  conditions
    should have affected the outcome as to whether his deportation would be
    proportionate or not.

17. The appellant did not succeed in establishing, despite having a  number
    of relations in the United Kingdom, that he enjoyed family  life  here.
    I am satisfied that,  given  the  weight  to  placed  upon  the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals as illustrated by  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and the seriousness of  his
    offence, it cannot be said that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in
    concluding  that  it  would  not  be  disproportionate  to  deport  the
    appellant to Somaliland, in the light  of  all  of  the  circumstances,
    notwithstanding the length of time that  he  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom and his low risk of re-offending.

18. In these circumstances the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed so
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed                              Dated

P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
