
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01707/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 March 2014                              |On 29th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE PARKER
               SITTING AS A DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LEONARD THAQI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bandegani of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge Digney and Mrs Holt.   The  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal was brought by Leonard  Thaqi.   He  was
    born on 19 January 1985, is  a  citizen  of  Kosovo,  and  he  appealed
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, the respondent, dated 7
    August 2013 to make a  deportation  order  under  Section  35A  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The background is set out  by  the  Tribunal  in  paragraph  3  of  the
    determination and we  recite  that  background  for  convenience.   The
    appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom  on  12  September
    1999.  He was granted exceptional leave to remain until 19 January 2003
    and subsequently, after a successful appeal, was granted  discretionary
    leave until 16 May 2008.   He  subsequently  made  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain and that application was  outstanding  when,
    on 18 May 2009 he was convicted at Kingston Crown Court of supplying  a
    class A drug and sentenced following a successful appeal to  the  Court
    of Appeal Criminal Division to ten months' imprisonment.  He was served
    with a deportation order and a decision to refuse indefinite  leave  on
    16 February 2010.  An appeal against that decision was dismissed on  15
    September 2010 and a deportation order was signed on 7 October 2010.

 3. On 2 January, that constitutes a very substantial period of delay,  the
    appellant was detained on reporting because he was not  living  at  the
    bail address.  Further representations were made and these were treated
    as an application to revoke the deportation order.  An  appeal  against
    the decision was made but the appeal was not heard as the decision  was
    withdrawn when it became apparent that the decision of 7  October  2010
    was invalid because it purported to be an automatic deportation  order.



 4. The Tribunal referred at paragraph 8 to the offences.  On  11  December
    2008 the appellant committed two offences.  He was in possession  of  a
    class A drug.  There was only one deal.  The  Tribunal  said  that  the
    appellant's evidence about that matter was not as clear as it might be.
     In his statement he said nothing about the supply, he simply said that
    the offence of possession was for his own use and the Tribunal  records
    that that must have been correct.  It also recorded at paragraph 8 that
    the appellant  had  stolen  from  meters.   It  also  stated  that  the
    appellant had given some explanation of his offending.  He said that he
    was not working on a regular basis.

 5. The Tribunal at paragraph  11  referred  to  a  relationship  that  the
    appellant had formed with one Anjali Rhodes  on  12  July  2012.   This
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was heard on 13 November 2013 and
    it appears that the appellant and Ms Rhodes had  been  living  together
    since June 2013.  Therefore, on any view, it was  a  relatively  short-
    lived relationship.  The appellant produced for the First-tier Tribunal
    a number of photographs of the appellant and Ms  Rhodes  but  only  one
    predated the start of the relationship.  A number of points  were  made
    about the relationship to the Tribunal.

 6. The Tribunal considered the application of the Immigration Rules to the
    circumstances of this offence.  They directed themselves to Rule 398 of
    the Immigration Rules, in particular 398C that reads as follows:

         "The deportation of the person from the United Kingdom is conducive
         to the pubic good because in the view of  the  Secretary  of  State
         their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a  persistent
         offender who  shows  a  particular  disregard  for  the  law.   The
         Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider  whether
         paragraphs 399 or 399A applies and if it does not it will  only  be
         in  exceptional  circumstances  that   the   public   interest   in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

 7. The respondent  submitted  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant's offending, namely the supply of a class A drug, fell within
    the terms of Rule 398C as an  offence  that  caused  serious  harm  and
    therefore the respondent maintained that Rule 398C was fully applicable
    in this case.  If then regard was had to Rule 399  and  399A  it  would
    appear  that  the  appellant  would  not  have  benefited  from   those
    provisions and therefore the deportation could  only  be  precluded  if
    there were exceptional circumstances.

 8. The Tribunal rejected that interpretation and application of Rule 398C.
     Today Mr Bandegani of Counsel on behalf of the appellant  directed  us
    to the determination Mohammed Rahim Barr v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2012]  UKUT  00196  (IAC)  before  the  President,  Mr
    Justice Blake  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill.   In  particular,  Mr
    Bandegani relied upon paragraphs 30 and 32 of  that  determination  for
    the proposition that it is for the Tribunal on the appeal to  determine
    for itself whether the criteria within the Rule before the Tribunal, in
    this case Rule 398C, have been satisfied.  The Tribunal is not bound in
    any way by the determination that the Secretary of State has made.  The
    Tribunal must look at the matter and  apply  its  own  judgment.   That
    proposition appears to be unchallengeable and the issue simply resolves
    to  whether  or  not  the  Tribunal  in   exercising   that   undoubted
    jurisdiction that it enjoyed, did apply the correct  legal  test  under
    the relevant Rule.

 9. The Tribunal appears to have taken the position that  because  in  this
    case the amount of the supply of the class A drug was  small,  no  more
    than a single gram, then it could not sensibly be said that the offence
    had caused serious harm.  The Tribunal also supported  that  conclusion
    by reference to the lack of any evidence of  risk  of  re-offending  by
    this appellant.  The Tribunal said in terms in paragraph 17:

         "It is impossible to say that the supply of about, at most, a  gram
         of cocaine, has caused serious harm.  It is also  not  possible  to
         see the appellant who committed an offence of simple possession and
         two other offences of stealing from meters as a persistent offender
         who has shown a particular disregard for the law.  It follows  that
         we conclude that the respondent was  wrong  to  rely  on  paragraph
         398C."

10. It should also be remarked that at paragraph 15 the  Tribunal  attached
    weight to the length of the sentence.  The  Tribunal  began  by  saying
    that the offence was clearly at the lowest level,  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal had reduced the  sentence  to  a  figure  that  meant  that  the
    appellant could be released immediately, something that suggested  that
    an even lower sentence  would  have  been  passed  if  the  Court  were
    untrammelled by the time already served.  We regard  those  remarks  as
    highly inappropriate.  The Court of Appeal, when it quashes a  sentence
    and substitutes another sentence, substitutes  the  sentence  that  the
    Court of Appeal determines in all the circumstances is the  appropriate
    sentence and is one that is not manifestly excessive.  In our judgment,
    the Tribunal should not have speculated that the Court of Appeal  might
    have passed an even lower sentence in the circumstances that  prevailed
    in this case.  Such an observation is likely, among  other  things,  to
    give rise to an unjustified sense of grievance on those whose sentences
    have been  substituted  in  these  circumstances.   The  Tribunal  must
    proceed, and must proceed  only,  on  the  basis  that  the  ten  month
    sentence that was substituted by the Court of  Appeal  was  a  sentence
    that was not manifestly excessive and was appropriate for  the  offence
    that was actually committed.  No observations such as  those  that  are
    found in paragraph 15 in this  determination  should  be  made  in  the
    future.

11. This approach may have led consciously or  unconsciously  to  colouring
    the Tribunal's view of the seriousness of the offending by leading  the
    Tribunal to believe that an even lower sentence  than  the  ten  months
    imposed would have been justified in the circumstances of the case.  We
    proceed on the footing that the ten month  sentence  was  the  sentence
    that appropriately measured the gravity of the offending  and  we  note
    that it was a substantial sentence in any event.

12. Mr Bandegani today has sought to maintain the conclusion of the  First-
    tier Tribunal, namely that it  was  for  the  Tribunal  to  assess  the
    seriousness and their approach in this case was not flawed.  We do  not
    accept  that  argument.   It  appears  to  us  that  the  Tribunal  has
    unjustifiably in this case belittled the  nature  and  gravity  of  the
    offence that was committed.  The supply of class A drugs, whether it is
    cocaine, heroin or other class A drugs is a very serious matter  indeed
    whether or not the supply is of a very substantial quantity or whether,
    as in this case, it is a lesser supply.  The effect on  those  who  are
    using drugs is serious, the harm caused by supply of drugs even in  the
    quantities indicated in this case is serious.  Those facts  are  really
    too well-known to need recitation at length.  Therefore we come to  the
    conclusion that the approach in law to the gravity of the  offence  and
    to the serious consequences for those to  whom  drugs,  even  in  small
    quantities are supplied, is not supportable.  The only conclusion  open
    to the Tribunal  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case  was  that  the
    offending fell within 398C of  the  Rules.   The  Rules  then  required
    exceptional circumstances.

13. The Tribunal did go on to consider whether, even if it had  been  wrong
    in regard to the application of Rule 398C,  whether  the  circumstances
    were here exceptional.  On this aspect we were helped by Mr  Bandegani.
    He has drawn our attention specifically to the observations made in  MF
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1192, (the Master of the Rolls, Lord Justice  Davis  and  Lady  Justice
    Gloster).  The Master of  the  Rolls  in  his  judgment  said  this  at
    paragraph 42:

         "42. In our view, that is not to say that a test of  exceptionality
             is being applied.  Rather  it  is  that,  in  approaching  the
             question of whether removal is  a  proportionate  interference
             with an individual's Article 8 rights, the scales are  heavily
             weighted  in  favour  of  deportation   and   something   very
             compelling which will be 'exceptional' is required to outweigh
             the public  interest  in  removal.  In  our  view,  it  is  no
             coincidence that the  phrase  'exceptional  circumstances'  is
             used in the new Rules in the context of weighing the competing
             factors for and against deportation of foreign criminals. "

    Then at paragraph 44 the Master of the Rolls says:

         "44. We would therefore hold that the new Rules are a complete code
             and that the exceptional circumstanced to be considered in the
             balancing   exercise   involved   the   application    of    a
             proportionality   test   as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence.  We accordingly respectfully do not agree  with
             the UT that the decision-maker is not mandated or directed  to
             take all the relevant Article 8 criteria into account.

         45.  Even if we were wrong about that, it  would  be  necessary  to
             apply a proportionality test outside the new Rules as was done
             by the UT. Either way, the result should be the same. In these
             circumstances, it  is  a  sterile  question  whether  this  is
             required by the new Rules  or  it  is  a  requirement  of  the
             general law. What matters is that it is required to be carried
             out if paragraphs 399 or 399A do not apply."

14. The Tribunal purported to deal with the  issue  of  proportionality  in
    paragraph 22.  The Tribunal said this:

         "In summary thee is the seriousness of the offences, the risk of re-
         offending, the time that has passed since the original decision was
         taken and the delay on the part of the Home Office and the lack  of
         any explanation for that delay since the decision was taken.  There
         is also the question of the appellant's relatively good immigration
         history which the first Tribunal relied on.  Although this  is  not
         an automatic deportation we consider that the  public  interest  in
         removing  foreign  criminals  in   the   non-technical   sense   is
         significant,  in  that  the  question  of  deterrence   is   always
         important.  In the final reckoning however  we  conclude  that  the
         presumption that we referred to in paragraph 18 above is  rebutted,
         and in the light of all the matters that can be said on both  sides
         of  the  argument,  removal  of  the   appellant   would   not   be
         proportionate.  The decision would therefore not be  in  accordance
         with the law."

15. Mr Bandegani submitted today that in  paragraph  22  the  Tribunal  did
    consider all relevant factors and did not exclude any factors that were
    relevant and that the Tribunal came to a decision that  was  reasonably
    open to them.  Again, we do not accept that submission.

16. Firstly, although the Tribunal does refer to  the  seriousness  of  the
    offences, for the reasons that we have already given we have  concluded
    that the Tribunal in this case simply misinterpreted the seriousness of
    the offences or perhaps, to put it more  appropriately,  misappreciated
    how serious the offence of supply was.  That failure to understand  the
    seriousness of the offence vitiated the further analysis  that  it  has
    undertaken.

17. As to the risk of re-offending, in our judgment that was a matter  that
    could carry very little weight in  this  context.   The  appellant  had
    committed a serious offence and, as is clear both from the Rules and on
    authority, deportation is almost inevitable unless there are compelling
    factors to the contrary.  The risk of re-offending cannot  be  regarded
    as compelling.

18. Similarly, the Tribunal refer to delay, but there is no  indication  in
    this case that the appellant materially changed his circumstances as  a
    result of the delay that occurred, and we do not accept that any  delay
    in this case could affect the public policy in deporting those who have
    committed a  serious  offence.   The  Tribunal  also  referred  to  the
    relatively good immigration history.  However, as Mr Parkinson  pointed
    out, on behalf of the Secretary of State, a relatively good immigration
    history should be the norm and cannot properly be counted as  a  factor
    giving rise to compelling grounds for a decision that  would  otherwise
    be taken in the public interest.  Furthermore, we do not  believe  that
    paragraph 22 gives sufficient weight to the need for deterrence in this
    area.  This is  a  case  in  which  in  our  judgment  deportation  was
    justified not only by reason of the appellant's own conduct but also by
    reason of the need to demonstrate that  offending  of  this  nature  is
    regarded with revulsion by the public and to indicate to  others  in  a
    similar position that unless there are compelling  reasons  deportation
    will almost inevitably follow where an offence of this gravity has been
    committed.

19. For those reasons therefore we do not accept that in paragraph  22  the
    Tribunal has properly examined all the matters that bear upon the issue
    of proportionality and has not properly weighed a number of the factors
    to which it has referred.  In our judgment, looking objectively at  the
    circumstances of this case, the Tribunal could as a matter of law  only
    have been driven to the conclusion that there were no  such  compelling
    reasons.  For completeness we refer also to the relationship  that,  as
    we have observed, was of a relatively short duration and not such as to
    give rise to any compelling aspect in this case.

20. Our decision therefore is, for the reasons given, that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did commit an error of  law  in  its  misappreciation  of  the
    serious harm caused by drug offences  of  this  nature,  and  that  the
    Tribunal also erred in concluding  that  there  were  here  exceptional
    circumstances,  namely  compelling  circumstances  that  justified  the
    setting aside of the deportation order.  For those reasons the decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  set  aside  and  we
    reinstate and affirm the deportation order that was made in  this  case
    by the Secretary of State.


Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Parker
Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
