


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
DA/01877/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at North Shields Determination Promulgated
On 26 June 2015  On 7 July 2015
Prepared on 27 June 2015


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                     M M
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mr Mills, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born 20  September  1987,
           and now aged 27.
        2. On 23 September 1992, and thus aged 5, he entered the UK in  the
           company of his mother and 4 other siblings. He had been  granted
           entry clearance for settlement under the refugee family  reunion
           policy because his father had been recognised as a refugee  from
           Somalia.
        3. On 3 March 1994 the Appellant was granted refugee status in  his
           own right, and in turn ILR.
        4. On 23 March 2010 the Appellant was notified that the  Respondent
           intended to revoke both his refugee status and the grant of ILR.
           On 15 April 2010 UNHCR were notified by the Respondent  of  that
           intention too. For reasons that are  unexplained  that  did  not
           then occur. A further notice to this effect was then  issued  to
           the Appellant on 7 May 2014, and to UNHCR on 29  May  2014.  The
           Respondent eventually revoked the refugee status and  the  grant
           of ILR on 16 July 2014.
        5. On 30 August 2014 the Respondent decided that s32(5) of  the  UK
           Borders Act 2007 applied to the Appellant following a number  of
           convictions, including robbery, and the supply of Class A drugs.


        6. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal against that decision and
           his appeal was heard on  27  November  2014,  and  dismissed  by
           decision of Judge Robinson, promulgated on 19 December 2014.
        7. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal, as drafted,  raised  two  complaints;  (i)
           that the Judge had failed to follow the country guidance  to  be
           found in MOJ (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT  442,
           and had failed to give adequate reasons for departing  from  it,
           and (ii) that the Judge had not given adequate reasons  for  his
           conclusion that the Appellant would be able to obtain assistance
           from his father's clan, given  the  lack  of  contact  with  his
           father.
        8. That application was refused by Judge Osborne on 15 January 2015
           on the basis that the decision showed that the FtT had  referred
           to and followed the guidance to be found in MOJ, and  had  found
           that the Appellant derived clan membership of the Issaq  through
           his father, would not be at risk from other clans as  a  result,
           and would be able to obtain help from members of his clan. Those
           findings  were  open  to  the  FtT  on  the  evidence  and  were
           adequately reasoned.
        9. The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and granted by
           Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 23 April 2015 on the basis it  was
           arguable that MOJ had not been properly applied,  and  that  the
           FtT had underestimated  the  difficulty  of  one  who  had  left
           Somalia at the age of 5 in  tracing  family  or  obtaining  clan
           protection in Mogadishu.
       10. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of 25 June 2015  in  which
           she asserted that the Judge had given adequate reasons  for  his
           adverse findings and that MOJ had been properly applied.
       11. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
       12. It is plain, and Mr Mills accepts, that the Judge  was  referred
           to the decision in MOJ [27] and that  he  sought  to  apply  its
           guidance. He also considered the previous position as  described
           in AMM (conflict;humanitarian crisis;returnees;FGM)  Somalia  CG
           [2011] UKUT 445 [53-58]. Thus it was argued  that  the  guidance
           contained in MOJ had not been applied correctly to the evidence.


       13. Although the Appellant appears to have sought to deny it  before
           the FtT, it is plain that he  derives  clan  membership  of  the
           Isaaq  clan  through  his  father  in  accordance  with   Somali
           tradition. Thus, as the Judge correctly found, he is a member of
           the Isaaq clan, a majority clan, and the clan most prevalent  in
           the north of Somalia, particularly in Somaliland.
       14.  Although  Mr  Mills  argued  that  the  Appellant  might   have
           difficulty in demonstrating to the satisfaction of clan  members
           that he was a member of the Isaaq, I note that the Appellant had
           offered no evidence at the appeal from clan elders based in  the
           UK to suggest either that he was not recognised  by  them  as  a
           member of the Isaaq, or,  to  offer  any  reason  why  in  their
           opinion the members of the Isaaq in Somalia would  not  also  do
           so. The Appellant did not suggest that he did not know  who  his
           own father was, or what his paternal lineage  was.  He  did  not
           provide evidence to show that clan elders based in the UK  would
           be unable or unwilling to  vouch  for  him  to  clan  elders  in
           Somalia if asked to do so. Thus in my  judgement  there  was  no
           evidential basis upon which the Judge  could,  or  should,  have
           found  that  the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to   demonstrate
           membership of the Isaaq to the satisfaction of  the  members  of
           that clan based in Somalia, either before, or after his  arrival
           in that country.
       15. Thus I am satisfied that Mr Mills  could  derive  no  assistance
           from the quotation from the Danish FFM of April 2013 set out  in
           paragraph 2.2.13 of the Country Information report upon Somalia.
           It was open to the Appellant to make contact with clan elders in
           the UK, and through them to clan elders in  Somalia  to  benefit
           from the assistance of the clan.
       16. Although Mr Mills argued that the Appellant could not access the
           support of the Isaaq without the assistance of his father, there
           was no adequate evidential basis  for  that  claim.  Indeed  the
           evidence that was  placed  before  the  FtT  demonstrated  quite
           clearly that the Appellant  and  his  extended  family  were  in
           contact with his father. Although his  father  is  a  recognised
           refugee from Somalia members of the family accepted that he  was
           in the habit of returning there. Thus L M in  her  statement  of
           November 2014  accepted  that  she  knew  her  father  sometimes
           travelled to Somalia, although she qualified that by saying  the
           family did not always know where he was. She  accepted  that  he
           would have connections in Somalia but did  not  know  what  they
           were [ApSpBd p11#12].  There  was  therefore  no  error  in  the
           Judge's assessment that he "may have extended family members  in
           Somalia but it is difficult to assess what assistance,  if  any,
           he could expect from them or his father"  [56].
       17. Mr Mills also argued that the Appellant faced a language barrier
           to accessing clan support; a proposition based upon the claim in
           evidence by the Appellant and his mother that he could not speak
           Somali. That claim was however rejected by the Judge  who  noted
           that since his mother did  not  speak  English,  they  must  use
           Somali to communicate. He also noted that  it  was  accepted  in
           cross-examination that he spoke Somali to the aunt who had given
           evidence. Thus although  the  Appellant  had  claimed  to  speak
           Somali very badly the Judge found that the  Appellant  would  be
           able to communicate easily and would not be handicapped by  lack
           of fluency in the local dialect [77]. I am satisfied that  those
           findings were well open to the Judge on the evidence,  and  that
           they were adequately reasoned.
       18. Finally Mr Mills argued that following deportation the Appellant
           would have no access to financial support, and that it  was  not
           open to the Judge to find, or to infer the contrary. Put  simply
           I am not  satisfied  that  such  an  argument  is  open  on  the
           evidence, or was properly raised in the grounds.  The  Appellant
           accepts that his extended family living in the UK  includes  his
           mother, his five sisters, his four brothers, his three aunts and
           his three uncles and their respective spouses and  about  twenty
           cousins. Without further  detailed  exploration  of  his  family
           connections that evidence meant that he had  some  35  potential
           sources  of  financial  support  from  relatively  close  family
           members upon his deportation to  Somalia.  Only  some  of  those
           family members gave evidence to the FtT. Having gone through the
           witness statements of those who did with Mr Mills I am satisfied
           that whilst some baldly denied that as students they  were  able
           to provide financial support, none offered any detailed evidence
           about their financial circumstances. Some had even accepted that
           they had given the Appellant financial support in the past,  and
           offered no explanation as to why they could not be  expected  to
           do so again in the future should he need it.
       19. In these circumstances there was no error on  the  part  of  the
           Judge in his assessment of the evidence upon the true nature  of
           the  Appellant's  own  circumstances  upon  his  deportation  to
           Somalia.
       20. The Judge considered the guidance set out in MOJ in the  context
           of an attempt to settle in Mogadishu because the point of return
           to Somalia was identified as Mogadishu.  As  Mr  Mills  accepted
           however the Appellant was not obliged to try to settle there, he
           could for example make his  way  immediately  to  Somaliland  by
           internal flight if he chose to do so. If he went to live  there,
           then the evidence was that this was  a  stable  and  functioning
           society which was dominated by the Isaaq. The evidence  did  not
           suggest that the Appellant would face a breach of his Article  3
           rights there.
       21. If the Appellant did choose to  settle  in  Mogadishu  then  the
           evidence placed before the Judge did not demonstrate that  there
           had been any significant change since the  position  as  it  was
           reviewed in MOJ. On the facts of this case the Appellant derived
           no  assistance  from  paragraphs  342-352  or  407(h)  of   that
           decision. He would not face  either  Al-Shabab,  clan  militias,
           inter-clan violence, or inter-clan discrimination. As a majority
           clan member, fluent in English, with skills and  qualifications,
           and with the opportunity  to  draw  not  only  upon  Isaaq  clan
           support for access to support mechanisms  and  livelihoods,  and
           with the opportunity for financial  support  from  his  extended
           family in the UK, it was therefore for him  to  explain  why  he
           would not be able to take advantage of the opportunities offered
           by the "economic boom" taking place in Mogadishu so as to make a
           life for himself there in safety. He singularly failed to do so.
       22. In these circumstances the criticisms that have been advanced of
           the decision are either inconsistent with the evidence, or, they
           are in reality no more than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
           conclusions. The Judge applied the correct burden  and  standard
           of proof to the evidence placed before him,  and  gave  entirely
           adequate reasons for his conclusions which were well open to him
           on the evidence. Thus the approach he took to the evidence  does
           not disclose any error of law that requires his decision  to  be
           set aside and remade.

   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      19 December 2014 contains no error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
      the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside
      and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 June 2015


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 27 June 2015
