
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01271/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 October 2013                            |On 1 November 2013           |
|Prepared 25 October 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                              TEKIN HAYRI ucar
                                                                    Claimant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Ms J Heybrook, Counsel, instructed by Ivy Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson and  Mr  D  R
    Bremmer, JP) promulgated on 22  August  2013  allowing  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 19 June  2013  to
    refuse to revoke the automatic deportation made against him.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Turkey born on 21 March 1983 and  who  has
    lived in the United Kingdom since 21 May 1989 with his mother,  brother
    and sister to join the claimant's father.  He and the other members  of
    his family were granted leave to enter and to remain and he was  on  25
    October 1996 granted indefinite leave to remain.  An  application  made
    on 4 March 2002 for naturalisation as a British citizen was refused due
    to his character, that is his criminal activity.

 3. The claimant has been  convicted  of  a  number  of  criminal  offences
    details of which are set out in the First-tier Tribunal's determination
    [4 - 6] the most serious being  a  conviction  on  30  April  2010  for
    conspiracy  to  supply  a  controlled  class  B  drug  (cannabis)   and
    possessing ammunition without a certificate for which he was  sentenced
    to a total of 30  months'  imprisonment.   As  a  consequence  of  that
    conviction the Secretary of State made a deportation order against  him
    pursuant to Section 32(5) of the Borders Act.  His appeal against  that
    decision was heard on 9 May 2011 and was dismissed; an  application  to
    appeal against the  decision  was  refused.   Subsequent  to  that  the
    claimant made a claim for asylum.  That application was refused as  was
    the request that his deportation order be revoked.

 4. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter of 19 June 2013.
     In summary, the respondent was not satisfied that the claimant was  at
    risk of harm on return due to his imputed political  opinion,  that  is
    because his  family  had  been  politically  involved  in  the  Kurdish
    community or that  he  was  at  risk  because  he  is  an  Alevi.   She
    considered also  that  the  claimant  was  excluded  from  humanitarian
    protection on account of his convictions [34], was not  entitled  to  a
    grant of limited leave to remain on a discretionary basis [43], that he
    was  excluded  from  the  protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention,   a
    consequence of Section 72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 and concluded also, having had regard to paragraphs  398,  399
    and 399A of the Immigration Rules as [70] it was  not  considered  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  his  partner
    being able to continue outside the United Kingdom and  as  he  had  not
    shown that he had no ties to Turkey [79].   She  considered  also  that
    there were no exceptional facts raised which warrant departure from the
    normal position [83].

 5. In its determination the First-tier Tribunal held:-

      a) that the claimant had rebutted the  assumption  raised  by  Section
         72(2) and therefore did not uphold the  respondent's  certification
         of the appeal [75];

      b) that the claimant was  not  at  risk  on  account  of  his  Kurdish
         ethnicity [81]; on account of his Alevi faith [83]; on  account  of
         having to do military service [84 to  89]  or  on  account  of  his
         family's political activism [90 to 96]  concluding  that  even  had
         they  believed  his  account,  it  was  clear  that   the   Turkish
         authorities would have no interest whatsoever in the claimant [104]
         and went on to consider, following a decision of the Upper Tribunal
         in MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 to consider
         Article 8 and, having directed themselves  in  accordance  with  SS
         (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 [121] and having taken  the  findings
         of the previous panel as a starting point [122] the panel concluded
         that bearing in mind the decision in Maslov that while,  to  render
         deportation  disproportionate,  a  very  strong  claim  indeed   is
         required for the reasons set out in SS Nigeria [132]

      c) that on the facts of this case given that the claimant was a  young
         child when he moved to  the  United  Kingdom,  had  spent  all  his
         formative years here, including all of his  education,  is  now  30
         years old and is no longer wholly fluent in Turkish and  his  long-
         term partner is in the United Kingdom  as  are  all  his  immediate
         relatives and the fact he has been crime-free since  2010  and  has
         given up his addiction to  cannabis,  that  his  removal  would  be
         disproportionate.

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal against this decision on the
    grounds that:-

       Ground 1:

           a) That they had materially misdirected  themselves  in  law  in
              taking a two-stage test of the Article 8 assessment based  on
              an incorrect view that the Immigration Rules  did  not  fully
              protect the Maslov/Boultif principles (a misinterpretation of
              paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the Rules and that, given the
              ability to take into account exceptional factors as  set  out
              in paragraphs 397 and 398, it was an error to apply the  two-
              stage test; that the Tribunal should  not  have  regard  that
              there was a starting point before moving on to a second free-
              standing Article 8 assessment [2] and should have  considered
              whether there were any exceptional circumstances which  meant
              that the consequence of deportation produced an unjustifiably
              harsh outcome incompatible with Article 8 despite the  public
              interest in deportation;  and,  that  the  Tribunal  had  not
              attached proper weight to the nature and weight of the public
              interest [3] and had it assessed the case in  line  with  the
              Immigration  Rules  it  would  have   reached   a   different
              conclusion [4].

          Ground 2:

           i) That the Tribunal had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
              finding on  material  matters  in  particular  a  finding  at
              paragraph 124 that the claimant had not re-offended since his
              last appeal hearing, had not breach bail requirements and had
              been drug-free given that "the Secretary of State  does  have
              evidence  that  the  claimant  was  recalled  to  prison  for
              breaching the conditions of his licence."  It is averred also
              that an attempt had been made to arrest him on  suspicion  of
              the possession of a firearm and he had been found  to  be  in
              possession of cannabis.  And  that,  having  found  that  the
              claimant had raised his claim for asylum in  order  to  avoid
              deportation and  that  his  evidence  was  not  credible  the
              Tribunal had failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  they
              accepted his assertion that he is reformed [3].

          ii) That the  claimant  does  therefore  meet  the  very  serious
              reasons to justify his expulsion in line with Maslov and  the
              Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons as  to  their
              findings why he does not do so now [4].

         iii) That the Tribunal, having  found  that  the  claimant  has  a
              strong claim to remain here, due to moving to the UK while  a
              child, and having spent his formative years hear, is now aged
              30 and is not wholly fluent in Turkish, had failed to provide
              adequate reasons why it was not proportionate to  deport  the
              claimant [5], given he had not shown that he has no  ties  to
              Turkey [6], and given that  they  had  not  given  sufficient
              reasons for concluding  it  would  not  be  proportionate  to
              remove him, given the findings in 2011 that, his relationship
              with his partner, that he could be deported [7];

          iv) That if the matter is  to  be  reconsidered,  the  respondent
              would seek to argue that the Tribunal's finding  the  section
              72 presumption had been rebutted was in error.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    11 September 2013, the judge stating that the panel materially erred in
    its assessment of  the  claimant's  propensity  to  criminality  having
    potentially erred in its findings regarding evidence of his  recall  to
    prison.

 8. Since permission was granted, the claimant has been admitted  to  Chase
    Farm Hospital, has been diagnosed  as  psychotic.   An  application  to
    adjourn the hearing on 24 October 2013 on account of this  was  refused
    and was not renewed by Ms Heybrook.

 9. Mr Walker accepted that there had been no evidence before the  Tribunal
    that the claimant had been recalled to prison or indeed of his arrests.
     He accepted that that information had been held  on  the  Home  Office
    file but had not been presented to the Tribunal either at the  date  of
    hearing and he was unable, at the commencement of  the  hearing  before
    me, to produce this evidence.

10. Mr Walker confirmed, as did Ms Heybrook who  had  been  present  below,
    that there had been no application before the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    the hearing to be adjourned to permit the evidence to be adduced.

Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
error of law?

11. It is appropriate in this case to consider first  the  allegation  that
    material relating  to  the  claimant's  alleged  recall  to  prison  is
    considered first. It is  accepted  that  that  material  had  not  been
    produced to the First-tier Tribunal to whom  no  application  had  been
    made for an adjournment to permit the evidence to be adduced.

12. In MA (Fresh evidence) Sri Lanka * [2004] UKIAT 00161 the  IAT  stated,
    after considering E v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49:-
           23(ii) New evidence will normally be admitted only in accordance
           with 'Ladd v Marshall principles' (see Ladd v Marshall [1954]  1
           WLR 1489), applied with some additional  flexibility  under  the
           CPR (see Hertfordshire Investments Ltd v Bubb [2000] 1 WLR 2318,
           2325; White Book para 52.11.2). The Ladd v  Marshall  principles
           are, in summary: first, that the fresh evidence could  not  have
           been obtained with reasonable diligence for use  at  the  trial;
           secondly, that if given, it probably would have had an important
           influence on the result; and, thirdly,  that  it  is  apparently
           credible although not necessarily incontrovertible. As a general
           rule, the fact that the failure to adduce the evidence was  that
           of the party's legal advisers provides no excuse: see Al-Mehdawi
           v Home Secretary [1990] 1AC 876."
       1. The Court of Appeal pointed out that it was not dealing  with  the
          current jurisdiction of the Tribunal which is limited  to  hearing
          an appeal on a point of law. However, we see  no  reason  why  the
          general principles governing the reception of evidence  which  was
          not before the Adjudicator should be different. There is no reason
          why  the  first  and  third  principles  should  be  changed.  The
          application of  the  second  principle  will  be  different.  When
          applied in the context of an appeal on the ground of error of fact
          or law, the fresh evidence has to be such that it  would  probably
          have had an important influence on the result of  the  factual  or
          legal conclusions of the Adjudicator. When applied in the  context
          of error of law  alone,  the  test  for  the  relevance  of  fresh
          evidence which could and should have been before  the  Adjudicator
          cannot now be that it assists a challenge to  factual  conclusions
          such as credibility findings or other personal circumstances which
          are very much matters for the Adjudicator. The application of  the
          second principle now requires that the  evidence  be  relevant  to
          showing that the Adjudicator made an error of law, which  probably
          had an important influence on the result.

13. Applying the principles  in  Ladd  v  Marshall,  I  consider  that  the
    respondent has failed to show me that the evidence  in  question  could
    not have been obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the hearing
    not least because, as is noted in the  determination,  the  information
    was supplied to the respondent well before the hearing.  Second, as  Ms
    Heybrook pointed out, it is not suggested that the claimant was  guilty
    of any criminal offence.

14. The relevant material had still not been supplied by the respondent  in
    time for the hearing before me, one month after they had been  notified
    of the date of the hearing and nearly six weeks  after  permission  had
    been granted I was not satisfied that it was appropriate to permit  any
    additional material and I explained that to Mr Walker.

15. Mr Walker accepted that, in the  circumstances,  there  was  little  he
    could say in favour of ground 2.

16. Turning first to ground 1, since the grounds were drafted, the Court of
    Appeal has handed down its decision in MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ .  In
    light of that decision, as both representatives  accepted,  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal should have proceeded on the basis  that
    if the requirements of paragraph 399 and 399A of the Rules were not me,
    the consideration of exceptional factors should have taken place within
    paragraph 398 of the Rules. This brings into play  the  application  of
    article 8 jurisprudence as considered at [39]-[40] of MF:


         39. Ms Giovannetti has made it clear on behalf of the Secretary  of
             State that the new rules do not herald  a  restoration  of  the
             exceptionality test. We agree. It  is  true  that,  as  the  UT
             pointed out at para 38 of their determination,  the  new  rules
             are not a perfect mirror of the Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  But
             Ms  Giovannetti  concedes  that  they  should  be   interpreted
             consistently with it. Mr Husain correctly points out  that  the
             rules  do  not  expressly  provide  for  consideration  of  all
             questions relevant to article 8 claims, such as what is in  the
             best interests of the child; the age of  the  offender  at  the
             date of entry into the UK and at the date of the offending; the
             length of time since the  offence;  the  offender's  subsequent
             conduct and so  on.  But  the  rules  expressly  contemplate  a
             weighing of the public interest in deportation  against  "other
             factors". In our view, this must be a reference  to  all  other
             factors which are relevant to proportionality  and  entails  an
             implicit requirement that they are to be taken into account.


         40. Does it follow that the new rules have effected no change other
             than  to  spell  out  the  circumstances  in  which  a  foreign
             criminal's claim that deportation would breach  his  article  8
             rights will succeed? At this point, it is necessary to focus on
             the  statement  that  it   will   only   be   "in   exceptional
             circumstances that the public interest in deportation  will  be
             outweighed by other factors". Ms Giovannetti submits  that  the
             reference to exceptional circumstances serves  the  purpose  of
             emphasising that,  in  the  balancing  exercise,  great  weight
             should be given to the public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
             criminals who do not satisfy paras 398 and 399 or 399A.  It  is
             only exceptionally that such foreign criminals will succeed  in
             showing that their rights under article 8(1) trump  the  public
             interest in their deportation.

17. In considering "exceptional circumstances", it is important to note the
    observation made by the Master of the Rolls. He cited with approve  the
    decision of Sales J in Nagre v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  in  the
    context of his observations of the repeated use by  the  ECtHR  of  the
    phrase "exceptional circumstances" , stating [42] and [43]:

         42. At para 40, Sales J referred to a statement  in  the  case  law
             that, in "precarious" cases, "it is likely to be  only  in  the
             most exceptional circumstances that the  removal  of  the  non-
             national family member will constitute a violation of  art  8".
             This has been  repeated  and  adopted  by  the  ECtHR  in  near
             identical terms in many cases. At paras 41 and 42, he said that
             in a "precarious" family life case, it is only in "exceptional"
             or "the most exceptional circumstances" that removal of the non-
             national family member will constitute a violation  of  article
             8.  In  our  view,  that  is  not  to  say  that  a   test   of
             exceptionality  is  being  applied.  Rather  it  is  that,   in
             approaching the question of whether removal is a  proportionate
             interference with an individual's article 8 rights, the  scales
             are heavily weighted in favour  of  deportation  and  something
             very compelling (which will be "exceptional")  is  required  to
             outweigh the public interest in removal. In our view, it is  no
             coincidence that the phrase "exceptional circumstances" is used
             in the new rules in  the  context  of  weighing  the  competing
             factors for and against deportation of foreign criminals.


         43. The word "exceptional" is often used to denote a departure from
             a general rule. The general rule  in  the  present  context  is
             that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras  399  and
             399A do not apply, very compelling reasons will be required  to
             outweigh the public interest in deportation.  These  compelling
             reasons are the "exceptional circumstances".

18. It is evident from the determination that that the First-tier  Tribunal
    carried out a proper  and  adequate  consideration  of  the  article  8
    jurisprudence which, although carried out  (wrongly)  after  a  finding
    that the appeal did not fall  to  be  allowed  within  the  rules,  was
    nonetheless the same analysis that would have  been  undertaken  within
    paragraph 398. Thus, their error in proceeding  as  they  did  was  not
    material.

19. As Mr Walker accepted, the panel had addressed  SS  (Nigeria).   It  is
    clear from their determination that they did so.  It is clear also from
    the  paragraphs  cited  above  from  MF  Nigeria  that   in   assessing
    exceptional factors there has to be a proportionality exercise in which
    serious and significant  weight  has  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals.  Whilst it is clear  that  the
    panel erred in doing so outside the Immigration Rules,  the  test  that
    they applied is that which is set out in the Rules,  as  understood  in
    light of the decision in MF (Nigeria).  Mr Walker again  accepted  that
    but submitted that in this case the panel had not  attached  sufficient
    weight to the public interest in deportation.

20. I consider that, however, that argument is not sustainable.  The  panel
    stressed at several stages  the  significant  and  high  weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest in this case and set  out  in  adequate
    detail why they considered, given the length of time the  claimant  has
    spent in this country, the age he arrived here and the  fact  that  all
    his parents are here and that  he  has  been  in  a  twelve  year  long
    relationship with Natasha Fisher, a British citizen, that it  would  on
    the facts of this case not be proportionate to remove the claimant.

21. Turning to ground 2, while it is clear that the panel  did  not  accept
    the claimant's  credibility  in  terms  of  his  claim  for  asylum  it
    considered that his raising of a claim for asylum  was  an  attempt  to
    avoid deportation, they have  set  out  in  adequate  detail  why  they
    considered that the claimant has reformed given the lack of evidence of
    further criminal conviction, activity or taking cannabis.  They did  so
    in setting out why they considered that the Section 72 certificate  was
    not upheld, a finding which I consider was  in  all  the  circumstances
    sustainable.

22. It is evident  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  direct  themselves
    properly with respect to Maslov and I consider also that  the  Tribunal
    did set out in adequate detail why the considered  deportation  is  not
    proportionate. The challenges set out in the grounds of  appeal  within
    ground 2 at [4] -[8] are in effect an attempt to restrict  the  factors
    that could be taken into account to those set out in paragraphs 399 and
    399A, contrary to what was held in MF.

23. Whilst the decision reached by the panel is not one to  which  I  might
    necessarily have come, it was nonetheless one which was  open  to  them
    and for which they gave permissible reasons.

24. In conclusion, I consider that although the panel erred by  considering
    exceptional circumstances outwith the immigration  rules,  rather  than
    within them, this made no material difference to the outcome given that
    the exercise they conducted was in substance, if not in form, the same.



25. In the circumstances, however,  I  uphold  the  determination  although
    substituting the basis on which it was allowed.

Summary of Decisions

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
an error of law.  I uphold it subject to the clarification that  the  appeal
is allowed under the Immigration Rules.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

