
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01482/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th July 2015                    |On 23rd July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 ercan ozer
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Counsel instructed by Ahmed Rahman
                    Carr Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Myers made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 29th October 2014.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 14th  December  1975.   He
    came to the UK on 8th January 2001 with his wife and daughter  and  was
    granted temporary admission.  He failed to report and was treated as an
    absconder.

 3. On 26th March 2001 he made an application for asylum using a false name
    which was refused and he eventually became appeal rights  exhausted  by
    30th July 2004.  He was subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain
    on 31st August 2007 in his false identity.

 4. In 2011 his wife and children acquired British citizenship.

 5. The appellant applied for naturalisation, again in his false  identity,
    on  3rd  June  2011  and  was  refused.   Following  that  refusal   he
    voluntarily confessed to the police that  he  had  used  it  to  obtain
    indefinite  leave  to  remain.   He  was  charged  with  a  number   of
    immigration offences and, on 22nd June 2012 was sentenced to a total of
    fifteen months' imprisonment.

 6. On 11th July 2014 a decision was made to deport him under Section 32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 7. The judge recorded the appellant's evidence, which  was  that  his  two
    younger children were both born in the United Kingdom,  doing  well  at
    school and wanted to remain here.  He voluntarily went  to  the  police
    because he felt unable to continue living a lie.  He had only used  the
    false name to claim asylum because he realised that he had  missed  the
    date for reporting  to  the  authorities  and  wished  to  avoid  being
    arrested as an absconder.

 8. His parents and two of his siblings live in Turkey and he  is  on  good
    terms with them but they have their own commitments.  His wife's family
    are also there and she has been back to Turkey on three occasions,  the
    last for seven weeks over the summer.

 9. There was contradictory evidence about his relationship with his  wife.
    The appellant said that he was temporarily separated from  her  at  the
    time of his conviction and they had lived apart for a total of eighteen
    months.  His wife and children visited him in prison two or three times
    and they reconciled when he was  released.   His  wife  said  that  the
    appellant had left home when they first came to the  UK  for  almost  a
    year.

10. The judge recorded that the evidence on the  relationship  was  evasive
    and inconsistent, his wife initially stating that there had  only  been
    one period when  they  lived  apart,  but  then  saying  that  she  had
    forgotten about the earlier period when it was put to her that she  had
    said that they were separated in her asylum interview.  The appellant's
    evidence was initially that they had lived apart for  one  and  a  half
    years before his prison sentence but he changed  his  evidence  to  say
    that it was a total of one and a half years  including  the  period  of
    imprisonment.

11. The judge concluded that the appellant had  spent  significant  periods
    living apart from his wife and children and the picture presented of  a
    close-knit happy family was removed from the truth or at best  only  of
    recent provenance.

12. She took a serious view of the offence.  The appellant  had  claimed  a
    considerable amount of money in state benefits  by  use  of  his  false
    identity, and if he had reported to the authorities as he was  required
    to do when he originally gained entry to the UK, he may  not  have  had
    the opportunity to live here for ten years making use of  the  benefits
    system.   The  appellant  had  frustrated  immigration  control  for  a
    considerable period of time and  the  fact  that  he  voluntarily  gave
    himself into the authorities did not outweigh the  public  interest  in
    deporting him.

13. She recorded that although his spoken English was good,  the  appellant
    had not perfected his  English  even  though  he  had  lived  here  for
    thirteen years.   There  was  no  evidence  that  he  was  economically
    independent and skills gained here could be utilised in Turkey.  He had
    close family ties there and his private and family life in the  UK  had
    been established at a time when his immigration status was  precarious.
    She accepted that the wife and children would choose to remain  in  the
    UK and it would be unreasonable to expect the  two  older  children  to
    leave.  However they had recently returned from Turkey  after  a  seven
    week visit and if they wished to accompany  the  application  there  it
    would not be unduly harsh for them to do so.

The grounds of application

14. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to take into account all of the relevant factors,  including
    that there had been a single conviction which  had  come  about  solely
    because of the appellant's voluntarily approaching the authorities.

15. Second, the judge had made  incomplete  findings  in  relation  to  the
    closeness of the family.  It was incumbent  on  her  to  make  a  clear
    finding as to the present family bond.

16. Third, the Tribunal had erred in its approach  in  considering  whether
    there were exceptional circumstances in this case.

17. Although permission to appeal was initially refused in the  First-tier,
    on 1st June 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer gave permission  to
    appeal on the grounds that the judge had cited  the  wrong  version  of
    paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules and arguably erred in law in not
    referring to the correct test and considering the  facts  of  the  case
    within the context of that test.

Submissions

18. Mr Hussain argued that the judge had plainly  applied  the  wrong  test
    under the Rules, and in  considering  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances, which had to be material.

19. Otherwise he relied on the grounds. Since there were children  involved
    in the appeal the Tribunal had to ensure that there was  no  deficiency
    in the determination which  could  adversely  impact  upon  their  best
    interests.  Whilst it was accepted that there had been past  volatility
    in the relationship, the couple had been living together  again  for  a
    number of months and the children would be facing an impossible choice,
    namely to live with their father or to remain in the country  of  their
    nationality.

20. Mr Diwnycz defended the determination and submitted that on the judge's
    findings it would not be unduly harsh for the children to either remain
    in the UK or to return with him to  Turkey  where  they  have  recently
    returned from a seven week holiday.

Findings and conclusions

21. It is not disputed that the judge cited an out of date version  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  However the correct  test  was  referred  to  under
    Section 117C. Moreover, it is abundantly  clear  from  the  Immigration
    Judge's findings that, had she applied her mind to the test  under  the
    Rules as well as under the 2002 Act, her decision would have  been  the
    same.

22. The version of paragraph 399(a)  to  which  she  referred  requires  an
    assessment of whether it would be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK and whether there is another family member who is able  to
    care for the child in the UK.

23. The correct version is as follows:

         "399.    This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported."

24. She correctly cited the relevant provisions of Section 117C of the 2002
    Act which states:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh"

25. To the extent that the judge considered whether the children would have
    a parent in the UK to look after them if the  appellant  was  deported,
    she took into account  an  irrelevant  consideration,  but  it  is  not
    material.

26. The judge's broad statement that  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of fifteen months and therefore it  is  only  in
    exceptional circumstances that his family or private life will outweigh
    the public interest in deportation, is neither  inconsistent  with  the
    Immigration Rules nor with Section 117C.

27. The judge was not, at paragraph 13  of  the  determination  considering
    exceptional circumstances within  the  Rules  but  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances outside them.  She cited MF (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA 1192 which held that the new  Immigration  Rules  are  a  complete
    code.   She  also  said,  unremarkably,  that  the   consideration   of
    exceptional circumstances involved the application of a proportionality
    test.  There is no error in paragraph 13.

28. The judge was clearly of the view that she had not been told the  truth
    about the periods of separation between the appellant and his wife  and
    children.  She identified clear inconsistencies in their evidence.   It
    was accepted that the couple were living  apart  at  the  time  of  the
    asylum interview and that they were also apart in the period before the
    appellant was imprisoned.  She was unpersuaded that there  would  be  a
    significant detrimental effect on the children were their father to  be
    deported.  She said that  she  placed  weight  on  the  fact  that  the
    children had already spent significant periods when he was absent.

29. This is a family which clearly maintains close links to Turkey.  It  is
    not said that the children cannot speak Turkish, which is  clearly  the
    main language of their  parents.   They  have  extended  family  there,
    including grandparents, and they had recently  returned  from  spending
    the whole summer there.

30. The judge accepted, correctly, that as British  citizens  the  children
    could not be required to leave and indeed that it would be unreasonable
    to expect them to do so.  The mother's evidence was that she would stay
    in the UK.  However given her findings that the appellant  had  already
    spent significant periods away from them, the  judge  would  inevitably
    have found that it would not be unduly harsh for them to remain and for
    the appellant to leave.

31. Section 117C(v) refers to the consideration of whether  the  effect  of
    the claimant's deportation on the partner  or  child  would  be  unduly
    harsh.  No challenge to the judge's assessment under the Act  has  been
    made, either in the grounds or in the submissions. It therefore  cannot
    properly be argued that the result of an accurate consideration of Rule
    399(a) would not have been exactly the same.

32. So far as the other challenges to the determination are concerned, they
    have no substance.  The judge plainly took into account the  fact  that
    there had only been a single conviction which had come about because of
    the appellant's voluntary confession,  which  she  considered  in  some
    depth at paragraph 17.  It took place  after  the  appellant  had  been
    living illegally in the UK for ten years, claiming benefits in a  false
    name, and only shortly after he had been refused  British  citizenship.
    The judge was entitled  to  place  little  weight  on  the  appellant's
    eventual candour.

33. The judge plainly had at the forefront of her mind, what the impact  on
    the children would be if the appellant were deported  to  Turkey.   She
    assessed the nature of the family relationships and  accepted  that  it
    was not in their best interests for the family to be split up.  It  was
    not an error of law for her to conclude that  the  public  interest  in
    deportation outweighed them.

Notice of Decision

34. The original judge did not materially  err  in  law  and  the  decision
    stands.

35. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor     Date
