

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01090/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 December 2013                           |On 15 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               BABOUCARR JOBE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Fisher, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors, Harrow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 28 October 2013,  the  appellant  Secretary  of  State  was  granted
    permission to appeal against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bennett and Mr S S Percy (the panel) that was promulgated  on  10
    October 2013.  The panel allowed Mr Jobe's appeal against the Secretary
    of State's decision of 5 November 2010 that s.32 of the UK Borders  Act
    2007 (automatic  deportation)  applied  and  that  Mr  Jobe  should  be
    deported to the Gambia because of his criminal history.

 2. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are that the panel failed to
    give adequate reasons for finding that the immigration decision was not
    proportionate.  The grounds focus on  the  allegation  that  the  panel
    failed to have proper regard to the fact deportation was clearly in the
    public interest because of the appellant's recidivism; and this was not
    outweighed by his relationships,  particularly  bearing  in  mind  that
    neither the Mr Jobe's partner nor child were British  citizens  or  had
    settled status in the United Kingdom.  Mr Smart amplified these  points
    by reminding us that the panel failed to make  findings  about  whether
    the Mr Jobe's partner and child could relocate to the Gambia.  At most,
    the panel took account of the

 3. In addition to the grounds of appeal, Mr Smart relied on MF (Nigeria) v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 (unreported) which was handed down  two  days
    before the determination was promulgated.   He  reminded  us  that  the
    Court of Appeal had  found  that  the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    deportation (paragraphs 398 to 399A) were a complete code and that  the
    same outcome should result whether a  decision  was  made  under  those
    provisions or directly under article 8 ECHR.  The fact the  panel  came
    to different outcomes indicated a legal error.

 4. Ms Fisher argued that the Secretary of State's  grounds  were  in  fact
    nothing more  than  disagreement  with  judicial  findings  which  were
    legitimately made.  She explained that the determination contained  120
    paragraphs and addressed all the issues that were  raised  by  evidence
    and argument.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  cherry  picking  certain
    factors and thereby taking them out of context.  Ms Fisher reminded  us
    that the panel was well aware of the significance they should  give  to
    public interest in that there is clear reference  in  para  103  to  SS
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 but when balancing the  impact  Mr
    Jobe's deportation would have on his partner and  child,  came  to  the
    conclusion  that  the   Secretary   of   State's   decision   was   not
    proportionate.

 5. Ms Fisher reminded us that the  panel  recognised  that  the  case  was
    finely balanced but came down against deportation  because  the  impact
    the decision would have on his partner and child  was  not  reasonable.
    Ms Fisher reminded us of the panel's findings in paragraphs 115 to  177
    of the determination; the panel found that there would  be  significant
    difficulties in maintaining family life should  Mr  Jobe  be  deported,
    including the fact that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  his
    partner and child to accompany him to the Gambia.  The factual findings
    were undisputed and include the fact that Mr Jobe's partner has been in
    the United Kingdom since six years old, all  her  close  relatives  are
    settled here and she has a pending application for settlement, made  in
    January 2007 and referred to the Case Resolution Directorate.

 6. Having heard from  the  representatives  and  having  considered  their
    arguments, we are satisfied that the determination  contains  no  legal
    error for the following reasons.

 7. It was open to the panel to find that it was more likely than not  that
    Mr Jobe's partner's future lies in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  is  a
    reasonable conclusion given that she has been here  since  the  age  of
    six, that is, since 1996, particularly in light of the  fact  that  her
    close relatives are now settled here.  To this extent they  dealt  with
    the issue Mr Smart  suggests  they  ignored  because  this  finding  is
    sufficient to establish that it would be difficult to expect Mr  Jobe's
    partner to accompany him to the Gambia.  The fact the panel went on  to
    identify additional difficulties strengthens its conclusion.

 8. The panel was well aware of the public interest  in  deporting  foreign
    national  criminals  and  gave  that  factor  appropriate  weight   but
    recognised that the immigration decision would  effectively  sever  the
    family life between Mr Jobe and his wife  and  child.   We  regard  the
    panel's findings as going much further  than  mere  acceptance  of  the
    couple's wishes, which is how the grounds  portray  them.     The  fact
    that the immigration decision had the potential to  sever  family  life
    led the panel to find that the public interest was outweighed.  It  was
    open to them to make such an  assessment.   The  finding  is  sustained
    because of the adequacy of reasons drawn from other findings throughout
    the determination.

 9. We recognise that the panel may  have  erred  in  coming  to  different
    conclusions under the immigration rules and article 8  ECHR.   However,
    the structure of the determination clearly shows that any error was  in
    relation to how the panel applied the immigration  rules  because  they
    failed to see  that  they  should  have  undertaken  a  proportionality
    exercise in order to determine whether or not  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances.  It is hardly surprising that the panel proceeded as  it
    did because the proper approach was not made clear until the  Court  of
    Appeal handed down MF (Nigeria).  However, even  if  we  accepted  that
    this was an error on a point of law, it could not be  material  because
    the panel undertook the necessary proportionality exercise  (including,
    as we have explained at para 4 above, a  detailed  examination  of  the
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals) and  merely  failed  to
    relate its conclusions to the immigration rules.

10. Given the findings made by the panel, we can see that had it been aware
    of  how  the  law  applied,  then  they  would  have  found  that   the
    circumstances in this appeal were exceptional and the appeal would have
    been allowed under the immigration rules for reasons identical to those
    given in relation to human rights.

11. For all these reasons we uphold the panel's  decision  and  reject  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bennett  and  Mr  Percy  does
not contain an error on a point of law.

We uphold the panel's decision that Mr Jobe's appeal against deportation  is
allowed.



                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
