
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01358/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination and reasons promulgated|
|on 25th March 2015                   |On 30th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     RRI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs J Moore, Solicitor - instructed by Latitude Law
                    Solicitors, Manchester
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETREMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision dated 8th July 2014 the respondent  decided  to  make  an
    "automatic deportation" order against the appellant.  Reasons are given
    in a letter dated 10th July 2014.

 2. The deportation is based on the appellant's conviction after  trial  on
    12th November 2013 for  possession  of  a  false  UK  passport  in  the
    identity RRI.  The sentencing remarks of Mr Recorder  Gibson  summarise
    the circumstances, including the pressure under which the true  Mr  RRI
    and his mother were put by the appellant who maintained that Mrs I  was
    his mother, withdrawing that aspect  of  his  defence  only  after  DNA
    tests.  A sentence of sixteen months' imprisonment was imposed.

 3. (The respondent identifies the appellant in these  proceedings  by  the
    name and date of birth which he has always used in this country, adding
    "also known as H-R".  The only reference to  that  other  name  in  the
    evidence on file appears to be that the appellant mentioned  it  during
    an interview at Manchester on 27th March 2013.   In  these  proceedings
    the appellant uses the identity RRI and  the  same  date  of  birth  as
    previously (although he describes himself as a national of Pakistan not
    the UK).  In his statement dated 27th August 2014 he says that  he  has
    always believed that to be his true identity.  It came as a surprise to
    him that he had lived in the identity of another person and that he was
    not a UK  citizen.   It  seems  that  he  seeks  to  succeed  in  these
    proceedings in a discredited  identity,  and  that  his  true  identity
    remains unknown.)

 4. A panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge Grace and  Mr  A  E
    Armitage dismissed the appellant's appeal for reasons  explained  in  a
    determination promulgated on 13th October 2014.

Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

         1.    Failure  to  properly  apply  section  55  of  the   Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and to consider the  best
             interests of the children affected by the decision.

          2. Failure to adequately consider  the  human  rights  of  family
             members in accordance with Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39.

          3. Failure to fully consider the proportionality of the  decision
             - Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, Huang [2007] UKHL 11.

             The Tribunal recognised its requirement to comply with section
             55 ... but the detailed consideration ... does not  contain  a
             proper assessment of what is in  the  best  interests  of  the
             relevant children.

             The Tribunal made findings that  the  appellant  can  maintain
             contact with his wife and daughters via telephone and internet
             and that his family and friends could visit  him  in  Pakistan
             ... the Tribunal failed to ... consider ... evidence ...  that
             visits  to  Pakistan  are  not  financially  viable  and  that
             electronic communication would be inadequate.  The decision is
             in conflict with ... SS (India)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  388.   The
             Tribunal acknowledged that the appellant's  wife  is  now  the
             primary carer  of  their  children  and  that  the  two  older
             children are beginning new stages of academic  and  vocational
             education  ...  however  the  determination  demonstrates   no
             assessment of evidence ... that it would benefit the  children
             to receive their father's direct  support  ...  and  that  the
             appellant's wife will struggle to continue to cope without  it
             ... the current family circumstances frequently result in  the
             youngest child returning from school to an empty house ... the
             appellant's  wife  spoke  in  detail  of  her  concern   about
             frequently being out of the home  rather  than  spending  time
             with her children.  The Tribunal failed to address this  which
             would  be  material  in  any  appeal  involving  a  child  but
             especially important where that child attempted  suicide  just
             last year.

             The determination correctly identifies that  section  117B  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  states  that
             when assessing public interests considerations  little  weight
             should be given to a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
             partner ... at a time when the person is in the UK  unlawfully
             ... [but] the Tribunal erred in law when  dismissing  entirely
             the significance of the appellant's relationship with his wife
             ... Beoku-Betts is still to be  applied  and  the  rights  and
             interests of the appellant's wife should have been considered.
              Her relationship with the appellant began at a time when  the
             appellant is considered to have been in the UK  illegally  but
             there is nothing to suggest that she was aware of this and ...
             she has been the appellant's partner for the last 23 years.

             Overall, the determination  shows  no  consideration  of  what
             outcome would be most beneficial for the children ... and does
             not consider the interests of the  appellant's  wife  ...  the
             Tribunal has not discharged  its  duty  to  consider  all  the
             relevant facts or to reach a fully reasoned and  proportionate
             decision.

Submissions for the appellant.

 1. Further to the grounds, Mrs Moore relied also on GO and  Others  [2014]
    UKUT 00517 (IAC).  That case deals with the duty imposed by section  55
    on a  decision-maker  to  be  properly  informed  of  the  position  of
    children, to conduct a careful examination of all relevant  information
    and factors, to identify the best interests  of  the  children  and  to
    balance them with other material considerations.  The question  is  "an
    intensively fact sensitive and contextual one".  Mrs  Moore  said  that
    there had been before the First-tier  Tribunal  a  mass  of  thoroughly
    prepared evidence about the children.  The Tribunal failed to embark on
    the exercise explained in GO.  Both older sisters expressed  their  own
    concerns and their concerns about the  youngest  child.   The  youngest
    child suffered from mental illness.  She attempted suicide, leading  to
    her hospitalisation, an extreme act for a  child  then  aged  only  12.
    Prior to the appellant's arrest his wife had been a full-time  stay-at-
    home mother.  She started work in May  2013.   He  went  to  prison  in
    October 2013 and has been in prison and later in immigration  detention
    since then.  As she was re-starting work after twenty years, only  low-
    paid employment as a carer, involving long  and  irregular  hours,  was
    available to her.  There was evidence of  her  work  rota.   There  was
    considerable evidence from relatives, friends  and  supporters  of  the
    family.  If the appellant were at home he would  resume  work  and  his
    wife would stop.  Beneficial arrangements would be  in  place  for  the
    children  as  previously.   The  current  arrangement  meant  that  the
    youngest child came home regularly to an empty house (her mother  being
    at work, and her oldest sisters in academic  and  vocational  training)
    which was plainly not  in  her  best  interests.   It  was  "blindingly
    obvious" that  deportation  of  the  appellant  was  not  in  the  best
    interests of the children.

 2. Apart from the error highlighted by GO, there were further errors.   On
    the authority of SS, it could not be considered that communications  by
    telephone and the internet were  any  adequate  form  of  family  life.
    There was a  further  error  of  not  assessing  the  position  of  the
    appellant's wife.  The panel might have  been  entitled  to  give  that
    aspect little weight, but not to give it no weight.

 3. The errors were so material that the determination should be set  aside
    and there should  be  an  entirely  fresh  hearing,  leading  the  oral
    evidence again (although it was acknowledged that  there  has  been  no
    significant change of circumstances).

Submissions for the respondent.

 4. Mr Mullen observed that GO concerns  the  duties  on  the  respondent's
    decision-maker, although he accepted that similar considerations  apply
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  He said that the facts  in  GO  were  very
    different.

 5. The panel correctly reminded itself  at  paragraph  19  that  the  best
    interests of the child  were  a  primary  consideration,  referring  to
    section 55 of the 2009 Act and to ZH [2011] UKSC.  The panel also cited
    Beoku-Betts on the need to consider the family  life  of  all  relevant
    family members.  There was no reason to think that the panel  left  all
    that out of account in reaching its decision.

 6. The oldest child in  this  case  was  an  adult  by  the  time  of  the
    respondent's decision.  She is a university student,  still  living  at
    home.   The  middle  daughter  was  aged  17  and   carrying   out   an
    apprenticeship in business  administration.   The  panel  recorded  the
    position regarding the youngest child, including the  attempt  at  self
    harm and the relevant documentation.  The incident took place in  April
    2013, prior to the appellant's conviction (although shortly  after  his
    arrest in March 2013).  The panel noted at paragraph 28 that the  child
    had been discharged by the Child and Adolescent Mental  Health  Service
    in terms of a letter dated 25th July 2013, and that there was no recent
    medical  evidence  that  she  was  suffering  from  any  mental  health
    condition or receiving treatment.  That was a correct recording of  the
    facts.  GO was not an authority that the panel  should  have  gone  any
    further than it did.

 7. The panel's finding at paragraph 29 that the effect of  deportation  on
    the wife and two  younger  children  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  was
    properly open to it.  It  implied  an  acceptance  that  there  was  an
    interference with the interests of the family members but that such  an
    outcome was proportionate.  The appellant's offence had been a  serious
    one.  It had effects not only on  the  public  interest  but  on  other
    parties who were falsely implicated through the appellant's  insistence
    on the identity he assumed.   No  doubt  there  was  interference  with
    family life through his deportation and that was very upsetting for his
    wife and children, but that was a responsibility he had to shoulder not
    a disproportionate action by the Secretary of State.  The situation  of
    the youngest child not having another a family member at home when  she
    returned from school was shared by many families, including  some  with
    two working parents.  The panel  was  entitled  to  observe  that  some
    communication could be carried on after deportation.  That  observation
    was not an error of principle in the light of  SS  (India).   The  best
    interests of the children were primary, but  the  appellant's  argument
    attempted to treat them as paramount.  It was an overstatement  to  say
    that no consideration had been given to the interests of the wife.   In
    substance the grounds were only a restatement of the case.

Reply for the appellant.

 8. The appellant's case was not that the best interests  of  the  children
    constituted a trump card, but that there was an  omission  to  consider
    the best interests of the children.  That was material, because on such
    consideration the appeal might have been allowed.  In  MF  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 an appellant succeeded on the basis of his  relatively  recent
    relationship  with  a  stepdaughter.   This  case  was  much  stronger.
    Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) at paragraph 43 was  an  authority
    that other cases could be very  helpful  as  working  examples  on  the
    facts.  It could not be said  that  another  Tribunal  looking  at  the
    assessment of the best interests of  the  children  and  weighing  that
    against the public interest might not come to another conclusion.

Discussion and conclusions.

 9. The appellant's representatives have stressed the impact of deportation
    on his family as strongly as they could.   The  argument  was  made  as
    plainly to the First-tier Tribunal as it was to the Upper Tribunal.   I
    do not think that the panel failed to see or to consider the  case  put
    before it.  I uphold the submission for the respondent that the grounds
    are not in substance more than reassertion and disagreement.

10. The determination, read fairly and as a  whole,  makes  it  clear  that
    family interests are the essence of the appellant's case and constitute
    the factors to weigh against the public interest.  The panel  correctly
    identified the ultimate question in terms of section 117C(5) -  whether
    the effect of deportation on wife and children would be  unduly  harsh.
    It is plainly implicit in the resolution  of  that  question  that  the
    panel understands the strong emotional impact upon all concerned of the
    deportation.

11. Case law warns against the error of thinking that  communication  among
    parties in different countries is an acceptable alternative  to  living
    together.  It does not invalidate every  determination  which  mentions
    the fact that such communication is available.

12. At highest for the appellant, there is missing from  the  determination
    some such sentence as, "It would be better for the  children  if  their
    father were to remain;" but that is so clearly the main factor  weighed
    in the balance that the determination cannot sensibly be  read  in  any
    other way.

13. The grounds do not disclose any such error of law  as  to  entitle  the
    Upper Tribunal to interfere.

14. The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order.   Neither  party
    mentioned that question in the Upper Tribunal.  In the circumstances, a
    direction is made under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
    their family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and to  the
    respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

                           [pic]


                           30 March 2015
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
