

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01462/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |                    Decision and Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                                |
|On 6 January 2016                     |                    On 12 January 2016     |
|                                      |                                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     LB
                          (Anonymity DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.    This is the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  against  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge Parkes  and  Mr G Getlevog),
hereinafter "the panel", promulgated on 10 June 2015, dismissing her appeal
against the respondent's decision of 9 July 2014  to  make  a  deportation
order in  respect  of  her.   The  respondent  had  also  decided  that  the
appellant was not entitled to asylum and  her  assertion  that  she  was  so
entitled was also considered by the panel.

2.    By way of background, the appellant was born on 16 February 1970 and
is a national of Jamaica.  She says that,  as  a  minor,  she  was  sexually
abused by family members.  She also says that she is  a  lesbian  and  that,
whilst in Jamaica, she had a lesbian relationship with a girl  she  attended
school with and whom I  shall  refer  to  as  "A".   She  has,  though,  had
relationships with men and, indeed, has previously been  married.   She  has
two daughters.  She has described, in some  detail,  the  relationships  she
had with men in Jamaica and the nature of those relationships in  a  witness
statement of 21 November 2014.

3.    On 28 April 1999 the appellant came to the UK as a visitor.  She was
granted leave to enter for a period of six  months  on  that  basis.   As  I
understand it, she returned to Jamaica within the currency of her  leave  to
enter but subsequently came to the UK once again, in 2000, and obtained  two
successive periods of leave as a  student.   However,  her  last  period  of
leave expired on 31 May 2002 and she remained in the UK, thereafter, as an
overstayer.

4.    The appellant says that, in 2006 or 2007, she met  a  person  I  shall
refer to  as  "LH".   She  claims  that  the  two  of  them  had  a  lesbian
relationship, which they conducted discreetly, but that the relationship  is
now at an end.  On 4 January 2010 the appellant  was  convicted  at  Lewes
Crown Court of an offence of  "possess  false/improperly  obtained/another's
identity document" and received a sentence of 12 months imprisonment.   She
did not  appeal  against  either  the  sentence  or  the  conviction.   That
sentence has now been served.  The offence related to her obtaining a  false
passport.  In consequence of her  conviction  the  respondent  notified  her
that she was liable to deportation and, in due course,  went  on  to  reject
her claim for asylum and to make a deportation order.

5.    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  There was an oral
hearing before the panel which took place on  20 May 2015.   Both  parties
were represented.  The appellant gave oral evidence as did LH and  a  number
of members of the appellant's family.   The  First-tier Tribunal  dismissed
her appeal concluding that she had failed to show that  she  was  a  lesbian
and seemingly having concluding, in the alternative, that even if  she  was,
she would not be at risk upon return to Jamaica on that  basis  because  she
would not be perceived to be a  lesbian  as  a  result  of  her  having  had
previous  heterosexual  relationships,  having  had   children   and   being
discreet. It set out its reasoning in this way:

      "     13.  In this appeal it  is  for  the  appellant  to  show  on  a
      balance of probabilities that he (sic) should not be deported.  As  an
      in-country appeal the relevant date for the consideration of the facts
      is the date of the hearing.  The evidence and submissions are set  out
      in the Record of Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.

             14.   The  appellant's  claim  is  set  out  in  full  in   the
      appellant's and respondent's bundles provided in the Tribunal  papers.
      Initially the appellant's asylum claim was based on events in  Jamaica
      in her childhood which involved family members and her now ex-husband,
      these can be accurately described as repeated, deeply  unpleasant  and
      harrowing.  These are not pursued as it is accepted that she no longer
      has a fear of the ex-husband and so we do not see the need  to  repeat
      those parts of the appellant's case here.  The claim is now put on the
      basis of the appellant's sexuality, that a lesbian she is a member  of
      a particular social group (PSG) and that  she  would  be  at  risk  in
      Jamaica and could not be expected to live discreetly there.

            15.  The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She came to the  UK
      in 1999 as a visitor and since 31 May 2002 she has remained in the UK
      without leave.  On 4 January 2010 at Lewes Crown Court the appellant
      was  convicted  of  possessing  a  false  identity  document  and  was
      sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.  It was this conviction that led
      to the Secretary of State to making the deportation order.

            16.  Part of the background  is  that  the  appellant  has  been
      married her daughter attended the hearing of the  appellant's  appeal.
      That is not  determinative  of  the  appellant's  sexuality  many  gay
      individuals have married members  of  the  opposite  sex  for  various
      reasons.  Equally a homosexual experience or having very close friends
      of the same sex is not determinative of whether a person is gay.

            17.   We  bear  in  mind  in  considering  this  aspect  of  the
      appellant's case that issues of sexual orientation are not necessarily
      straightforward and that there may be a number of factors that  affect
      an individual's appreciation of their own position including  personal
      issues such as upbringing and family values as well as cultural mores.



            18.  The appellant made a witness statement on 21 November 2014
      which is in her bundle at pages 1 to  29.   Much  of  that  statement
      refers to matters which are no longer relevant to this appeal  but  at
      paragraphs 28 and 29 the appellant briefly described her relationship
      with a girl at  school  called  [A].   Although  not  currently  in  a
      relationship the appellant relies on a relationship with [LH]  in  the
      UK.  She attended the hearing and gave  evidence  in  support  of  the
      appellant but it is clear, as observed below, that they are not  in  a
      relationship and that there have been strains between them.

            19.  The appellant's description of her time with  [A]  and  the
      freedom and feelings she experienced took place in the context of  her
      very  troubled  home  life  with  the  attendant  abuse  and  lack  of
      protection from her mother.  In the appellant's witness statement  she
      does not describe any other such relationships in  Jamaica  but  there
      followed a series of relationships with men, none of which  appear  to
      have brought the appellant much if any happiness or much of protection
      (sic) that she says she was seeking.

            20.  The appellant has only referred to one relationship in  the
      UK and that is with LH.  In her evidence at the hearing the  appellant
      and LH said that they had been discreet and did  not  tend  to  go  to
      openly gay venues preferring to be together in a more low key fashion.
       They did not live together but  lived,  at  one  stage,  in  adjacent
      properties and spent a lot of time together.   Also  in  evidence  the
      appellant indicated that they had only been intimate once.

            21.  Other  witnesses,  including  the  appellant's  cousin  who
      worked in the music business, indicated that they were  aware  of  the
      appellant's being a lesbian and that her coming out  had  not  been  a
      surprise to them.  It was also a feature of their  evidence  that  the
      appellant was not averting her behaviour and he did not know that  the
      appellant and LH had lived in separation accommodation.

             22.   While  the  appellant  said  that  she  appreciated   the
      toleration in  the  UK  it  was  still  the  case  that  the  Jamaican
      community, in which she lives,  remains  deeply  homophobic  and  that
      includes the church that she  and  LH  attend.   They  chose  to  live
      discreetly within that community.

            23.  The situation is complicated by the letter  written  by  LH
      in December 2012 in which she withdrew her support for the appellant.
      We note  that  the  letter  makes  no  reference  to  the  appellant's
      sexuality, or that of LH, and does not suggest that past  claims  were
      made up or otherwise unreliable.  In any event LH  and  the  appellant
      appear to have re-established a friendship and the letter  appears  to
      have been motivated by a disagreement unrelated to this case.

            24.  We attach no weight to the letter from Aston Law  Practice
      of the 18th December 2012.  While the letter refers to the letter from
      LH and states that they were professionally embarrassed it  was  wrong
      to suggest that the appellant's claim was not genuine,  such  a  claim
      could not properly be based on the letter from LH and in  the  absence
      of other disclosable information it should not have been made  to  the
      Home Office.

            25.  Although both the appellant and LH spoke of the dangers  to
      those who are gay or thought to be gay in  Jamaica  LH  is  a  regular
      visitor to Jamaica to see  family  members.   This  voluntary  regular
      return was not said to be accompanied by any particular danger  to  LH
      and it was not suggested that there have been  any  problems  for  her
      when visiting even though she would have the added disadvantage of not
      having been born there.

            26.  The appellant's  conviction  related  to  her  obtaining  a
      false passport and it is her case that  this  was  to  enable  her  to
      travel to Jamaica.  In evidence she said she hoped to visit her father
      and build a relationship she had never had.  However in her letter  of
      3 July 2013 she said that it was only 'to visit my family,  most  of
      whom I had not seen for nearly a decade' and to offer moral support to
      the family of a gay friend who had been murdered.

            27.  The willingness of the appellant to travel back to  Jamaica
      to visit people there does serve to undermine her claim to be in  fear
      of a return there.   The intention to travel there is consistent  with
      the willingness of LH to visit regularly and calls into  question  the
      reality of any danger that they might face.

            28.  The evidence is not consistent but that is not  surprising,
      this is a  complex  issue  and  involves  personal  matters  that  the
      individual  may  themselves  find  perplexing.   Taking  the  evidence
      overall, and the bearing in mind the lower standard of  proof,  we  do
      not believe that the appellant has shown that she is a lesbian.   More
      importantly we do not believe that the appellant would be regarded  as
      a lesbian in Jamaica.

            29.  At best the appellant has had a close  friendship  with  LH
      as an adult and described a brief friendship as a school  girl.   That
      has to be set against the heterosexual relationships she described  as
      having in Jamaica.  We do not see that  if  returned  to  Jamaica  the
      appellant  would  be  living  her  life  in  a  way  that   would   be
      significantly different from the way she chooses to live in the UK and
      would do so for similar reasons and not  out  of  necessity  to  avoid
      societal violence but because that is the manner in which she  prefers
      to live.

            30.  We have to assess whether that would  place  the  appellant
      at risk in Jamaica and whether she would be perceived to  be  lesbian.
      The appellant  has  a  past  of  heterosexual  relationships  and  has
      children which would be regarded as positive factors.  She could  live
      in one of the larger urban areas and her view of the  relative  safety
      of doing so is underlined by her  willingness  to  try  to  travel  to
      Jamaica on false documents and supported by the willingness of  LH  to
      travel there on an almost yearly basis.  We find  that  the  appellant
      would not be at risk of treatment contrary to Articles 2 or 3 of  the
      ECHR."

6.    The rest of the determination relates to  considerations  relevant  to
Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (ECHR)  and  the
findings made, in that context, have not been the subject of  any  challenge
before the Upper Tribunal.

7.    The appellant,  through  her  representatives,  though,  did  seek  to
challenge  the  findings  in  relation  to  her  claim  to  be  entitled  to
international  protection  and  did  seek  permission  to  appeal   to   the
Upper Tribunal.   In  summary,  the  grounds  assert   that   the   First-
tier Tribunal erred in law in applying an incorrect standard of proof  with
respect to the asylum aspect in that it applied a balance  of  probabilities
test  as  opposed  to  a  real  risk  test  (see   paragraph 13   of   the
determination); it erred in failing to address the content of a  psychiatric
report prepared by one Professor Katona which, it is said,  "addresses  the
appellant's sexuality"; in failing to  consider  the  content  of  a  letter
written by LH of 19 January 2011; in failing to adequately explain why  it
found that the relationship with LH was a "close friendship" as  opposed  to
a  genuine  lesbian  relationship;  in  irrationally   concluding   that   a
willingness to visit Jamaica undermined  the  appellant's  claims  regarding
her sexuality; in failing to consider that  her  past  sexual  and  physical
abuse was "inextricably linked to her sexuality"; in failing  to  adequately
assess the evidence  before  it  including  the  oral  evidence  of  various
witnesses; in failing to adequately consider the question of how  she  lived
discreetly in the UK and how she might  have  to  live  more  discreetly  in
Jamaica to avoid risk and in  failing  to  consider  what  is  said  in  the
country guidance case of SW (Lesbians -HJ and HT applied) Jamaica CG 2011
UKUT 251 (IAC).

8.    On 3 July 2015 a judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission
to appeal.  The salient part of that grant reads as follows:

      "     3.   Paragraph 8 of the decision does not assist in identifying
      the  appropriate  standard  of  proof.   The  tribunal  did  say,   at
      paragraph 13 of the decision that it was for the appellant to show, on
      the balance of probabilities, that she should not be deported.  Whilst
      reference was made, in paragraph 28, to the lower standard of  proof,
      the decision does not set out that lower standard and it is  arguable,
      in those circumstances, that the lower  standard  was,  in  fact,  the
      balance of probabilities.  Clearly, that would be an error of law when
      considering asylum issues.

            4.   It is arguable, therefore, that  the  panel  has  erred  in
      law, and so I grant permission to appeal.  All grounds are arguable."

9.    There was a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  (before  me)  for  the
purpose of a consideration as to whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had
erred in law such that its decision ought to be set aside.

10.   At  that  hearing  Ms Rutherford,  for  the  appellant,  successfully
applied to me for an anonymity direction.  As to the grounds, she  contended
that the panel had applied the wrong standard  of  proof,  as  was  apparent
from what it had said at paragraph 13 of its determination, notwithstanding
the later reference to "the lower standard of proof" at  paragraph 28.   It
was, at least, she argued, sufficiently unclear  as  to  what  standard  had
been applied for the determination to be rendered  unsafe.   The  report  of
Professor Katona had not been referred to at all and some  of  its  content
was relevant to the question of the appellant's  sexuality.   Whilst  it  is
not necessary for reference to be made in a determination to each and  every
item of evidence, the letter from LH  referred  to  in  the  grounds  was  a
significant piece of evidence and there ought  to  have  been  some  comment
upon it.  It was not clear whether the panel had, in fact,  been  making  an
alternative finding to the effect that even if the appellant was  a  lesbian
she would not be perceived as one but, if it was intending to make  such  an
alternative finding,  it  had  not  adequately  explained  it  and  had  not
adequately gone into the issue of her being able to  live  discreetly  as  a
lesbian in Jamaica bearing in mind what she had said about such matters,  in
particular, in the detailed witness statement referred to above.  There  was
an overlap with respect to the rest of the grounds  but,  as  to  those,  in
summary, it was right to say that the panel had failed to adequately  reason
its decision.

11.   Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, submitted, in particular, that the
panel had, on a full reading  of  the  determination,  applied  the  correct
standard of proof with respect to the asylum aspect.  She acknowledged  that
she was in some difficulty in seeking to persuade  me  that  the  reasoning,
overall, was sufficiently adequate, but pointed out that the panel had  said
why it thought she would not be perceived as a lesbian  and  why  she  would
choose to live discreetly in Jamaica.

12.   I have decided, as I indicated to the parties  at  the  hearing,  that
although not all the grounds are made out, the First-tier Tribunal did  err
in law in a material way such that its decision falls to be  set  aside.   I
set out my reasoning below.

13.   I do not accept that the panel erred in law by applying  an  incorrect
standard  of  proof.   I  agree  that  it  referred   to   "a   balance   of
probabilities" at paragraph 13 of its  determination.   However,  prior  to
going on to state its key findings with respect  to  the  asylum  arguments,
those findings being that the appellant is not a lesbian and  in  any  event
would not be regarded as one in Jamaica, it made  reference  to  "the  lower
standard  of  proof".   Whilst  I  note  what  was  said  in  the  grant  of
permission, it seems to me that, taken in  context,  that  could  only  have
been a reference to what is known as the "real risk test" and which  applies
when arguments relevant to asylum are to be considered.  Further,  the  fact
that a "real risk" test is to be applied in  the  context  of  international
protection claims is a cardinal and absolutely fundamental principle and  it
does not seem to me  that,  without  something  more  clear  than  has  been
offered by way of argument, I should conclude that the panel lost  sight  of
it.  Further, as to the point about Professor Katona's  report,  I  do  not
think it is  right  to  say,  as  is  suggested  in  the  grounds,  that  it
"addresses the appellant's  sexuality".   It  seems  clear  to  me,  from  a
reading of the report, that Professor Katona's expertise is in the field of
mental health and that her conclusions went to the nature and extent of  the
mental health problems from which the appellant suffered.   I  do  not  read
the report as containing anything which amounts to an  expert  opinion  that
the appellant's sexuality is what she claims it to be.   I  agree  it  would
have been better if the panel had borne the content of the  report  in  mind
and made some reference to it, particularly bearing in  mind  that  it  does
contain detailed information provided by the appellant as to aspects of  her
sexuality which might, when looked at in a particular way, be taken to  have
lent support to the contention that she has given a  credible  or  at  least
consistent account, but I do not think that that, of itself, means that  the
failure to have regard to it amounts to material legal error.  I would  also
add that I do not think that the failure to refer to the letter  written  by
LH, of 19 January 2011, when taken in isolation, establishes  legal  error
either bearing in mind that it is not necessary to refer to each  and  every
aspect of the evidence.  For completeness, with respect to dealing with  the
parts of the grounds I do not find persuasive, and  although  there  was  no
discussion about this at the hearing, it seems  to  me  to  go  too  far  to
contend, as was done at ground (f) that the appellant's history of abuse is
"inextricably linked to her sexuality" such that the panel erred by  failing
to take that into account.  Certainly, I do not think it can  be  said  that
the very unfortunate history of abuse which  she  describes  is  necessarily
relevant to the question of her sexuality and it does not seem  to  me  that
there was any expert or other evidence before the panel which suggested,  in
terms, that it was.  Of course, it may or may not be the case that  any  new
evidence can now be obtained and produced at some point in the future.

14.   I have, though, as indicated, and despite my views as to the parts  of
the grounds addressed above, set the decision aside.  In this  context,  the
panel  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  from  a  number  of
witnesses, including LH, which touched upon the question of  her  sexuality.
It is clear from the determination that LH had something to say  about  that
as did a cousin of the appellant.  As well as the appellant's oral  evidence
it had detailed written evidence from her which, in  part,  dealt  with  her
sexuality and  her  relationship  history.   In  looking  carefully  at  the
determination the panel seems to have concluded that she is  not  a  lesbian
on the basis of her willingness and it  seems  the  willingness  of  LH,  to
visit Jamaica.  Ordinarily, of course, one would not  expect  a  person  who
fears persecution or serious ill-treatment in a particular country to be  at
all interested in visiting that country.  However, on the face of it,  if  a
person is not already known by the general populace to be lesbian, it  seems
to me that the risk would not arise immediately  but,  rather,  would  arise
over a passage of time if, for example, there was a failure  to  maintain  a
heterosexual narrative.  Viewed in that context, the  willingness  to  visit
or contemplate visiting Jamaica might not, of itself, be an indication  that
a person would not be at risk if they were to relocate to that country on  a
permanent basis.  So, whilst I do not  go  as  far  as  do  the  grounds  in
suggesting that the finding that the appellant's  desire  to  visit  Jamaica
and LH's history of having done so undermined their claims  regarding  their
sexuality was irrational, I do think it was  incumbent  upon  the  panel  to
explain, against the above background, why it did think that  it  undermined
the claims.  The panel has failed to do that  and,  in  consequence,  in  my
judgment, has failed to  provide  an  adequate  explanation  as  to  why  it
concluded that the appellant is not a lesbian and why it concluded that  she
and LH had only a friendship as opposed to a  lesbian  relationship.   Since
there is really  nothing  else  in  the  determination  which  points  to  a
justification for those adverse conclusions (from the appellant's  point  of
view) it does seem to me that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law  and
I so decide.

15.    There  is,  though,  the  question  of  whether  the  panel  made   a
sufficiently sound alternative finding.  At paragraphs 29 and 30  it  said,
in effect, on my reading, that it thought the appellant had, if  a  lesbian,
lived discreetly as such in the UK as  a  matter  of  preference,  that  she
would do the same in Jamaica as a matter of  preference  and  that,  bearing
that  in  mind,  and  given  that  she   has   had   previous   heterosexual
relationships and has children, she would be safe.  Ms Rutherford submitted
that it was  not  clear  that,  in  fact,  the  panel  was  making  such  an
alternative finding.  However, I really cannot  see  that  those  paragraphs
can viably be read in any other way.  That is important  because  the  error
of law  I  have  identified  above  will  not  be  a  material  one  if  the
alternative finding should  stand.   I  have  concluded,  however,  that  it
should not.

16.   In this context, it does not seem to me that the appellant was  saying
that she lived discreetly out of choice as a lesbian  in  the  UK.   Certain
comments she makes in her witness statement (the one referred to above)  are
more to the effect that she is not the sort of person who  would  enjoy  gay
nightclubs and an overtly high profile lesbian  lifestyle  but,  apart  from
that, would wish to live as a lesbian without feeling she has  to  hide  the
fact and that her predominant reason for doing so is a fear of the  reaction
or possible reaction from the Jamaican community living in the UK.   Perhaps
the appellant is telling the truth about all of that and perhaps  not.   The
point is, though, the panel did not, in my judgment, properly  evaluate  all
of that in light of her evidence such that its apparent conclusion that  she
simply prefers to  live  discreetly  as  a  lesbian  by  way  of  unfettered
preference is not sufficiently reasoned.  I would  also  conclude  that  the
question of whether she would be able to maintain a heterosexual  narrative,
even bearing in mind positive factors in this  connection  which  the  panel
identified at paragraph 30 of its determination, has also been inadequately
considered.  This ties in with the reference in the grounds to  the  country
guidance decision in SW cited above. Bearing in mind what is  said  in  that
decision, it seems to me that the panel did not  sufficiently  consider  the
difficulties the appellant may have in retaining  a  heterosexual  narrative
over the passage of time, if returned, such that whilst she may  not  be  at
immediate risk she might come to be  at  risk  given  the  expectation  that
women should be sexually active "into their  sixties"  unless  there  is  an
obvious reason why they do not have a partner such as, for  example,  recent
widowhood, which is something the appellant would not appear to be  able  to
show.

17.   I conclude, then, that the decision should be set aside  and  that  is
what I do.

18.   There was a discussion at the hearing as to whether or not the  appeal
should be retained within the Upper Tribunal or whether I should  remit  to
the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Rutherford sought the latter course of action
pointing out that the bases upon which I had  decided  that  the  panel  had
erred in law meant that the negative credibility assessment could not  stand
and meant that  little  or  nothing  could  be  viably  preserved  from  the
findings.  She was also I am sure, conscious of the  possible  advantage  to
be had in protecting the  appellant's  ongoing  appeal  rights  if  remittal
could be secured.  Mrs Pettersen expressed an  essentially  neutral  stance
but did not say anything to oppose the idea of remittal. I was also  assured
by both representatives that remittal does now follow much  more  frequently
than was once the case in the event of a decision being  set  aside  without
much or any of the factual findings being preserved.   Taking  into  account
the views of the representatives as noted, and taking into account the  fact
that I am  unable  to  preserve  anything  of  real  significance  from  the
determination of the panel despite it being apparent that it set  about  its
task with diligence, and bearing in  mind  the  basis  for  my  setting  its
decision aside, I have concluded that remittal is the appropriate course  of
action with directions which follow below.

19.   Finally, I have decided, as indicated  above,  to  make  an  anonymity
direction.  That is because it seems to me that there  are  aspects  of  the
factual background to this case which are sensitive, most notably, the  past
history of abuse and because it may  be  that  the  appellant  will  not  be
assisted by any publicity if it transpires that she is a lesbian as  claimed
but that, nevertheless, it  is  decided  that  she  is  to  be  returned  to
Jamaica.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  I set  aside  the  decision.   The  case  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with the  directions  set
out below and on the basis that it be heard by another judge of  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Therefore, the claimant and members  of  her
family are granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.   No  report  of
these proceedings in whatever form shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify
the claimant or any member of her  family.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
order could lead to a contempt of court.


Signed                            Dated


Directions for the rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal

1.    The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
panel which shall not include Judge Parkes or Mr G Getlevog.

2.    The new hearing shall take place at a hearing  centre  convenient  for
the appellant and the time estimate for  the  new  hearing  shall  be  three
hours.  There are no interpreter requirements.

3.    If either party is to  rely  upon  further  documentary  evidence  not
already filed then that evidence  should  be  produced  in  the  form  of  a
paginated and indexed bundle and sent to the  First-tier Tribunal  and  the
other party so that it is received at least five working days prior  to  the
date of hearing.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
