
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01737/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 June 2015                                |On 25 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                            mr vanse koue-bi-tra
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bobb, Aylish Alexander Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of France born  on  22  December  1989.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 1995 with his parents and subsequently
    accumulated a number of convictions; the most recent of which was on 25
    January 2013 when he was convicted of supplying  a  controlled  drug  -
    Class A (heroin), possession with intent to supply a controlled class A
    drug (both heroin and cocaine) and having a bladed  article  which  was
    sharply pointed in a public place.  He  was  sentenced  to  54  months'
    imprisonment on 30 January 2013.

 2. As a consequence, on 21 May 2013 the  appellant  was  notified  of  his
    liability to be deported and on 2 September 2014 the Secretary of State
    made a decision to deport him, having first  taken  into  consideration
    the provisions of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 (the 2006 EEA Regulations).

 3. The appellant appealed this decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.  That
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Perry on 6  January  2015
    and dismissed on all  grounds  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  5
    February.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  subsequently
    granted on 21 March 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales, and thus
    the matter comes before me.

 4. The grounds seeking leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal run  to  some
    72 paragraphs and identify the following seven grounds:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in applying  an  incorrect  level  of
         protection to the appellant; he ought to have had  the  benefit  of
         the highest level of protection i.e. he can only be removed if  the
         Secretary of State has demonstrated that  there  exists  imperative
         grounds of public security for doing so;

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in paragraph 46 of its  determination
         in directing itself that "the overarching framework for approaching
         the  decision  on  deportation  is  not  so   much   the   personal
         circumstances  of  the  appellant  but  the  seriousness   of   the
         offence...";

    iii) The  judge  failed  to  assess  and  take  into  consideration  the
         prospects of the appellant's rehabilitation;

     iv) The First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion  on  the  prospects  of  the
         appellant obtaining employment  at  the  end  of  his  sentence  is
         unclear and/or perverse;

      v) The First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  provide  adequate
         reasons for concluding the appellant to be at medium  risk  of  re-
         offending;

     vi) The First-tier Tribunal erred in finding that the appellant had not
         acquired a right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom;

    vii)  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of  Article  8  ECHR   is
         fundamentally flawed.

 5. Turning first to ground (i), [as summarised above].  Regulation  21  of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations reads as follows:

         "Decisions taken on  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
         health grounds:



         21(1) In  this  regulation  a  'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

           (2)    A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                ends.

           (3)    A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                person with a permanent right of residence under  regulation
                15 except on serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                security.

           (4)    A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-



                (a)    has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                    period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                    decision; or

                (b)    is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                    is necessary in his best interests, as provided  for  in
                    the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the
                    General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th  November
                    1989...".


 6. In paragraphs 41 and 42 of its determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    conclude:

         "41. The issue is whether the appellant has resided in the UK for a
             continuous period of at least ten years prior to  2  September
             2014.  I accept the finding in the determination  prepared  on
             21 October 2007 that 'the appellant has been in the  UK  since
             1995'.  The Home Office wrote to the appellant on 3 July  2014
             requesting information as to how he had been exercising treaty
             rights in the UK.  However as the refusal letter  states  'the
             appellant has not provided any evidence to confirm your length
             of residence' - paragraph 15.  No further  evidence  has  been
             provided by the appellant.  There are no general  practitioner
             details or places of residence in Milton Keynes or  employment
             details that would clarify the position.  The burden of  proof
             is upon the appellant to provide such information and this  he
             has failed to do.  Accordingly I find that the  appellant  had
             not proved that he has resided in the UK and exercised  treaty
             rights for a continuous period of ten years since 2  September
             2004.

         42.  As the appellant correctly  states  at  paragraph  18  of  the
             skeleton argument 'the three levels of protection against  the
             risk of expulsion are therefore those who present  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  public  policy;
             those who present such a threat but have a permanent right  of
             residence and who therefore can only  be  removed  on  serious
             grounds of public policy; and those who reside in  the  United
             Kingdom for a continuous period of ten years and can therefore
             only be removed on imperative grounds of public  security.   I
             find that the appellant can only be deported if he presents  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  public
             [sic]  to  public  policy.   He  has  no  permanent  right  of
             residence and he has not resided in the UK  for  a  continuous
             period of ten years prior to the  deportation  order  dated  2
             September 2014."

 7. The issue as to the circumstances in which an  individual  can  acquire
    the highest level of protection has recently attracted the attention of
    the Court of Justice of  European  Union  in  the  cases  of  C-400/12,
    Secretary of  State  v  MG  and  C-387/12,  Onuekwere  v  SSHD.   These
    decisions were considered in some detail by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ
    Storey and UTJ Allen) in the reported decision of MG (prison -  Article
    28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC) -  the
    Tribunal concluding therein as follows:

         "42. Prior receiving further evidence regarding the claimant's  up-
             to-date circumstances, but after receipt of  the  judgment  of
             the Court, we wrote to the parties asking them to comment on a
             possible tension in the text of the answers given by the Court
             and an apparent contradiction between:

             (1)  its seemingly categorical statement in the first part  of
                  paragraph 33 that 'periods of imprisonment cannot be taken
                  into account for the purposes  of  granting  the  enhanced
                  protection provided for in Article 28(3)(a)...'; and

             (2)  its seemingly defeasible statement in the second half  of
                  the same sentence (reinforced in  paragraphs  35-36)  that
                  'in principle, such periods interrupt  the  continuity  of
                  the  period  of  residence  for  the  purposes   of   that
                  provision."

             ...

         48.  Despite our difficulties, we have concluded that a categorical
             reading of (1) cannot be what the Court meant or at least that
             what it must have had  in  mind  was  to  draw  a  distinction
             between  a  positive  taking  into  account  and  a   negative
             interruption.  If the Court in MG had meant to convey  by  the
             terms  'cannot  be  taken  into  account'  that   periods   of
             imprisonment automatically disqualify a person  from  enhanced
             protection under Article 28(3)(a)  protection,  it  would  not
             have seen fit to proceed  in  paragraph  35  to  accept  as  a
             possibility that the 'non-continuous' nature of  a  period  of
             residence did not automatically prevent  a  person  qualifying
             for  enhanced  protection.   Nor  would  it  have  chosen   in
             paragraph 38  to  describe  periods  of  imprisonment  as  'in
             principle, capable both of interrupting the continuity of  the
             period of residence for the purposes of that provision and  of
             affecting the decision regarding the  grant  of  the  enhanced
             protection provided for thereunder...'.  It would have had  to
             say that, if they fall within the 10 year period counting back
             from the date of  decision,  periods  of  imprisonment  always
             prevent a  person  qualifying  for  enhanced  protection.   In
             addition, what the Court goes on to say in paragraph 37  about
             the implications of the fact that a person has resided in  the
             host Member State during the 10 years prior to imprisonment is
             clearly intended to underline that even though such  a  person
             has had a period of imprisonment during the requisite 10  year
             period (counting back from the date of decision  ordering  the
             expulsion: see para 27) it  is  still  possible  for  them  to
             qualify for enhanced protection and in this regard their prior
             period of residence 'may be taken into consideration  as  part
             of the overall assessment referred to in paragraph 36  above'.
             We also bear in mind, of course, as did Pill LJ  in  Secretary
             of State v FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA Civ  119  at  [42]  that  in
             Tsakouridis the CJEU Grand Chamber did not consider  the  fact
             that Mr Tsakouridis had spent a substantial period of time  in
             custody in Germany in the year prior to the decision to  expel
             him (taken on 9 August 2008) as defeating his eligibility  for
             enhanced protection under Article 28(3)(a).  Nevertheless (and
             this is where we consider  Mr  Palmer  Right  and  Miss  Hirst
             wrong), the fact that the Court specifies that 'in  principle'
             periods of imprisonment interrupt the continuity of  residence
             for the purposes of meeting the 10 year requirement  can  only
             mean  that  so  far  as  establishing  integrative  links   is
             concerned, such periods must have a negative impact."

 8. Mr Bramble accepts that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  its  approach
    to the consideration of whether  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  the
    highest level of protection i.e. that identified in Regulation 21(4) of
    the 2006 Regulations,  in  that  it  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant is a person sufficiently integrated into  the  UK  to  obtain
    such protection, irrespective of the fact that he has served a  lengthy
    prison sentence immediately prior  to  the  issue  of  the  deportation
    decision. In short, it is accepted that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to apply the approach commended to it by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  its
    decision in MG - a decision which the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    have regard to at all in its determination.

 9. Despite making the aforementioned concession  Mr  Bramble  nevertheless
    submitted that the appellant's appeal ought to be dismissed because the
    error of law identified above is  not  one  capable  of  affecting  the
    outcome of the appeal - there being only one answer to the question  of
    whether the appellant was  integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom  and,
    consequently, entitled to the highest level of protection, that  answer
    being, according to Mr Bramble, that the appellant is not  entitled  to
    such protection because he is not sufficiently integrated here.

10. Mr Bobb also submitted that there to be only one answer to question  of
    whether the appellant is integrated here such that he  is  entitled  to
    the highest level of  protection  -  that  being  that  he  is.  In  so
    submitting Mr Bobb relied on the date of the appellant's arrival in the
    United  Kingdom,  his  age  on  arrival,  the  extent  of  his   family
    relationships here, the fact that he attended school here and his  lack
    of connection to his home country.

11. The consideration of whether  the  appellant  is  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom and is entitled to the highest level  of  protection  is
    one which is deeply rooted into the facts of the case and in my view it
    cannot be said on the basis of the information before me that there  is
    only  one  answer  to  this  question.  Given  this  finding,  and  the
    concession made by Mr Bramble which was undoubtedly  properly  made,  I
    conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error
    on a point of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and  I
    set it aside.

12. Having announced this conclusion at the hearing both parties  submitted
    that the only proper course would be for the appeal to be remitted back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined de novo. I agree that  this
    is so.

13. For the sake of completeness  I  observe,  in  relation  to  other  six
    grounds of appeal relied upon by the appellant, that I heard Mr Bobb in
    relation to only one of them,  i.e.  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in its consideration of the appellant's entitlement to  permanent
    residence.  For  my  part  I  can  find  no  error  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's consideration of this issue given the  evidence  before  it.
    Nevertheless, I do not direct that the scope of the First-tier Tribunal
    is in any way restricted. This issue will be a matter  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to determine afresh on the evidence placed before it.

Notice of Decision

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is allowed. The  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 12 June 2015
