
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01147/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Nottingham Magistrates    |Determination Promulgated            |
|Court                                |                                     |
|On : 13 May 2015                     |On 20 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         EUAELE WONDEMU GEBRESELASIE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia whose date of  birth  has  been
      recorded as 1 January 1982. He has been  given  permission  to  appeal
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision that section 32(5) of the UK Borders
      Act 2007 applied.

   2. The appellant was encountered  in  the  United  Kingdom  when  he  was
      arrested on 31 March  2009  on  suspicion  of  illegal  entry,  having
      previously made an unsuccessful application for settlement to join his
      mother in 2001 and a further unsuccessful visa application in Ethiopia
      using false documentation in June  2004,  and  was  served  with  form
      IS151A as an illegal entrant. He claimed  asylum  the  same  day.  His
      asylum application was  refused  in  September  2009  and  his  appeal
      against the decision was dismissed  in  February  2010.  He  left  the
      United Kingdom in June 2010. According to the  appellant  he  went  to
      Ireland but  was  sent  back  to  the  United  Kingdom  by  the  Irish
      authorities, returning here on 30 September 2010.  He  claimed  asylum
      again. His claim was refused in November 2010 and his  appeal  against
      that decision was dismissed in February 2011.

   3. On 22 December 2012 the appellant was convicted of theft and sentenced
      to 16 weeks' imprisonment. On  7  August  2013  he  was  convicted  of
      attempted robbery and sentenced to 1 year and 6 months'  imprisonment.
      In light of the conviction he was notified, on 3  September  2013,  of
      his liability to automatic deportation. He completed  a  questionnaire
      on 3 September 2013, stating that his deportation would be  in  breach
      of the ECHR and the Refugee Convention. A deportation order  was  made
      against him on 29 May 2014 and a decision was made  on  11  June  2014
      that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

   4. The appellant claims  to  fall  within  the  exceptions  to  automatic
      deportation.  He claims to be at risk  on  return  to  Ethiopia  as  a
      result of his activities for the OLF  (Oromo  Liberation  Front)  and,
      more recently, as a result of his sexuality.

   5. In his first  claim,  after  initially  claiming  to  be  an  Eritrean
      national unable to practice his religion in Eritrea, he claimed to  be
      Ethiopian  and  Oromo  and  to  have  been  involved  in  distributing
      information about the Oromo cause for the OLF. He claimed to have been
      caught on one occasion when distributing leaflets  and  to  have  been
      arrested and beaten up and taken to prison, where he was tortured.  He
      claimed that his uncle was  also  arrested  and  ill-treated  and  was
      accused of financially supporting the Oromo movement  and  died  after
      his release from injuries received in prison. He came  to  the  United
      Kingdom on the advice of his uncle who arranged for an agent to  bring
      him here, also in the hope of finding his mother and  being  re-united
      with her, having last seen her when she  left  Ethiopia  when  he  was
      seven or eight years of age and having last had contact  with  her  in
      2003. He claimed that his father was  in  South  Africa,  having  fled
      Ethiopia because of problems arising from his support  for  the  Oromo
      cause.

   6. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim in October 2009, did
      not accept that he was Oromo, that he was a supporter of  the  OLF  or
      that he had been arrested as claimed and considered that he  would  be
      at no risk on return to Ethiopia. In dismissing the appellant's appeal
      in February 2010, the Immigration Judge found him  to  be  lacking  in
      credibility and considered that he had fabricated his account and  was
      not Oromo.

   7. In his second asylum claim the appellant claimed again  to  have  been
      involved with the OLF, although on that occasion he  claimed  to  have
      been arrested and detained three times as a result of his  involvement
      with the movement.  In  refusing  that  claim,  the  respondent  again
      rejected his claim to be Oromo and considered that he would be  at  no
      risk on return to Ethiopia. In dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  in
      February 2011, the Immigration Judge again found him to be lacking  in
      credibility and considered that he had fabricated his account and  was
      not Oromo, noting further inconsistencies arising out  of  his  second
      claim in  addition  to  those  previously  noted.  On  that  occasion,
      however, there was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant  and
      therefore no oral evidence.

   8. In the deportation decision of 11 June 2014 the respondent referred to
      the appellant's previous unsuccessful asylum claims  and  appeals  and
      maintained that he would be at no risk on  return  to  Ethiopia.  With
      regard to Article 8 of the ECHR, it was considered that he  could  not
      meet the requirements in paragraph 399(a) and (b) or paragraph 399A of
      the immigration rules and that there were no exceptional circumstances
      outweighing the public interest in his deportation for the purposes of
      paragraph 398.  The  exceptions  to  automatic  deportation  did  not,
      therefore, apply to him.

   9. The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was  heard  on  13
      January 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

  10. Judge Hollingworth heard from the  appellant  and  had  before  him  a
      witness statement in which  he  repeated  his  claim  as  regards  his
      involvement with the OLF but also claimed to be gay.  The  judge  also
      had  before  him  a  medico-legal  report  from  Dr   Tania   Longman,
      photographs of scars on the appellant's body  and  a  Rule  35  report
      compiled by a doctor in the healthcare centre where he  was  detained.
      He placed little weight upon Dr Longman's report and found that it did
      not detract from the adverse  findings  made  by  the  judges  in  the
      appellant's previous appeals, which he took as his starting point.  He
      rejected the appellant's account of his involvement with the  OLF,  as
      well as his account of his sexuality and found that he would be at  no
      risk on return to Ethiopia on either basis. He  also  found  that  the
      appellant's deportation would not be in breach of  Article  8  and  he
      dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

  11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on behalf of the
      appellant, and granted, on the grounds that the  judge's  approach  to
      the question of scarring and the deliberate infliction  of  the  scars
      was arguably flawed.

  12. The appeal came before me on 13 May 2015.

Consideration and Findings

  13. Having heard submissions from both parties it seems to me  that  there
      are fatal flaws in Judge Hollingworth's decision such that  it  cannot
      stand.

  14. At paragraph 36 of his decision, the judge placed  significant  weight
      upon the fact that the  appellant  had  not  raised  the  question  of
      scarring previously. However it is clear that reference had been  made
      to scarring and torture in both his interviews, at questions 35 and 41
      of the first interview and at  questions  18  and  35  of  the  second
      interview. Further, the Rule  35  report  from  April  2014  contained
      details about torture  and  scarring.  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the
      judge's comments at paragraph  36  should  be  read  as  meaning  that
      scarring had not formed an important  part  of  the  appellant's  case
      before, since it was clear from paragraph 27 that he  was  aware  that
      there had been previous references to scarring. Whilst that may be the
      case, it is certainly not clear from paragraph 36 that  that  was  so,
      and given the adverse weight attached by the judge to  the  matter  it
      seems to me that more detailed and explicit findings ought  reasonably
      to have been made at that point. Indeed no findings were made  on  the
      Rule 35 report at all.

  15. Further, whilst the judge  considered  that  the  reliability  of  the
      medico-legal report was undermined by the  expert's  failure  to  give
      proper consideration, with respect to the scarring, to the question of
      self-infliction and self-infliction by proxy, it seems to me  that  he
      in turn failed to address the findings that the  expert  did  make  in
      that regard,  in  particular  at  paragraphs  6.2.5,  6.2.11,  6.2.13,
      6.2.15,  6.2.22  and  6.2.23.  Neither  was  the  appellant  given  an
      opportunity to respond to a suggestion of  self-infliction  by  proxy,
      which Mr Mills agreed would have been appropriate  in  line  with  the
      guidance in RR (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 274.

  16. Mr Mills accepted that there were problems with the  judge's  decision
      and that errors had been made by the judge, but it was his  submission
      that those errors were not material.  However  I  do  not  agree.  The
      appellant's scarring and the conclusions reached by the medical expert
      were fundamental to the assessment  of  credibility,  particularly  in
      light of the substantially adverse findings already made  against  the
      appellant and the acknowledged discrepancies in his evidence. As such,
      it seems to me that any  errors  made  in  the  consideration  of  the
      evidence of scarring and the assessment of the medical evidence simply
      had to be material. Accordingly I consider that the  judge's  decision
      cannot stand and has to be re-made.

  17. Both parties agreed that, if a material error were to be found in  the
      assessment of the medical evidence, that would go to the heart of  the
      credibility findings and, as such, would have infected  all  parts  of
      the judge's decision and would necessitate a complete rehearing of the
      appeal. It was therefore  agreed,  in  such  circumstances,  that  the
      appropriate course would be for the case to be remitted to the  First-
      tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

DECISION

  18. The appeal is allowed.

  19. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  pursuant  to  section
      12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
      Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be dealt with afresh, before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Hollingworth.






                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

