
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01101/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT(IAC)Birmingham           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th September and 9th November    |On 9th December 2015                 |
|2015                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     FM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards (on 8th September) and Mr D Mills (on
                    9th November) Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pipe, instructed by TRP solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

I make an order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  anything
that might lead members of the public to identify the parties identified  in
this decision as FM (Mr M), Ms A or S.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

    1. The respondent made a decision that  s32  (5)  UK  Borders  Act  2007
       applied to Mr M following his conviction for  numerous  offences  for
       which he received lengthy prison sentences. A deportation  order  was
       signed on 29th May 2014. Mr M appealed the decision and by a decision
       promulgated on 18th June 2014 a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       allowed the appeal on the basis that the removal of Mr M would  be  a
       breach of his human rights.

    2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department (hereafter  the  SSHD)
       sought and was granted permission to appeal the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal. Following a hearing on 8th September 2015 I found, for
       the reasons that follow, that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  an
       error of law such as to require that its decision  be  set  aside  so
       that the Upper Tribunal would substitute a fresh decision to allow or
       to dismiss the appeal against the deportation decision.

  Background

    3. Mr M, a Jamaican citizen, arrived in the UK on  20th  July  2001;  he
       claimed asylum on 14th March 2002 such claim  being  refused  on  5th
       June  2002.  He  did  not  appeal  the  immigration   decision   that
       accompanied the refusal of his asylum claim at that time and remained
       in the UK unlawfully. He submitted an out of time appeal against that
       decision which was refused on 6th May 2005 although  whether  it  was
       rejected as being out of time or refused on its merits  is  not  made
       clear in the papers before me. In the meantime he had  been  arrested
       for motoring offences and detained under Immigration powers.

    4. On 22nd November 2004 he applied for leave to remain as the spouse of
       a person present and settled in  the  UK,  outside  the  Rules,  such
       application being refused with no right of  appeal  on  2nd  February
       2006. He then voluntarily left the UK on 14th February 2006.

    5. An application for entry clearance as a spouse was made on 7th  April
       2006 and refused on 11th May 2006. His appeal  was  successful  in  a
       decision dated 11th June 2007 and  on  25th  September  2007  he  was
       granted entry clearance until 25th September 2009, arriving in the UK
       on 20th October 2007.

    6. An application for indefinite leave to remain as a spouse of Ms A,  a
       British citizen, was made on 18th November  2009.  According  to  the
       reasons set out in the decision which led to the instant appeal, that
       application (which was made when Mr M had no leave to remain  in  the
       UK) remains outstanding. It was not submitted to me that the decision
       was subsumed within the deportation decision and so far as I am aware
       no decision has yet been made on that application.

    7. On 20th September 2010 Mr M was convicted of (and sentenced to):

         . Conspiracy to commit robbery (9 years imprisonment)

         . Having a firearm with intent to commit an indictable offence  (5
           years imprisonment to run concurrent)

         . Having an imitation firearm with  intent  to  commit  indictable
           offence (30 months imprisonment to run concurrent)

         . Possessing prohibited weapon  (54  months  imprisonment  to  run
           concurrent)

         .  Possessing  a  firearm  without  a   certificate   (54   months
           imprisonment to run concurrent)

         .  Possessing  ammunition  without  a   certificate   (33   months
           imprisonment to run concurrent)

    8. S117D(2) Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  defines  a
       foreign criminal as, inter alia,  a  person  who  is  not  a  British
       citizen who has been convicted of  an  offence  and  sentenced  to  a
       period of imprisonment of at least  12  months.  S117D(4)(b)  further
       states that reference to a person who has been sentenced to a  period
       of imprisonment "does not include a person who has been sentenced  to
       a period of imprisonment of that length of time  only  by  virtue  of
       being sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting  in  aggregate  to
       that length of time". Plainly this appellant is  a  foreign  criminal
       who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  12
       months (and more than 4 years  -  see  s117C  (6)).  Mr  M  had  been
       detained since September 2009; in April 2014 Mr M was  released  from
       custody on bail and he, his wife (Ms A) and  their  son  S  (date  of
       birth 11th September 2002) lived as a family unit since then.

    9. The SSHD accepts that it is not in the best interests of the child or
       Ms A to live in Jamaica; the child S has been diagnosed  with  Autism
       Spectrum Disorder; Ms A  runs  a  successful  nursery  business;  the
       couple were expecting  a  second  child  (which  has  now  been  born
       although it was not argued before the First-tier Tribunal  that  that
       child had any rights as an 'unborn child').

  The law

   10. The Immigration Rules, in so far as relevant to Mr M, are as follows:

           '396.  Where a person is liable to deportation  the  presumption
           shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in
           the public interest to deport where the Secretary of State  must
           make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK
           Borders Act 2007.

           397.   A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's
           removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
           Convention. Where deportation would not  be  contrary  to  these
           obligations, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
           the public interest in deportation is outweighed.

           A398.  These rules apply where:

                  (a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                  his deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's
                  obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   Human   Rights
                  Convention;

                  (b)  a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                  made against him to be revoked.

           398.   Where a person claims that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and

                  (a)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                  conducive to the public good and in  the  public  interest
                  because they have been convicted of an offence  for  which
                  they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
                  least 4 years;

                  (b)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                  conducive to the public good and in  the  public  interest
                  because they have been convicted of an offence  for  which
                  they have been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of
                  less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                  (c)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                  conducive to the public good and in  the  public  interest
                  because, in the view of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
                  offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
                  offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,

           the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does  not,  the
           public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by  other
           factors where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and
           above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

           399.   This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
           applies if -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                      (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                      (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                      at least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date
                      of the immigration decision;

                      and in either case

                           (a)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                           live in the country to which the person is to  be
                           deported; and

                           (b)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported; or

                  (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                  with a partner who is in the UK and is a  British  Citizen
                  or settled in the UK, and

                      (i)  the relationship was formed at a time  when  the
                      person (deportee) was in the UK  lawfully  and  their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and

                      (ii) it would be unduly harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      live in the country to which  the  person  is  to  be
                      deported, because of  compelling  circumstances  over
                      and above  those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                      Appendix FM; and

                      (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported.

           399A.  This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -

                  (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                  most of his life; and

                  (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                  and  (c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported.'

   11. The Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended  by  the
       Immigration Act 2014) in so far as relevant to Mr M reads as follows:

           'PART 5A

           Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

           117A   Application of this Part

                  (1)  This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                  required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the
                  Immigration Acts-

                      (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private
                      and family life under Article 8, and

                      (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of
                      the Human Rights Act 1998.

                  (2)  In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                  court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                      (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in
                      section 117B, and

                      (b)  in cases concerning the deportation  of  foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                      117C.

                  (3)  In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                  means the question  of  whether  an  interference  with  a
                  person's right to respect for private and family  life  is
                  justified under Article 8(2).

           117B   Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in
           all cases

                  (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                  in the public interest.

                  (2)  It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                  the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the  United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English-

                      (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                      (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

                  (3)  It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                  the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the  United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons-

                      (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                      (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

                  (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                      (a)  a private life, or

                      (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                      that is established by a person at a  time  when  the
                      person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                  (5)  Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

                  (6)  In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                  deportation, the public  interest  does  not  require  the
                  person's removal where-

                      (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                      (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                      to leave the United Kingdom.

           117C   Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving
           foreign criminals

                  (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                  interest.

                  (2)  The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

                  (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not
                  been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  four  years
                  or more, the  public  interest  requires  C's  deportation
                  unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

                  (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                      (a)  C has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                      Kingdom for most of C's life,

                      (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated  in  the
                      United Kingdom, and

                      (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

                  (5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                  subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner,  or  a
                  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with   a
                  qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                  partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                  (6)  In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  four
                  years, the public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
                  there are very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above
                  those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                  (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to
                  be taken  into  account  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted.'

   12. S55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 reads as follows:

           'Duty regarding the welfare of children

           (1)     The  Secretary  of  State  must  make  arrangements  for
           ensuring that -

                (a)     the  functions  mentioned  in  subsection  (2)   are
                discharged having  regard  to  the  need  to  safeguard  and
                promote the welfare  of  children  who  are  in  the  United
                Kingdom, and

                (b)    any services provided by another person  pursuant  to
                arrangements which are made by the Secretary  of  State  and
                relate  to  the  discharge  of  a  function   mentioned   in
                subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.

           (2)    The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -

                (a)    any function of the Secretary of State in relation to
                immigration, asylum or nationality;

                (b)    any  function  conferred  by  or  by  virtue  of  the
                Immigration Acts on an immigration officer;

           ...'

   13. S71 of the Immigration Act 2014 states

           'For the avoidance of doubt, this Act does not  limit  any  duty
           imposed on the Secretary of State or any other person by section
           55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  (duty
           regarding the welfare of children).'

   14. It is plain that the implementation of the Immigration Act  2014  has
       not limited or changed the manner of assessment of the best  interest
       of children; nor has it shifted the importance to be given  to  those
       interests or the children's welfare.

   15. These are the reasons, arrived at and  communicated  to  the  parties
       following the hearing on  8th  September  2015,  why  the  First-tier
       Tribunal made an error of law:

           "1.    There is no question but that Mr M is a foreign  criminal
                and that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
                qualifying partner and a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship  with  a   qualifying   child.   Although   his
                relationship with Ms A was formed at  a  time  when  he  was
                unlawfully in the UK it is clear that the respondent and the
                First-tier Tribunal (correctly) placed no weight  upon  that
                given in particular that he had left the UK, applied for and
                been granted entry clearance  to  return  as  a  spouse  and
                thereafter his residence  in  the  UK  was  lawful.  It  was
                accepted by the respondent before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                that it was in S's best interests to remain in  the  UK  and
                that he and Ms A would  remain  in  the  UK  if  Mr  M  were
                deported; this was a 'family splitting' case.

           2. The SSHD in her grounds  of  appeal  relies  upon  her  IDIs,
                Chapter 13 and refers to:

                     4. A foreign criminal sentenced to at least four years
                        imprisonment must be able to show  that  there  are
                        very compelling circumstances over  and  above  the
                        circumstances  described  in  the   exceptions   to
                        deportation.  This  is   because   Parliament   has
                        expressly excluded those sentenced to at least four
                        years   imprisonment   from   the   exceptions   to
                        deportation. Missing out on  the  exceptions  by  a
                        small margin, or a  series  of  near  misses  taken
                        cumulatively, will  not  in  itself  be  compelling
                        enough  to  outweigh   the   public   interest   in
                        deportation. The best interest of any child in  the
                        UK who will be affected by the decision are  a  but
                        not the primary consideration and must be not  only
                        compelling, but very compelling,  to  outweigh  the
                        public interest.

           3. She relies upon Danso [2015] EWCA Civ 596 in particular  that
                rehabilitation  "cannot   ...contribute   greatly   to   the
                existence of the very compelling circumstances  required  to
                outweigh the public interest in deportation" [20] Danso.  In
                submissions Mr Richards referred to MAB (para  399;  "unduly
                harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC)  and  submitted  that  the
                decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  fell  far  short  of
                providing adequate reasons for reaching the conclusion  that
                in the particular circumstances of the case, there were very
                compelling circumstances such that Mr M met paragraph 398 of
                the Immigration Rules and  that  this  removal  would  be  a
                disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights.

           4. Mr Pipe  submitted  that  the  structure  of  the  First-tier
                Tribunal decision, when read as  a  whole  and  cumulatively
                clearly  identified  and  gave  adequate  reasons  for   the
                conclusions reached. He  referred  to  the  self  directions
                given by the panel - (paragraphs [5]. [12], [13], [14], [15]
                and [17]) - and drew attention to the different elements  of
                the First-tier Tribunal decision which,  he  submitted,  had
                been cumulatively assessed:

                  . risk of re-offending was very low ([17], [21], [22]);

                  . in this particular case rehabilitation is  an  important
                    factor ([23]);

                  . the impact of Mr M's deportation  on  S  would  be  very
                    significant  and  damaging;  would  have  a  significant
                    detrimental effect on S's well being both in  the  short
                    and long term ([24]; [32]);

                  . Ms A and the child would highly  probably  not  move  to
                    Jamaica ([33]);

                  . S cannot be expected to move to Jamaica to live with his
                    father there ([33]);

                  . S's best interest are a  primary  consideration;  it  is
                    highly important for S's welfare that Mr  M  remains  in
                    the UK ([34]);

                  . Ms A has a business and her parents in the UK; if  Mr  M
                    is deported she will have to look after two children and
                    her business ([35]);

                  . There is  strong  public  interest  in  his  deportation
                    tempered   by   the   factors   in   relation   to   his
                    rehabilitation ([36]).

           5. Mr Pipe argued that the references in  [35]  to  factors  not
                amounting to compelling circumstances did not refer  to  the
                family circumstances overall but merely  to  the  particular
                elements set out in that paragraph namely, in  essence,  the
                additional difficulties Ms  A  would  have  in  running  her
                business, providing care for the children and  the  lack  of
                availability of assistance from Mr M. He  argued  that  [36]
                should not be  seen  in  isolation  from  the  rest  of  the
                determination and the reference to rehabilitation should not
                be seen as the  issue  that  amounted  to  'very  compelling
                circumstances'.

           6. In [34] the reference  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the
                interest of S being a primary  consideration  is  of  course
                correct. The First-tier  Tribunal  then  held  that  "it  is
                highly important for S's welfare that his father remains  in
                the  UK".  This  does  not  equate  with  'very   compelling
                circumstances'. There has been no assessment by  the  First-
                tier Tribunal of whether the deportation of Mr M from the UK
                would be unduly harsh on the child, even  if  it  is  highly
                important for Mr M to remain in the UK for the welfare of S.
                The First-tier Tribunal has simply not applied  the  correct
                test to the information before them.

           7. Furthermore the First-tier Tribunal has  failed  to  consider
                the circumstances in accordance with the  Rules.  There  has
                been no assessment of the circumstances to the  extent  that
                they amount to very compelling circumstances over and  above
                paragraphs 399 and 399A.

           8. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in
                failing to make adequate findings, or at all, in  accordance
                with the Immigration Rules."

  Remade decision

   16. I made directions on findings that were to be preserved and that both
       parties were to  file  skeleton  arguments  addressing  the  specific
       requirements of s55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and
       its relevance and impact as regards paragraph 398  Immigration  Rules
       and s117C(6) Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; no  further
       documentary evidence and no oral evidence. Mr Pipe filed  a  skeleton
       argument as directed; the respondent did not and  apologised,  citing
       change of personnel.

   17. I preserved the following findings of the First-tier Tribunal (the  [
       ] are references to the paragraph numbers  in  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal decision):

           On 20th September 2010 Mr M was convicted of:

                Conspiracy to commit robbery (9 years imprisonment)
                Having a firearm with intent to commit an indictable offence
                (5 years imprisonment to run concurrent)
                Having an imitation firearm with intent to commit indictable
                offence (30 months imprisonment to run concurrent)
                Possessing prohibited weapon (54 months imprisonment to  run
                concurrent)
                Possessing  a  firearm  without  a  certificate  54   months
                imprisonment to run concurrent)
                Possessing  ammunition  without  a  certificate  (33  months
                imprisonment to run concurrent)

           Mr M's overall sentence included at least four years for four of
           the offences of which he was convicted.  He  had  been  detained
           since September 2009; in April  2014  Mr  M  was  released  from
           custody on bail and he, his wife (Ms A) and their son S (date of
           birth 11th September 2002) lived as a family unit since then.

           The SSHD accepts that it is not in the  best  interests  of  the
           child or Ms A to live in Jamaica; the child S has been diagnosed
           with Autism Spectrum Disorder; Ms A runs  a  successful  nursery
           business; the couple were expecting a second  child  (which  has
           now been born although it was not argued before  the  First-tier
           Tribunal that that child had any rights as an 'unborn child').

           The risk of re-offending was very low  ([17],  [21],  [22]);  in
           this particular  case  rehabilitation  is  an  important  factor
           ([23]); the impact of Mr M's deportation  on  S  would  be  very
           significant and damaging; deportation would have  a  significant
           detrimental effect on S's well being both in the short and  long
           term ([24]; [32]); Ms A and the child would highly probably  not
           move to Jamaica [33]; S cannot be expected to move to Jamaica to
           live with his father there  ([33]);  S's  best  interest  are  a
           primary consideration; it is highly important  for  S's  welfare
           that Mr M remains in the UK ([34]); Ms A has a business and  her
           parents in the UK; if Mr M is deported she  will  have  to  look
           after two children  and  her  business([35]);  There  is  strong
           public interest in his deportation tempered by  the  factors  in
           relation to his rehabilitation ([36]).

   18. Mr Mills submitted, in relation to rehabilitation, that [21] per Lord
       Justice Moore-Bick in  Velasquez  Taylor  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  845  was
       relevant:

           "I would certainly  not  wish  to  diminish  the  importance  of
           rehabilitation in itself, but the cases in which it can  make  a
           significant  contribution  to  establishing  compelling  reasons
           sufficient to outweigh the public interest  in  deportation  are
           likely to be rare. The fact that rehabilitation has begun but is
           as yet incomplete has been held in general not to be a  relevant
           factor: see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256 and PF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
           State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 596. Moreover,  as
           was recognised in SU (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State  for  the
           Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 427, rehabilitation is  relevant
           primarily to the reduction in the risk of  re-offending.  It  is
           less relevant to the  other  factors  which  contribute  to  the
           public interest in deportation. In any  event  the  tribunal  in
           this case was clearly aware of the extent to which the appellant
           had rehabilitated herself. It was for the Tribunal to decide how
           much weight should be attached to that."

   19. Mr Mills further submitted that  the  report  of  the  social  worker
       Christine Brown did little  more  than  "state  the  obvious"  -  the
       separation of the child S from his father  was  inevitably  going  to
       cause distress and have a significant impact upon him; there  was  no
       suggestion that Mr M had not been a good father or that it was not in
       the child's (now both children's) best interests for Mr M  to  remain
       in the UK with them as a family.  He  referred  to  the  comments  on
       Christine Brown's report in ZZ (Tanzania) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  596.  He
       referred to S's school reports  which  indicated  that  he  had  good
       computer literacy skills and this would  enable  him  to  communicate
       with his father and that the evidence whilst Mr M had been in  prison
       was that Ms A had been able to look after the  child  adequately  and
       the evidence was that where  Mr  M  had  been  absent  the  necessary
       additional support from extended family had been available. Ms A  was
       plainly a caring and competent mother  and  there  would  be  support
       available from a range of public services including education, social
       services and health. He submitted that overall  the  evidence  simply
       failed to establish either that deportation of Mr M would  be  unduly
       harsh on the child or that there were very  compelling  circumstances
       over and above this. He referred and relied upon KMO (section  117  -
       unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC) and  in  particular  "...
       that the more serious the  offence  committed,  the  greater  is  the
       public interest in deportation of a foreign criminal. Therefore,  the
       word "unduly" in the phrase "unduly harsh" requires consideration  of
       whether, in the light of the seriousness of the offences committed by
       the foreign criminal and the public interest considerations that come
       into play, the impact on  the  child,  children  or  partner  of  the
       foreign  criminal  being  deported  is  inordinately  or  excessively
       harsh."

   20. Mr Mills submitted that in essence the  statutory  requirement  under
       s55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  was  of  similar
       import to the "best  interests  of  the  child"  as  referred  to  in
       established jurisprudence (for example ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC  4,
       Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74); the circumstances and factual matrix of this
       case did not, even if the test were slightly different given one  was
       a statutory requirement and the other  a  policy  consideration  that
       arose  out  of  that   requirement,   reach   the   very   compelling
       circumstances threshold.

   21. Mr Pipe acknowledged that there was no real  difference  between  him
       and Mr Mills as to the high threshold to be met.  He  submitted  that
       the terms of 'welfare of the child', 'best interests' and the test as
       set out in s55 were synonymous but that s55 is a statutory duty.  The
       consideration of the best interests of the child is through the  lens
       of the statutory duty and this was underlined by s71 of the 2014 Act.
       He was anxious not to appear to be submitting that the  oldest  child
       was a "trump card" or that the two children together amounted to that
       although in terms of the factual matrix to be taken into account  and
       assessed  he  submitted  that  the  arrival  of  the  baby  generated
       additional pressure upon Ms A and added additional difficulties for S
       whose  routine  would  be  significantly  disrupted;  this   was   of
       particular significance because of his age (13) and the combined need
       he  has  for  stability,  closeness  to  his  father,   routine   and
       communication. He accepted that the second child had  been  conceived
       at a time when Mr M  had  been  aware  of  possible  deportation.  He
       submitted that the welfare of the children was a  significant  matter
       and, with the other elements in this case,  the  public  interest  in
       deportation was outweighed.

   22. Although S's school report comments very favourably upon  S  being  a
       confident and competent computer user, Mr Pipe  submitted  that  this
       was not the same as being able to communicate - the evidence was that
       S needed physical and face to face contact with his father.  He  drew
       attention to the evidence of the psychiatrist Dr Newth  who  prepared
       an unchallenged report and referred to the child's need for  physical
       contact for example play wrestling before they have  a  serious  talk
       and to S's difficulties speaking over the phone. Dr Newth refers to S
       being at a crucial stage in his development - just starting secondary
       school and that her experience  of  working  with  autistic  spectrum
       children was that puberty and adolescence are particularly  difficult
       for them. She considered there would be a high risk  of  S  suffering
       from depression if his father were deported; although he was able  to
       cope with previous separations  (after  problems  lasting  over  many
       months) he was younger then and the  separations  were  known  to  be
       temporary. This time it would be permanent and S would have  no  hope
       to sustain him. She drew the analogy of the deportation of Mr M  with
       bereavement, and said that it is known that bereavement in  childhood
       can result in a  higher  incidence  of  depression.  She  added  that
       children  on  the  autistic  spectrum  have  a  higher  incidence  of
       psychiatric disorders in any event, so that S is at a  'much  greater
       risk of developing problems' if Mr M were deported. Mr Pipe submitted
       that these factors of the increased possibility of harm to the  child
       elevated the seriousness to  a  level  above  other  cases  involving
       children. This is particularly so given that the usual  methods  that
       could be utilised of attempting to ameliorate that harm (for  example
       facetime, skype, WhatsApp) were a real problem for S.

   23. Mr Pipe did not accept  that  Christine  Brown's  report  was  saying
       substantially what was self evident. He drew attention in  particular
       to her specific assessment of the effects of autism on the child: the
       contact the child had been able to maintain whilst Mr M was in prison
       compared to when he was in  Jamaica  awaiting  entry  clearance;  the
       'triad' of impairments due to autism - difficulty with communication,
       difficulty  with  social  interaction  and  difficulty  with   social
       imagination; that  the  child  was  more  settled  and  content;  the
       importance of consistency, routine  and  familiarity;  the  immediate
       effects on S when Mr  M  went  into  prison  including  bed  wetting,
       headaches and profound manifestation of distress; that when he  could
       see his father rather than talk on the telephone he started to settle
       although this took some considerable time. Although a large  part  of
       the report by Ms Brown is of the generalist nature referred to in  ZZ
       (Tanzania) and could be termed as 'self evident' - all  children  are
       likely to suffer when separated from a parent who plays a significant
       part in their  life  -  she  has  drawn  specific  attention  to  the
       additional problems suffered by S as an autistic child and  the  role
       played by Mr M ameliorating these and assisting the child  in  coping
       with social structures around him. Mr Pipe submitted these add to the
       serious impact on the child's best interests and the  need  for  that
       child to have his father close by.

   24. Mr Pipe relied upon Mr M's rehabilitation,  not  because  it  was  of
       itself highly relevant but because, he submitted, when combined  with
       the other factors it resulted in the very high threshold  being  met.
       The probation officer's  report  referred  to  Mr  M's  risk  of  re-
       offending being 'very low indeed' and the report concludes  that  she
       has "rarely supervised someone with such a high level  of  motivation
       or ability to sustain positive change."

   25. Mr Pipe relied upon the publication "Every Child Matters"  issued  in
       November 2009 that is the statutory guidance to the UK Border  agency
       on making arrangements  to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
       children. This Guidance does not appear to consider specifically  the
       role of the UKBA in consideration of  British  Citizen  children  who
       would be separated  from  one  or  other  parents  in  the  event  of
       deportation; it is aimed more at non  British/non  settled  children.
       Nevertheless, the principles in this guidance apply to  all  children
       and are matters to be taken into account.

   26. Part 1 of the Guidance explains the  duty  to  make  arrangements  to
       safeguard and promote the welfare of children. Paragraph  1.4  refers
       to "preventing impairment of children's health or development  (where
       health means  'physical  or  mental  health'  and  development  means
       'physical,   intellectual,   emotional,   social    or    behavioural
       development')". Paragraph 1.14 identifies a key feature of  a  system
       to safeguard and promote the welfare of individual children  includes
       "Ethnic identity, language, religion, faith, gender  and  disability"
       and  that  "communication  is  according  to  his  or  her  preferred
       communication method or language". Paragraph 1.16 refers to work with
       children and families being "holistic" "building on strengths as well
       as identifying and addressing difficulties", and  in  paragraph  1.17
       refers to 'identifying both strengths  and  difficulties  within  the
       child, his or her family and the context in which they are living  is
       important, as is considering how these factors have an impact on  the
       child's health and development. Working  with  a  child  or  family's
       strengths  becomes  an  important  part  of   a   plan   to   resolve
       difficulties".

   27. Part 2 of the Guidance sets out the role of the UKBA in  relation  to
       safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children. It  refers  (2.6)
       to the status and importance of the UN Convention on  the  Rights  of
       the Child in relation to  children  whilst  the  UKBA  exercises  its
       functions as expressed in domestic legislation and policy.  Paragraph
       2.7 requires disability to be taken into account.

   28. It is plain from the evidence that  the  child  S  will  suffer  very
       considerably from the departure of his father from the  UK.  Although
       there have been two periods of his life when he  has  been  separated
       previously, these have been managed because  of  the  combination  of
       circumstances at that time (including his age, that he did not have a
       younger sibling and because his mother was  able  to  give  him  more
       attention; that there were grandparents available and there was  some
       contact possible that was not restricted to telephone contact and the
       prospect of future 'reconciliation' was a distinct possibility).

   29. As explained in KMO, it is necessary, where making an  assessment  as
       to whether a person meets the requirements of paragraph  399  of  the
       Immigration Rules, to have regard to the seriousness of  the  offence
       committed. The more serious the offence, the greater  is  the  public
       interest in the deportation of the foreign criminal. As already noted
       above it is not sufficient for this appellant to be able to meet  the
       requirements of paragraph 399;  there  have  to  be  very  compelling
       circumstances over and above those criteria. It is  plain,  from  the
       extracts of evidence I have set out above, the extent of the  serious
       effect the deportation of Mr M will have on this child S. It is plain
       that there will be consequences both short and long term for him  and
       that is likely, in turn to impact not only upon Ms A but also on  the
       new baby.  The 'best interests' and the need to safeguard and promote
       the welfare of this child  can  be  seen  to  be  heightened  by  the
       combination of all these factors.

   30. The greater the criminality the more difficult  it  is  to  establish
       that the impact on the child of the deportation of his father will be
       unduly harsh. A foreign criminal with a sentence of imprisonment  for
       12 months with a genuine and subsisting relationship with a seriously
       ill child where the  foreign  criminal's  presence  is  an  important
       element of palliative care and a foreign criminal with a sentence  of
       20 years  for  terrorist  offences  with  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with a child who will miss him represent two ends  of  a
       calibrated scale. Cases are to be  determined  by  reference  to  the
       public interest informed by matters such as the nature and extent  of
       criminal offending, the risk  of  re-offending,  the  need  to  deter
       others from committing crime and the need to protect  the  public  on
       one side of the balance with the specific  needs  and  welfare  of  a
       minor child on  the  other.   The  needs  of  the  many  (the  public
       interest) might not reach the high level of impact for an  individual
       member of society that the consequences (and impact) would have on an
       individual child. Another way of putting this is that few members  of
       society will weep if the foreign criminal is removed  but  the  child
       will weep on  his  departure.  The  specific  child's  interests  and
       welfare  will  have  been  the  subject  of  reports   and   detailed
       consideration and assessment. But sometimes,  where  the  extent  and
       nature of the criminality is sufficiently serious considered together
       with the need to deter others, that child's suffering  is  outweighed
       by the public interest. That is what deportation does.  That  is  the
       nature of the proportionality test in play.

   31. The circumstances of this family  but  taken  in  the  context  of  a
       foreign criminal who has been sentenced to less than four  years  may
       well be sufficient to show that the  impact  of  deportation  on  the
       child would be unduly harsh. Such an appellant may have fallen within
       the Exception. But in this case the nature of  the  criminality,  and
       the length of sentence reflecting that,  is  extremely  serious  -  a
       sentence of 9 years  has  to  be  reflected  and  considered  in  the
       assessment of the deportation decision  and  consideration  given  to
       whether there are other very compelling circumstances over and  above
       what is required to demonstrate that  Mr  M  would  fall  within  the
       statutory  exceptions  to  automatic  deportation,  if   those   were
       available to him which, of course, they are not. It  is  clearly  not
       possible to 'box up' all the circumstances relied upon  and  consider
       them individually. There has to be a holistic assessment not only  of
       the  child's  circumstances  but  the  circumstances  overall.   This
       includes the effect on Ms A, the likely  future  effect  on  the  new
       baby, the effect on the  family  as  a  whole,  economic  and  social
       consequences both  long  and  short  term,  and  also  including  the
       evidence of rehabilitation and the very  strong  positive  statements
       made about Mr M. This has  to  be  set  against  the  very  real  and
       emphatic public interest in  deportation  not  only  because  of  the
       nature of the crime and public revulsion but the length of  sentences
       he received and deterrence. Although it is plainly important that  Mr
       M has been successful in responding to rehabilitative  processes  and
       is to be lauded for that, such process would not have been  necessary
       had he not committed such crimes in the first place.

   32. It has been made abundantly clear in guidance  given  by  the  higher
       courts that the public interest in deportation encompasses  the  need
       for deterrence, the promotion of public confidence in  the  treatment
       of foreign criminals and the need to express  society's  condemnation
       of those who commit serious offences. In N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA
       Civ 1094, Judge LJ (as he then was) said at para 83:

           "83.   The "public good" and  the  "public  interest"  are  wide
           ranging  but  undefined  concepts.  In  my   judgment   (whether
           expressly referred to in any  decision  letter  or  not),  broad
           issues  of  social  cohesion  and  public  confidence   in   the
           administration of the system by which control is exercised  over
           non-British citizens who enter and remain in the United  Kingdom
           are engaged. They include an  element  of  deterrence,  to  non-
           British citizens who are already here, even if they are  genuine
           refugees and to those minded to come, so as to ensure that  they
           clearly understand that whatever the circumstances, one  of  the
           consequences of serious crime may well be deportation ..."

   33. In AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, Pitchford LJ, having  referred  to
       this dicta said at paragraph 24:

           "Deportation in pursuit of  the  legitimate  aim  of  preventing
           crime and disorder  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  seen  as  one-
           dimensional in its  effect.  It  has  the  effect  not  only  of
           removing the risk of re-offending by the deportee  himself,  but
           also of deterring other foreign nationals in a similar position.
           Furthermore, deportation of foreign criminals  preserves  public
           confidence in a system of control whose loss would  itself  tend
           towards crime and disorder."

   34. The importance of these considerations was emphasised in JO  (Uganda)
       v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10, per Richards LJ at paragraph 29:

           "... the factors in favour of expulsion are, in my view, capable
           of carrying greater weight in a deportation case than in a  case
           of ordinary removal. The maintenance  of  effective  immigration
           control is an important matter, but the  protection  of  society
           against serious crime is even more important and can properly be
           given corresponding greater weight  in  the  balancing  exercise
           ..."

   35. The same approach was taken by a  Presidential  panel  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal  in  the  reported  decision  of  Masih  (deportation-public
       interest-basic  principles)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  46  (IAC).   The
       guidance is summarised in the head note as follows:

           "The following basic principles can be derived from the  present
           case law concerning the issue of the public interest in relation
           to the deportation of foreign criminals:

                (a)    In a case of automatic deportation, full account must
                be taken of the strong public interest in  removing  foreign
                citizens convicted of serious offences, which lies not  only
                in the prevention of further offences on  the  part  of  the
                individual  concerned,  but   in   deterring   others   from
                committing them in the first place.

                (b)    Deportation of foreign criminals expresses  society's
                condemnation  of  serious  criminal  activity  and  promotes
                public confidence in the treatment of foreign  citizens  who
                have committed them.

                (c)    The starting-point for assessing  the  facts  of  the
                offence of which an individual has been committed, and their
                effect on others, and on the public as a whole, must be  the
                view taken by the sentencing judge."

   36. As was noted in Richards v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  244  "the  strong
       public interest in deporting foreign criminals is now not merely  the
       policy of the Secretary of State but the judgment of Parliament", and
       [9] of Velasquez Taylor, noted the  emphasis  given  to  this  in  SS
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 256.In LC China v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
       Civ 1310 the Court of Appeal said at para 24

           "...  The  starting  point  for  any  such  assessment  is   the
           recognition  that  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
           criminals is so great that  only  in  exceptional  circumstances
           will it be outweighed by other factors, including the effect  of
           deportation on any children. ... where the person to be deported
           has been sentenced to a term of 4 years' imprisonment  or  more,
           the provisions of paragraph 399 do not apply and accordingly the
           weight to be attached to  the  public  interest  in  deportation
           remains very great despite the factors to which  that  paragraph
           refers ..."

   37. [17] of Velasquez Taylor considers the particular circumstances of an
       appellant whose sentence exceeded four years:

           "... The factors  to  which  the  tribunal  attached  importance
           reflected credit on the appellant, but it is  difficult  to  see
           that  they  amounted  to  exceptional  circumstances   or   very
           compelling reasons of a kind that could  properly  outweigh  the
           public interest in her deportation. Nor do I think that the risk
           to her marriage takes the matter much farther.  Some  indication
           of the kind of circumstances that will meet the requirement  are
           to be found in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules to  which  I
           have referred, but it is to be noted that they do not  apply  in
           the case of a person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a  term  of
           imprisonment of four years or more. The appellant's sentence  in
           this case was considerably longer than that  and  reflected  the
           seriousness  of  her  offence.  The  public  interest   in   her
           deportation was correspondingly heightened. ..."

   38. In so far as the instant case is concerned it can be  seen  from  the
       above that there are  many  factors  weighing  in  favour  of  Mr  M.
       Although he remains on licence and is considered very low risk of re-
       offending, the  fact  remains  that  the  crimes  committed  and  the
       sentences  imposed  result  in  a  heightened  public   interest   in
       deportation. It is not sufficient to succeed that  he  has  a  strong
       case that would (or may) lead to success under paragraph 399 or 399A.
       Factors and circumstances that fall within those Rules or ss117C  (4)
       or (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are simply
       insufficient. Where paragraphs 399 or 399A do not apply  (as  in  the
       case of foreign criminals sentenced to more than 4 years), there have
       to be, in  the  words  of  paragraph  398  of  the  Rules  "...  very
       compelling circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs
       399 and 399A" and in  the  words  of  the  statute  "very  compelling
       circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2".



   39. The impact on the child S falls within an assessment of whether it is
       unduly harsh for him to be separated from his father. The  fact  that
       the evidence is sufficient to satisfy the unduly  harsh  test  to  be
       found in s117C (5) takes the appellant  no  further  at  all  in  the
       assessment to be carried out under paragraph 398 (a foreign  criminal
       sentenced to more than four years imprisonment). Having said that, if
       in any particular case the evidence establishing  that  it  would  be
       unduly harsh does so to  a  significantly  greater  extent,  that  is
       relevant  to  the  assessment  under  paragraph  398  -  because  the
       assessment is of circumstances over and above  what  is  required  to
       meet the s117C(5) Exception.  Even if that  particular  threshold  is
       not met it is still potentially open to some appellants to succeed if
       there are other very compelling circumstances of a different nature.

   40. Mr Pipe was careful to try and identify other such matters and I have
       referred to these above. It cannot  be  however  that  any  of  those
       factors, whether individually or together, amount to very  compelling
       circumstances. The consideration of such circumstances is informed by
       the  seriousness  of  the  offence  and  the   public   interest   in
       deportation. The more serious the  crime,  the  more  heightened  the
       public interest in deportation and the consequent raised bar for very
       compelling circumstances. There will be considerable difficulties for
       Ms A, the new baby, the family as a whole. That Mr M appears to  have
       successfully rehabilitated is laudable but the removal or  diminution
       of a propensity to commit crime cannot amount to  a  very  compelling
       circumstance such as to outweigh the public interest  in  deportation
       which exists  because  of  his  criminal  activity.  The  reason  the
       exception is not open to him is because it is not unduly harsh in the
       context of his criminality and extensive sentence.

   41. In conclusion therefore I find that there is nothing that comes close
       to displacing the public interest arguments. I dismiss the appeal.

  Conclusion

   42. For the reasons given in the error of  law  decision  the  First-tier
       Tribunal decision was set aside.

   43. I substitute a fresh decision dismissing the appeal.


[pic]
     Date 1st December 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
