
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01252/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 February 2014                           |On 28 February 2014          |
|Prepared 18 February 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                         Aziz Jarad AKA ABDULLAH ALI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adewoye, legal representative of Prime
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Morocco born on 20  October  1984  appeals,
    with permission against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (First-
    tier Tribunal Judge J Simpson and Mr B D Yates (legal member)) who in a
    determination promulgated on 9 December 2013 dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 30 May 2013
    to deport the appellant pursuant to the provisions of Section 32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant arrived in Britain illegally in 2001 claiming  asylum  on
    28 June that year.  His application was refused but the  appellant  was
    granted exceptional leave to remain  until  his  18th  birthday  on  20
    October 2002.

3.   On 26 May 2006 the appellant was convicted of two  counts  of  burglary
    and theft and sentenced to 29 months' imprisonment which  was  extended
    to 40 months to include eleven  months  for  an  unexpired  licence  in
    respect of past convictions for burglary and theft.

4.   In May 2008 he was served with a decision to make a  deportation  order
    but his appeal against that decision was allowed on 10 February on  the
    basis that the appellant had not complied with directions.   A  further
    deportation letter was served in December  2010  and  a  letter  giving
    reasons for the refusal of asylum was served  in  April  the  following
    year.  On 27 May 2011 the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  to
    deport was allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR and on 6 September  2011
    he was granted three years' discretionary leave to remain.

5.   On 29 September 2011 the appellant  was  convicted  of  burglary  of  a
    dwelling house and theft from a  supermarket  and  sentenced  to  three
    years' imprisonment.  A further decision to deport  him  was  therefore
    made and it was in those circumstances that this appeal came before the
    First-tier Tribunal in December 2013.

6.   The Tribunal noted the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the fact that that Tribunal had considered that a  critical  aspect  of
    the appeal before them was the appellant's abuse of heroin but that  as
    a result of a prison sentence he had stopped using heroin and had had a
    period of stability and the First Tribunal therefore stated that  there
    was no suggestion the  appellant  posed  any  risk  to  society.   They
    reached that conclusion on the presumption that had the appellant  been
    a risk to society there would have been OASys or NOMS reports but  that
    these had not been forthcoming.  They had stated that the appellant was
    off drugs and that "if he is supported in the community  the  pressures
    that he was under at the time he committed the offences  would  not  be
    present".

7.   The Tribunal, in December 2013 noted the appellant's assertions at  the
    time of the hearing in May 2011 he had not used heroin for a number  of
    years and had stopped taking methadone.  He said that in June  2011  he
    had been arrested and detained for an offence he had not committed  and
    then released without charge and had then reverted  to  abusing  heroin
    which he said had been supplied to him free of charge.  He had  entered
    a community based drugs programme to support him  and  he  had  claimed
    that he had then stopped using heroin and since that time his only drug
    abuse had been when he had smoked cannabis on  two  occasions  when  in
    prison.
8.   The Tribunal noted that the appellant's prison records showed  that  he
    had failed drugs tests in June 2012, September 2012 and  December  2012
    and extra time had therefore been added to his sentence.

9.   In November he had refused to provide  a  sample  for  testing  and  in
    August had been found intoxicated in the prison yard.

10.  They quoted from the NOMS1 report dated January  2013  which  described
    the appellant to be at:-

         "Risk of  further  offending...until  such  time  as  Mr  Ali  (the
         appellant's alias)  engages  in  sincere  efforts  to  address  his
         substance abuse".

    The NOMS report had referred to his bad behaviour in  prison  and  said
    that it was concerned that he had chosen to behave in this way


         "Whilst in the  controlled  environment  of  the  custody  setting.
         Despite maintaining that the index offence did not relate to  funds
         for drug abuse, we can see from his list of adjudications  that  he
         has clearly relapsed back on drug abuse."

11.  The Tribunal therefore rejected that the  appellant  was  no  longer  a
    drug user.  They noted his two latest offences had been of  a  dwelling
    house on 4 September 2011 and theft from Tesco's on 15 September.  They
    noted that a laptop computer, two cameras, a mobile phone and �785  had
    been taken in cash from the house and that the two  offences  had  been
    committed within eleven days of each  other.   They  stated  they  were
    satisfied  that  these  offences  had  been  committed  to   feed   the
    appellant's drug habit.

12.  It appeared to the Tribunal that  the  previous  Tribunal's  assumption
    that the appellant was drug free and posed no  threat  to  society  was
    unfounded and noted that the NOMS report indicated that there had  been
    little improvement.

13.  They considered arguments put forward on behalf of the  appellant  that
    the appellant would face inhuman or degrading treatment because of  his
    mental illness if returned to Morocco and that he would not be assisted
    by the Moroccan government who did not help homeless persons.   It  was
    claimed that the appellant suffered from  PTSD  and  schizophrenia  and
    that if he were removed his support would stop as  would  the  care  he
    received in the United Kingdom.

14.  They noted that there were two  reports  from  a  Dr  Turner  dated  26
    October 2010 and Dr Hajioff dated 13  September  2010,  the  latter  of
    which stating that the appellant was  taking  olanzepine  which  was  a
    major tranquiliser usually prescribed for psychotic conditions such  as
    schizophrenia  and drug induced psychosis.  It could also be used as  a
    calming agent for those who are anxious or restless.

15.  The report had referred to the appellant persistently hearing  "voices"
    which had decreased with medication but had not completely disappeared.



16.  Dr Turner had stated that there was no evidence of symptoms that  could
    be associated with schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, although
    it appeared that the appellant had  active  symptoms  of  a  depressive
    disorder compounded to some degree by the fact that  he  was  still  on
    methadone as a maintenance treatment for his "opiate dependence".

17.  The appellant's medical records dated April 2013 had shown that he  was
    taking nefopam, olanzepine and  paracetamol.   The  Tribunal  commented
    that there was no evidence these were anything other than the  standard
    medications for depression.

18.  Having taken into account a World Health Organisation report  for  2013
    which showed that there were basic health  facilities  in  Morocco  but
    that access might remain difficult for populations with  low  resources
    they noted that the report had said that mental health care was part of
    the primary care system  and  that  therapeutic  drugs  were  generally
    available at the primary health care level of the country.

19.  Having considered the medical reports the Tribunal stated:-

         "We adopt the  findings  of  the  medical  practitioners  that  the
         appellant is not schizophrenic and his condition is well controlled
         by his  current  medication.   We  also  accept  that  health  care
         facilities in Morocco may not be as good or as available as in  the
         UK but that basic medication  required  to  treat  the  appellant's
         conditions are available in Morocco according to  the  WHO  report.
         The appellant adduced no evidence to  contradict  this  conclusion.
         He asserted he has no family support in Morocco  but  accepted  the
         same applies in the UK".

20.  In paragraph 18 they stated:-

         "We conclude there is nothing  exceptional  about  the  appellant's
         circumstances  which   would   make   the   respondent's   decision
         disproportionate and further that the threshold  applicable  to  an
         Article 3 claim is far from reached in this case."

21.  They went on to dismiss the appeal.

22.  The grounds of appeal  on  which  Mr  Adewoye  relied  at  the  hearing
    asserted  that  the  Tribunal  had  adopted  "a  wrong  legal  test  of
    exceptionality" where paragraphs 399 or 399A or 399B  does  not  apply.
    They stated that that approach was contrary  to  the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  "where  it  was
    expressly stated that the new Rules do not create a new legal  test  of
    exceptionality".

23.  The grounds of appeal then appeared to set out  the  factors  which  it
    was considered should be taken into consideration in this appeal. These
    included the fact that the first Tribunal, in 2011, had found that  the
    appellant had no ties in Morocco as he had been away from  there  since
    the age of 11, that he suffered from depression which had  led  him  to
    self-harm on a number of occasions and the fact that he would not  have
    counselling in Morocco which was important for his rehabilitation.   It
    was stated that the WHO report relied upon  did  not  make  mention  of
    availability of counselling.

24.  It was also argued that the Tribunal had not  mentioned  the  issue  of
    self-harm which should have been evident before them and that that  was
    crucial in assessing Article 3 and Article 8 elements of the case.   It
    was argued they should have assessed how the appellant would manage  on
    return without family ties or shelter and suffering from depression and
    being low in resources.

25.  It was argued that the relevant test was that of reasonableness  as  to
    whether or not it would be disproportionate to remove the appellant  in
    "Article 8 mental cases" short of the Article 3 test.

26.  It was emphasised that the Tribunal had  not  considered  the  lack  of
    support the appellant would face in  Morocco  and  that  they  had  not
    properly considered the support available there.

27.  The second ground of appeal similarly argued that the decision  of  the
    panel was against the evidence adduced about the facilities in Morocco.

28.  It was claimed that insufficient consideration had been  given  to  the
    fact the appellant was attending a drug counselling group in prison and
    had not failed a drugs test for almost a year in prison given that  the
    last adjudication was in 2012.  It was argued that there had  not  been
    any consideration of whether or not the appellant was a danger  to  the
    community,   whether  his  deportation  was  conducive  to  the  public
    interest or whether he would reoffend in future and whether or not  his
    Article 8 rights outweighed the public  interest  in  his  deportation.
    The final sentence of the  grounds  stated  "it  is  accepted  that  he
    committed an offence and falls under the automatic deportation criteria
    but that is not enough to justify deportation".

29.  At the beginning of  the  hearing  Mr  Adewoye  stated  there  were  no
    further reports regarding the appellant's  mental  or  physical  health
    although he did refer to the medical notes from the  prison  which  had
    been in the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.

30.  He relied on the application for permission  emphasising  the  Tribunal
    had applied an "exceptionality" test and  that  this  was  against  the
    decision in MF.  Although, in the Rule  24  statement  which  had  been
    served by the respondent it was argued that for the appellant not to be
    deported there would have to be some exceptional factor he referred  to
    paragraph 14 of the judgment in MF and  stated  that  the  decision  to
    deport  the  appellant  was  so  unjustifiably  harsh   that   it   was
    disproportionate.


31.  He referred back to the determination of the  First  Tribunal  who  had
    set out factors which they considered to be  important  and  which  had
    led to their decision to allow the appeal.  These included the  reports
    of Dr Hajioff and the evidence given to him by the appellant  regarding
    the appellant's attempt to self-harm since childhood and the  overdoses
    that he had taken in prison and the claim that he  had  once  tried  to
    hang himself.  Dr Hajioff had diagnosed the appellant as depressed  and
    had prescribed antipsychotic medication.

32.  He had also noted the appellant's history of abuse in Morocco  and  his
    attempts to leave Morocco with his brother.  Moreover that Tribunal had
    stated that only 30% of the population had access to medical  insurance
    and the system was unequal and that figures for those employed  in  the
    mental health field were unsatisfactory.

33.  Mr Adewoye went on to refer to the  World  Health  Organisation  report
    and stated it was evidence that this had not been  properly  considered
    by the Tribunal.

34.  He argued that there were clear exceptional factors  in  any  event  in
    this case given the fact that the appellant had  been  out  of  Morocco
    since the age of 11 and the difficulties he would have in attempting to
    live a normal life there.

35.  He stated that the appellant  would  not  have  available  to  him  the
    olanzepine which he is receiving here.

36.  He argued that the Tribunal had not properly considered the  issues  of
    self-harm nor had they properly considered the risk of  reoffending  or
    the lack of support which the appellant would receive in Morocco.

37.  He emphasised that there was a lack of facilities for the appellant  in
    Morocco.

38.  While he accepted that there was a high threshold  for  a  Tribunal  to
    conclude that there were exceptional  circumstances  which  would  mean
    that an appellant should not be deported he referred to the Immigration
    Directorate Instructions Chapter 13 which gave "criminality guidance in
    Article 8 ECHR cases".  They stated that  "exceptional"  did  not  mean
    "unusual" or "unique".   Moreover  a  case  was  not  exceptional  just
    because exceptions to deportation in Rules 399 and 399A had been missed
    by a small  margin.   The  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  said
    "'exceptional' mean circumstances in which deportation would result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences of an individual or their family  such
    that it would not be proportionate."

39.  The Immigration Directorate Instructions set out a  number  of  factors
    to be considered which included the  circumstances  around  a  person's
    entry to Britain, exceptional cultural or  legal  factors  which  would
    prevent or severely limit a person from enjoying private life in  their
    country of origin and difficulties in communication.  Moreover  factors
    could be taken into account on a cumulative basis.

40.  Mr Adewoye stated that he gave room for consideration of the health  of
    the appellant and facilities in Morocco.

41.  He again emphasised that the findings of the Tribunal were contrary  to
    those of the First Tribunal and asserted that they had disregarded  the
    WHO report.  They had, in effect, applied too stringent a test.

42.  In reply Mr Walker relied on the Section 24 response which stated  that
    the Tribunal had considered all relevant facts  before  them  and  made
    cogent findings and that their decision was well  reasoned,  sound  and
    sustainable.  They had  taken  account  all  factors  weighing  in  the
    appellant's favour including the medical  evidence  and  correctly  had
    found that it was out of date.  Moreover, the response referred to  the
    judgment  in  MF  (Nigeria)  which  stated  that  the  Rules  expressly
    contemplated a weighing of the public interest to  deportation  against
    "other factors" and that those must be a  reference  to  the  issue  of
    proportionality.  It was not a case that the test of exceptionality  is
    being applied rather it was a question of whether or not removal was  a
    proportionate response and that the  scales  were  heavily  weighed  in
    favour of deportation and therefore something  very  compelling,  which
    would be "exceptional" is required to outweigh the public  interest  in
    removal.  The term "exceptional" should be used to denote  a  departure
    from the Rule and the general Rule was that set out in  paragraphs  399
    and 399A and therefore very compelling reasons  would  be  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.  Those compelling  reasons
    were "exceptional circumstances".  It was argued therefore that the new
    Rules were a complete code and that the exceptional circumstances to be
    considered in the balancing exercise involved  the  application  for  a
    proportionality test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence.

43.   It  was  therefore  argued  that  the  Tribunal  had   not   used   an
    "exceptionality test" but had properly considered all relevant  factors
    in this case.

44.  Mr Walker went on to state  the  panel  had  correctly  considered  the
    appellant had continued to abuse drugs and had carried on stealing.  He
    referred to the terms of the NOMS report.

45.  He stated that the medical evidence produced was out  of  date  and  in
    any  event  the  Tribunal  had  found  that  the  appellant   was   not
    schizophrenic.  They had considered the medical  support  available  in
    Morocco and indeed there was nothing to say that drugs similar to those
    which the appellant was or had taken would not be available in Morocco.
     It was clear, he argued, that the Tribunal had  used  the  appropriate
    proportionality test.

46.  In reply Mr Adewoye  emphasised  that  reoffending  was  not  the  only
    consideration that should  be  taken  into  account  and  set  out  the
    mitigating factors which had led to the appellant to commit theft after
    the last hearing before the First Tribunal.


Discussion

47.  In determining  this  appeal  I   have  considered  in  particular  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF and the correct approach  to  the
    issue of Article 8 rights set out in that judgment.  Having  emphasised
    that the first step was to decide whether deportation be contrary to an
    individual's  Article  8  rights  on  the  grounds  that  fell   within
    paragraphs 398 and 399A, in paragraph 36 the reference  to  exceptional
    circumstances,   which  would  mean  that  the   public   interest   in
    deportation should be outweighed by  other  factors,   was  considered.
    Having noted the recognition by the European Court of Human Rights that
    States were entitled to  decide  that  there  is  generally  compelling
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals reference  was  made  to
    the proportionality test which is demanded by Article 8.

48.  It was emphasised that the new Rules do not  herald  a  restoration  of
    the exceptionality test and it was stated that  that  it  was  relevant
    that all factors relating  to  proportionality  should  be  taken  into
    account.  In paragraph 44 of the  judgment  the  Master  of  the  Rolls
    states:-

         "We would, therefore, hold that the new Rules are a  complete  code
         and that the exceptional circumstances  to  be  considered  in  the
         balancing exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality
         test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence."

49.  he went on to say:-

         "45. Even if we were wrong about that  it  would  be  necessary  to
             apply a proportionality test outside the new Rules as was done
             by the UT.  Either way, the result should  be  the  same.   In
             these circumstances, it is a sterile question whether this  is
             required by the new Rules  or  it  is  a  requirement  of  the
             general law.  What matters  is  that  it  is  required  to  be
             carried out if paragraphs 399 or 399A do not apply."

50.  I have considered the determination of the Tribunal.   The  reality  is
    that the Tribunal, having noted the appellant's immigration history and
    his criminal activities stated that it was relevant  that  despite  the
    faith placed on the appellant by the First Tribunal the  appellant  had
    gone on to reoffend.

51.  They noted that the only issue was  whether  or  not  the  decision  to
    deport was in breach of the  appellant's  rights  under  Article  3  or
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

52.  They considered at very considerable  length  the  appellant's  medical
    history and noted indeed that the medical reports were not recent.

53.  They took into account however the reports of Dr Turner and Dr  Hajioff
    and noted that the appellant's latest medication records showed that in
    April 2013 he was taking nefopam,  olanzepine  and  paracetamol.   They
    correctly stated there was no evidence that these were  anything  other
    than standard medication for depression.
54.  They then went on to consider the World Health Organisation report  for
    2013 and the medical facilities in Morocco.  They set out at length the
    drugs which were available.

55.  There was nothing before them to lead them to  the  conclusion,  as  Mr
    Adewoye would have us believe that the drugs which the appellant is now
    taking or their equivalents would not be available to the appellant  in
    Morocco.  They stated that they adopted the  findings  of  the  medical
    practitioners that the appellant was not  schizophrenic  and  that  his
    condition  was  well  controlled  on  his  current  medication.    They
    considered the fact that the appellant would not have family support in
    Morocco but noted that, of course, he had no family support here.

56.  What they stated in paragraph 18 was that they  concluded  that  "there
    is nothing exceptional about the appellant's circumstances which  would
    make the respondent's decision disproportionate and  further  that  the
    threshold applicable to an Article 3 claim is far from reached in  this
    case".  That sentence does not imply  that  they  were  importing  into
    their   consideration   of    the    appellant's    circumstances    an
    "exceptionality" test.  They had weighed up all relevant factors.   The
    relevant factors in this case are those to which they had  referred  in
    the determination.  The appellant is an overstayer.  He has committed a
    series of thefts and has certainly in the past shown  an  addiction  to
    drugs.  There is a link between the two.  They found that the appellant
    was not schizophrenic but there are drugs available for him in Morocco.
     While he has no family to whom he can turn there he similarly  has  no
    family here.  Weighing up  all  these  factors  the  Tribunal,  clearly
    mindful of the provisions in paragraphs 398 and 399 of the  Rules  and,
    although they did not specifically refer to it, although they  referred
    to the NMS report, they were clearly aware  of the public  interest  in
    the deportation of  criminals  reached  a  conclusion  that  there  was
    nothing in this case which would mean that the removal of the appellant
    would be disproportionate and therefore that his removal  would  be  in
    breach of his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  As is pointed out in
    the judgment in MF if there were such  disproportionate  factors  these
    would lead to it being found that this was an exceptional case.

57.  I therefore find that the Tribunal made no material  error  of  law  in
    their determination and that therefore their decision  dismissing  this
    deportation appeal on immigration and human rights grounds shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

