
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01437/2014
     AA/04362/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 March 2016                              |On 13 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    R M M
                                     P M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, HOPO
For the Respondents:   Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by A J Paterson
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, the Secretary of State, has been granted  permission  to
    appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Scott  allowing  the
    appeals of the respondents on asylum and human rights (Article 3 of the
    ECHR) grounds.

2.   The respondents are citizens of Sri Lanka born on [  ]  1968  and  [  ]
    1979.  They are husband and wife and have three children together  aged
    between 7 and 10.  The two oldest children were born in Sri  Lanka  and
    the youngest child was born in France.  All three children are  present
    in the United Kingdom where they live with  their  mother,  the  second
    respondent.

3.   The first respondent's appeal  was  against  an  automatic  deportation
    order made against him on 2 July 2014.  The second respondent's  appeal
    was against the refusal of her asylum  claim  on  6  June  2014  and  a
    decision made to remove her and the children from the United Kingdom.

4.   The facts in these cases are rather complicated.  However, the  salient
    facts are that the first respondent arrived in the UK  on  12  November
    1994 and claimed asylum under the name of [DA].  His asylum  claim  was
    refused and his appeal was dismissed on 22 January 1999.

5.   On 20 March 2003 the  second  respondent  and  the  first  respondent's
    brother, [M], got engaged.

6.   In October 2003 the first respondent returned to Sri Lanka.   [M]  then
    persuaded the  second  respondent  to  marry  his  brother,  the  first
    respondent, instead of him because of [M]'s duties in the LTTE.  On  20
    October  2003  the  respondents  contracted  a  religious  marriage  in
    Colombo.

7.   On 13 November 2003 the first respondent was detained by  the  security
    forces on suspicion of assisting the LTTE.   He  was  also  accused  of
    being involved in the recent killing of a member of the EPDP.   He  was
    tortured by being suspended, asphyxiated with a plastic bag  containing
    petrol, subjected to simulated drowning, subjected to electric  shocks,
    beaten on his back and the soles of his  feet  (falaka)  and  cut  with
    blades.  He was detained for about a  week  in  very  poor  conditions.
    Then, after being forced to sign blank pieces of paper, he  was  handed
    over to the EPDP and driven into a forest where he was accused again of
    killing an EPDP member.  He was beaten unconscious and left  for  dead.
    He was found by a passer-by and taken to  hospital.   Fearing  that  he
    would be reported to the police, he  contacted  his  uncle,  discharged
    himself from the hospital and went to stay with a friend who helped him
    to obtain private medical treatment.

8.   At the end of March 2004 the first respondent  was  again  detained  by
    the security forces and  handed  over  to  the  anti-terror  branch  on
    suspicion of assisting the LTTE.   He  was  again  tortured  by  having
    objects pushed under his toenail, being subjected to freezing water and
    ice and being struck about the head, including across the bridge of his
    nose.  He was bailed in May 2004 after payment of bribes.  In June 2004
    he jumped bail, left Sri Lanka and returned to the UK.

9.   The second respondent, who was then pregnant, remained  in  Sri  Lanka.
    She and [M] allowed people to assume that they  were  married  to  each
    other.  On [ ] 2004 the respondent's first child, [L] was born  in  Sri
    Lanka. On 17 September 2004 the first  respondent  contracted  a  civil
    marriage with a Portuguese national in the UK.  On 3 December  2004  he
    was granted an EEA residence permit on the basis of that marriage.   He
    travelled to India to meet the second respondent in March 2005 and  the
    second respondent became pregnant with their second child, who was born
    on in Sri Lanka on [ ] 2006.  On 28 April 2006, the  second  respondent
    was detailed, along with the children by the security forces  who  were
    looking for [M].  She was  tortured  and  raped  multiple  times.   She
    managed to escape in October or November 2006 when  the  LTTE  attacked
    the camp where she was being held.  She left  Sri  Lanka  and  went  to
    France on 19 December  2006.   The  first  respondent  visited  her  in
    France. She became pregnant with their third child.   He  was  born  in
    France on [ ] 2008.  The second respondent arrived in the UK on 1 March
    2010 where was reunited with the first respondent.  On  3  March  2010,
    the second respondent made a postal application for asylum through  her
    solicitors.

10.  The respondents feared persecution by the Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
    light of the country guidance decision of GJ and Others (Sri Lanka)  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  It  was  also  their  contention  that  their
    removal would also be a breach of Article 3 of the  ECHR  because  they
    are both at serious risk of suicide following  torture  in  Sri  Lanka.
    Furthermore removal would not be in the best interests of the children,
    as the respondents would not be fit to look after them because of their
    very poor mental health and no alternative arrangements for their  care
    are available.

11.  The judge failed to consider the  position  of  the  respondents  under
    Article 8 with particular  reference  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.   This  was  because  he  had  allowed  the  appeals  of  the
    respondents on asylum grounds and Article 3 of the ECHR.

12.  Mr Mackenzie accepted that the judge should have dealt with  Article  8
    and whether the three children could return  to  Sri  Lanka  when  both
    parents had mental health problems.  He submitted, and I  agreed,  that
    this ground would be arguable if I  found  that  the  judge's  decision
    allowing the respondents' appeals on asylum grounds and  Article  3  of
    the ECHR was flawed.

13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson granted the  appellants  permission
    as follows:

         "In relation to the Appellants' asylum claims, it is  submitted  in
         ground  one,  at  paragraphs  2-13,  that  the   Judge   materially
         misdirected himself in law and failed to give adequate reasons  for
         findings  on  material  matters  because  he  failed  to  take  the
         credibility findings of the Tribunal that assessed  A1's  claim  in
         1999 as the starting point for his assessment and failed to  engage
         with the matters set out in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  in
         relation to the assessment of A2's claim.  Whilst it is likely that
         there is significant new evidence in A1's claim which  enabled  the
         Judge to go behind the findings of the first  Tribunal,  the  Judge
         has made no mention of the first Tribunal's findings and this point
         is therefore arguable.  Similarly, whilst there may be good  reason
         for finding A2's account credible on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
         before him, the Judge does not engage with the  reasons  given  for
         refusal or A2's asylum claim or give reasons  for  as  to  why  the
         evidence before him answered the Respondent's case.  These  grounds
         are therefore arguable.


         At paras 28-36  of  the  grounds,  the  Respondent  challenges  the
         Judge's assessment of the Appellants' appeals under Article 3.   It
         is not the case, as asserted in the grounds, that the Judge  failed
         to have regard to the healthcare available in Sri Lanka.  He  heard
         evidence  on  it  from  Professor  Katona  (at  para  17)  and  the
         likelihood of both appellants accessing treatment in Sri Lanka from
         both Professor Katona and Dr Singh  (at  paras  12-17  and  32-42).
         However, it is arguable that the Judge  gave  insufficient  reasons
         for his finding that the  evidence  before  him  reached  the  high
         threshold for engagement of Article 3 on  medical  grounds  in  the
         light of N v UK and the absence of evidence as to family members in
         Sri Lanka."


14.  Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds save for three amendments which  were
    highlighted in Mr Mackenzie's Rule 24 response.

15.  At paragraph 12 of the appellant's  grounds,  it  was  submitted  that,
    like the first respondent, the second respondent  sought  asylum  after
    being informed of proposed removal action.  Mr  Whitwell  acceded  that
    this was incorrect and that the second respondent  had  claimed  asylum
    two days after her entry into the UK as stated at paragraph 23  of  the
    Rule 24 response.  He also submitted that it was incorrect as stated in
    paragraph 13 of their grounds that the second respondent had a previous
    appeal which had been dismissed.  Rather it was  the  first  respondent
    whose previous appeal had been  dismissed.   Thirdly,  the  grounds  at
    paragraph 28 said that the first respondent would have  family  support
    available in Sri Lanka.  This was incorrect as he does not have  family
    in Sri Lanka.

16.  Mr Whitwell proceeded to challenge the judge's findings in  respect  of
    the first respondent's credibility.  He said it is common  ground  that
    the starting point for the judge's  assessment  should  have  been  the
    credibility findings of the Tribunal of the first  respondent's  asylum
    claim in 1998.  The Tribunal found that there were  inconsistencies  as
    to the respondent's place of detention and date of  detention,  whether
    or not it was his  sister  or  sister-in-law  who  was  killed  by  the
    security forces, had embellished his evidence in respect of  a  signing
    on condition imposed  on  him  n  September  1994  and  the  particular
    incident when his business was  raided.   Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that
    although the first respondent's current fear stems  from  events  after
    his  return  to  Sri  Lanka  in  2002/2003,  that  the   judge   should
    nevertheless have considered the findings made by the previous Tribunal
    as his starting point.

17.  In respect of Judge Scott's  determination,  Mr  Whitwell  acknowledged
    that the judge made a number of positive findings based on the  account
    given to Dr Arnold in 2011.  However the judge's disregard of the  past
    evidence must have an effect on the  remainder  of  his  findings.   Mr
    Whitwell further submitted that the judge did not take into account the
    delay by the first respondent in claiming asylum.  The first respondent
    returned to Sri Lanka in October 2003.   He  made  an  entry  clearance
    application for  a  family  visit  which  did  not  sit  well  with  an
    application he made on 6 July 2009 for indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the UK based on the claim that he had been living and working in the UK
    for fourteen years.  He then obtained a residence card on the basis  of
    his marriage to an EEA national.  He then returned to Sri  Lanka  where
    he fathered two children and engaged in a marriage  ceremony  with  the
    second respondent.  Mr Whitwell submitted that all these factors have a
    bearing on the determination of the first respondent's case  which  the
    judge failed to consider.

18.  I accept  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  first
    respondent's delay in claiming asylum.   Mr  Mackenzie  submitted  that
    there was no need for him to claim asylum because he  had  a  residence
    card.  Whilst there is some validity to that argument, the  submissions
    made by  Mr  Whitwell  showed  that  the  first  respondent  was  being
    deceitful in his actions.  First, he applied for leave to enter the  UK
    on a family visit.  Whilst here, he made an application on the basis of
    fourteen years' long residence which was clearly  dishonest  given  the
    fact that there had been a break in his residence from October 2003  to
    June 2004, when he had been in Sri Lanka.  During the currency  of  his
    residence card, he continued to  maintain  his  relationship  with  the
    second respondent which led to the birth  of  their  second  child.   I
    accept  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  these  factors  in  his
    assessment of the first respondent's case.  It is not  clear  from  the
    determination that these matters were drawn to the judge's attention by
    the  HOPO  below  as  adversely  affecting   the   first   respondent's
    credibility.  I also note that Mr. Whitwell's arguments  did  not  form
    part  of  the  grounds  upon  which  the  Secretary  of  State   sought
    permission.  In any event I am of the view that these matters would not
    have undermined the  judge's  findings  on  the  core  issues  of  this
    particular claim.

19.  I accept that the judge did not use the previous determination  as  the
    starting point.  I do not find that the error  is  material.   This  is
    because the previous decision, which was made in 1999, was in  relation
    to the first respondent's experiences in Sri Lanka in 1989 to 1994.   I
    agreed with Mr Mackenzie's submission that  by  contrast,  the  judge's
    finding related to the first  respondent's  experiences  following  his
    return to Sri Lanka in 2003, as to which the 1999  determination  could
    have had no direct bearing.  In any event the judge was  aware  of  the
    circumstances in which the first  respondent  claimed  asylum  for  the
    second time,  which  he  set  out  in  a  detailed  chronology  in  his
    determination.

20.  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  grapple  with  the
    credibility points  made  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letters.   He
    challenged  the  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  54  that  the  second
    respondent would be on a "stop list" and that she falls into  the  risk
    category identified at 7(d) of GJ.  He  submitted  that  there  was  no
    reference to an arrest warrant or court order for the second respondent
    for her to be on a "stop list".

21.  He further submitted that the Secretary of State's Reasons for  Refusal
    Letters in respect of both respondents stated that  certain  medication
    was available in Sri Lanka, albeit there was a limited  medical  system
    in place.  Mr Whitwell submitted that given the prevalence of  evidence
    on this issue by the appellant, the  judge  did  not  explain  why  the
    evidence before him reached the threshold of N.  He submitted  that  if
    the last sentence of paragraph 62 is taken out, the judge's findings at
    paragraph 62 do not reach  the  high  threshold  of  N.   In  the  last
    sentence of paragraph 62 the judge said that he  has  also  taken  into
    account the fact that he has found their fears  of  persecution  to  be
    objectively justified.  This was not relevant to his  findings  to  his
    findings on their medical claims.

Findings

22.  I find that the appellant's arguments do not show an error of law.

23.  In respect of the first respondent, I find that the judge gave  reasons
    for finding that there would be an outstanding warrant for his  arrest.
    He found that the first respondent had been detailed  and  tortured  in
    2003 and 2004 not only on suspicion of helping the LTTE,  but  also  on
    suspicion of being implicated in the killing of EPDP  member.   He  had
    jumped bail after paying a bribe.  The  judge  had  the  benefit  of  a
    medical  report  from  Dr.  Arnold,  who  identified   numerous   scars
    attributable to torture, most of which were  attributed  by  the  first
    respondent to tortured suffered after returning to Sri Lanka in 2003.

24.  In the case of the second respondent, the judge found that there  is  a
    real risk that her name too will feature on a "stop  list".   This  was
    because of her real and perceived connection with  Manoharan,  a  known
    senior LTTE member, and her escape from detention, for which  there  is
    reasonably likely to be continuing adverse  interest  in  her,  as  her
    detention and  torture  occurred  after  the  end  of  the  civil  war.
    Consequently, I find that the judge was entitled to conclude  that  she
    too fell into risk category 7(d) of GJ.

25   I accept Mr. Mackenzie's submission that the judge  had  a  significant
    amount of medical and other evidence before him,  as  well  as  a  very
    lengthy and detailed statement by the second respondent which  he  said
    at paragraph 49 made "compelling and convincing reading on its own".  A
    scarring report by Dr Soon Lim identified numerous  burns  from  heated
    iron rods and lighted cigarettes, regarded by Dr Lim as  diagnostic  of
    ill-treatment, as well as numerous  other  scars  regarded  by  him  as
    consistent with  the  second  respondent's  account.   The  substantial
    psychiatric evidence supported the view that the second respondent  had
    suffered extensive and grievous torture. I  find  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to give all that evidence such weight  as  he  reasonably  saw
    fit.

26.  I find that in the light of the medical evidence that was  before  him,
    the judge's decision to allow the respondents'  appeals  on  Article  3
    EHCR grounds discloses no error of law.

27.  Professor Katona, Consultant Psychiatrist,  prepared  four  reports  on
    the first  respondent.   He  diagnosed  the  first  respondent  with  a
    psychotic illness, most likely to be schizophrenia.   The  judge  noted
    that in his latest reports Dr Katona had  maintained  various  opinions
    which included the opinion that without the help and support  which  he
    currently receives, there would be a  significant  risk  of  the  first
    appellant behaving aggressively towards his wife, as he  did  in  April
    2011 during a  period  of  severe  mental  deterioration  with  clearly
    adverse consequences for his wife and children.  He  was  also  of  the
    opinion that if returned to Sri Lanka the first respondent would be  at
    a high risk of suicide.  Professor Katona also gave  oral  evidence  in
    which he confirmed his view that the  first  respondent  was  suffering
    from schizophrenia.  He pointed out that  the  appellant's  country  of
    origin information  made  no  reference  to  schizophrenia  or  to  the
    medication which is available in the United Kingdom.

28.  The judge also heard evidence from Ms [A]  who  said  she  acts  as  an
    informal carer for the first respondent.   She  has  seen  the  serious
    adverse effects on him of not taking his tablets  at  the  right  time.
    She has heard him express the intention of killing himself if  he  were
    to be returned to Sri Lanka.  Ms [A] was concerned that  if  the  first
    respondent and his wife were sent back together, they would not be able
    to support each other because of their mental illnesses.  She was  even
    more concerned for their children.  His wife would not be able to  help
    him because she is mentally ill herself.

29.  The evidence with regard to the second  respondent  was  that  she  was
    detained, tortured and raped in Sri Lanka.  Her helper is Mrs  [G]  who
    assists with domestic tasks.  Mrs [G] oversees her  medication  regime,
    checking that she takes the right amounts  at  the  right  times.   She
    lives with the children separately from the first respondent who  lives
    nearby, but visits them every day now that his schizophrenia  is  under
    control.  She has also expressed that she would prefer to kill  herself
    rather than seek psychiatric treatment  in  Sri  Lanka.   She  has  the
    "tiger stripe" scars on her back from torture which would be discovered
    if she were to be stopped and questioned on arrival.

30.  The respondent's bundle contained a letter  from  a  Sri  Lankan  human
    rights lawyer, Mr Gangatharan, who stated that he was  contacted  by  a
    friend of [M] in November 2009 and asked to find  out  why  the  second
    respondent had been detained on her return to Sri Lanka from  Malaysia.
    He contacted the terrorist investigation department on 5 November  2009
    and was told that she was being detained "due to suspicion of terrorist
    activities".  He called them again on 7 November 2009 and was told that
    she was deemed to be "the wife of a senior LTTE leader" (that is  [M]).
    Mr Gangatharan was denied access to her and was unable to progress  the
    case.  He was later told that the second  respondent  had  been  handed
    over to the EPDP and had fled the country.

31.  The judge also heard from Dr Mala Singh, a Consultant Psychiatrist  who
    adopted her three medical reports relating to  the  second  respondent.
    She diagnosed the second respondent as suffering from PTSD  and  severe
    depression with psychotic symptoms.  If removed to Sri Lanka her mental
    state would deteriorate significantly and lead to an increased risk  of
    suicide.  Dr Singh expressly considered whether the  second  respondent
    might be fabricating or manufacturing her symptoms but  concluded  that
    she was not.

32.  The judge also noted that the children have their own social worker.

33.  In the light of the evidence the  judge  found  that  both  respondents
    suffer from serious mental illnesses which require  special  treatment,
    as well as carer's support on a daily basis,  all  of  which  they  are
    currently receiving in the United Kingdom.  If returned  to  Sri  Lanka
    they will not seek treatment, for the reasons explained by him and even
    if they did, it is very unlikely that the appropriate  treatment  would
    be available to them.  They would have  no  one  to  support  them  and
    supervise their adherence to any drug regime.  They would not  be  able
    to support and help each other because they  are  both  seriously  ill.
    The results would be a serious deterioration in their conditions.  They
    already both present a high risk of suicide on return.  I find that  in
    all the circumstances the judge was entitled to find that this was  one
    of those rare or exceptional cases in which  the  very  high  threshold
    established in the case of N v United Kingdom is reached and  that  the
    appeals fall to be allowed also under Article 3 of the ECHR in  respect
    of their mental conditions.

34.  I find in light of the  judge's  acceptance  of  the  evidence  of  the
    respondents and in the  light  of  the  significant  amount  of  cogent
    medical evidence that was before the judge, he made findings that  were
    properly reasoned and properly open to him.  His decision discloses  no
    error of law.

35.  Consequently, I find that  it  was  not  necessary  for  the  judge  to
    consider the Article 8 ECHR claims of the respondents.

Notice of Decision

36.  The judge's decision allowing the  appeals  of  the  respondents  shall
    stand.





Signed                                  Date: 6 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

