
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01628/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2014                                |On 28th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                             Mr Bazadi Mohammadi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E King
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Bazadi Mohammadi against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thanki  sitting  with  Mrs  L.R.  Schmitt,  a  non-legal
    member, promulgated  on  17  April  2014  whereby  they  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to make  a
    deportation order pursuant to the automatic deportation  provisions  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. On 7 October 2012 the appellant was sentenced at St Albans Crown  Court
    by His Honour Judge Plumstead to four and a half years' imprisonment on
    a plea for an offence under Section 18  of  the  Offences  against  the
    Person Act 1861, namely wounding with intent.

 3. The circumstances of the offence, which are set out in paragraph 30  of
    the Determination and Reasons,  involved  a  sustained  attack  by  the
    appellant on the victim with a bottle which the appellant then broke in
    order to slash at the victim's face.

 4. The background facts are that the appellant is a citizen of  Iran.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in August 2006 and upon arrest on arrival
    claimed asylum.  His claim for asylum was refused on  18  October  2006
    but he was granted limited leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and
    then granted indefinite leave to remain  in  August  2010  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. Within about twelve months, he was then arraigned and sentenced  at  St
    Albans Crown Court, as we have said,  for  wounding  with  intent.  The
    judge must have regarded this an offence  of  considerable  seriousness
    since his sentence starting point was in excess of 4.5 years.

 6. The appellant was served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to  automatic
    deportation on 14 December 2011.  His solicitors then wrote in  January
    2013 claiming that  deportation  would  be  a  breach  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and Article 8 ECHR.

 7. Following a screening interview on  30  May  2013,  the  appellant  was
    served with a notice of decision under Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007. A deportation order was made on 17 July 2013.

 8. The appellant claimed in his submissions and evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal that he would be at risk  if  he  was  returned  to  Iran
    because of his father's activity in  Iran  on  behalf  of  the  Kurdish
    community and his  fear  of  persecution  on  the  basis  of  political
    opinions imputed to him, the appellant.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the appellant's various  claims  under
    the Refugee Convention, the Immigration Rules, humanitarian protection,
    Article 3 and Article 8 of the ECHR.



Credibility

10. Before us today the appeal is put by Ms King on behalf of the appellant
    on two grounds.  The  first  relates  to  the  Tribunal's  findings  on
    credibility. She submits that, on analysis, the Tribunal's findings  on
    credibility were tainted by 'errors of law' as she put it.  She  relied
    primarily on the grounds of appeal prepared by her predecessor in  this
    case.

11. First, she criticised the fact that the Tribunal had used as a starting
    point on credibility their finding  that  the  appellant's  failure  to
    claim asylum in France in the course of his travel from Iran via Turkey
    through France to the United Kingdom.  The Tribunal said  in  paragraph
    35: "His  failure  to  claim  asylum  in  France  damages  his  overall
    credibility."

12. Ms King submitted that this was a 'pivotal'  finding  by  the  Tribunal
    which was (a) an inappropriate starting point, and (b) not justified on
    the evidence.

13. She submitted that the appellant was a minor aged 17 when he engaged in
    this journey to the United Kingdom, and secondly that he  had  been  in
    the control of an agent, and would have been travelling with an  agent.
    The evidence, however, suggests otherwise. In his  statement  dated  13
    September 2006 the appellant states that his relatives "found an  agent
    who arranged my journey to Turkey" and the agent was paid monies by his
    relatives. He said he left Iran in July 2006, travelled  to  Turkey  by
    foot, then he was put on a bus to Istanbul  and,  after  staying  in  a
    flat, was hidden in the back of a lorry and changed  lorries  twice  to
    the United Kingdom. It  is  far  from  clear  that  the  appellant  was
    travelling with an agent. The appellant gave  an  explanation  for  not
    having claimed asylum en route but that explanation was not in terms of
    having been under the control of an agent. His screening interview  was
    not relied upon.

14. We have also considered  his  deportation  questionnaire  in  which  he
    answered the question "what was the  reason  for  your  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom?" With the answer "to have a better life for myself." In
    our judgment, it  was  plainly  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    conclude that his failure to claim asylum in France damaged his overall
    credibility.

15. The second point made by Ms King was  a  criticism  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reliance on the fact that the  appellant's  uncles  in  Iran
    remained unhindered, as did his mother and sisters by the  authorities.
    Regarding this issue the Tribunal said as follows:

         "37. However, the fact remains that his two uncles remain  in  Iran
             unhindered as do his mother and  sisters.  The  appellant  has
             said that he is in danger because he is perceived by the State
             as a sympathiser, if not an activist, for the Kurdish cause in
             Iran. That is so just because he is his father's  son.  He  is
             not involved in  the  Kurdish  cause.  We  therefore  find  it
             incredible that his paternal uncle, despite being the father's
             brother, is left alone by the State to lead his  life  without
             hindrance. Similarly, other members of his family.   The  fact
             that the appellant can now name the political party his father
             belonged to does not enhance his case."



16. The latter reference  is  a  reference  to  the  fact  that,  when  the
    appellant first came to the United  Kingdom  in  2006,  he  was  unable
    apparently even to identify what cause his father was identified with.

17. Ms King submits that what distinguishes the appellant from  his  uncles
    is the fact that the appellant was travelling in a car with his  father
    when he says Iranian guards recognised the car containing men who  were
    guerrilla fighters. His father told the men to get out of the  car  and
    drove back to the village. Armed guards then arrived and  arrested  his
    father. However,  in  his  witness  statement  of  September  2006  the
    appellant said that "I was in the backyard and when I saw the  soldiers
    I climbed the wall and ran away." The appellant's statement  then  goes
    on to say that whilst he was hiding:

         "My mother sent me a message not  to  return  home  as  the  police
         wanted to arrest  me  too.  As  my  father  was  believed  to  have
         committed a wrongdoing it followed that I too would be punished  as
         a male member of his family."

18. What is instructive about the appellant's own statement is he does  not
    say at any stage that the police recognised him in the car or knew  who
    he was, or when  the  police  came  to  the  house  that  they  saw  or
    recognised him prior to him making his escape. It is also telling  that
    his mother's message was not that  the  police  wanted  to  arrest  him
    because they had seen him in the  car  with  his  father.  Indeed,  the
    appellant says in terms that the only reason he was  being  sought  was
    because his father had committed a wrongdoing and "it followed  that  I
    too would be punished as a male member of the family."

19. It is therefore unsurprising that, that the First-tier Tribunal came to
    consider that they did an this  issue.  They  used  the  logic  of  the
    appellant's own case and asked themselves the question: why was it that
    two uncles in Iran and his mother and sisters all remained  unhindered?
    In our judgment, the First-tier Tribunal were entitled to conclude that
    they found it incredible that the appellant's paternal  uncle,  despite
    being the father's brother, was left alone by the  state  to  lead  his
    life without hindrance and similarly other members of  the  family,  if
    indeed the story told by the appellant was true.

20. The third point that Ms King made was the criticism of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's finding at paragraph 39 of  the  Determination  and  Reasons
    that the claim that the security services visited the family home every
    six months seeking the appellant was "not based on  any  evidence,  not
    even to  [the]  lower  standard  as  required  in  asylum  cases."  She
    submitted that there was evidence of this from the  appellant  himself.
    It is clear, however, that what the Tribunal  were  essentially  saying
    was that there was no independent evidence of a visit every six  months
    by the security services seeking the  appellant.  There  is  a  further
    point which is that if indeed the security services  visit  the  family
    home every six months why was it that they did not arrest the uncles or
    anybody  else  in  the  family?  Given  the  vestigial  nature  of  the
    appellant's case as far as the Tribunal were concerned thus far, it was
    open to them to consider that independent  evidence  of  this  sort  of
    assertion was desirable if they were to be persuaded of the appellant's
    asylum case.  It is also worth noting that in paragraph 39  the  First-
    tier Tribunal found as follows: "There is no evidence  before  us  that
    the appellant is a member of any of the proscribed Kurdish groups."

21. We are satisfied that the findings of the Tribunal in paragraphs 35  to
    39 of the Determination and Reasons were justified and their conclusion
    on this aspect of the case in paragraph 40  of  the  Determination  and
    Reasons is unimpeachable: "We do not find the appellant has  discharged
    the burden upon him that he is  a  refugee  on  the  basis  of  imputed
    political opinion."

22. Ms King went on to criticise the Tribunal's reliance on the appellant's
    questionnaire to which we have referred  and  his  illuminating  answer
    that the reason for coming to the United Kingdom was "to have a  better
    life for myself." She submitted that this was not inconsistent  with  a
    claim for asylum and it was 'unfair, unjustified and inappropriate' for
    the First-tier Tribunal to have relied upon it as a significant feature
    going to  credibility.  It  is  apparent  from  the  structure  of  the
    Determination and Reasons, however, that the Tribunal  only  relied  on
    the questionnaire as comfort or support for a conclusion which they had
    already  reached.  The  reference  to  the  questionnaire  appears   in
    paragraph 40 of the Determination and Reasons after  they  had  reached
    the conclusion cited above that the appellant had failed  to  discharge
    his burden of proof.

23. We mention one  further  point  on  this  aspect  which  is  Ms  King's
    submission that the findings by the Tribunal as to, for  instance,  the
    uncles' position went to plausibility but not credibility.  In  a  case
    such as this plausibility and credibility often meld into  one  general
    factual issue as to whether or not  an  appellant  has  discharged  the
    burden upon them of proving that they are at risk. The more implausible
    the story, the more incredible the storytellers' version of events.



Risk of Re-offending

24. The second aspect of the appeal related to the risk of reoffending.  Ms
    King criticised the First-tier Tribunal's reliance on the risk  of  the
    appellant reoffending. She relied on a psychiatrist's report which puts
    the risk of reoffending as low to moderate under the  VRAG  scale.  The
    OASys Report put the appellant's "likelihood of serious harm to others"
    as medium in relation to the public and medium in relation to  a  known
    adult.

25. However, as the Tribunal correctly  observed,  having  cited  Maslov  v
    Austria [2008] ECHR [GC] 1638/03, whether the risk of  reoffending  was
    assessed as low or medium was not of itself of great significance given
    the seriousness of this offence and the fact that paragraph 398 of  the
    Immigration Rules applied.

26. The Tribunal also referred correctly to Gurung v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    62 which explains that the risk of reoffending is not the ultimate  aim
    of  the  deportation  regime.   The  automatic  deportation  regime  in
    relation to those who have committed serious criminal offences in  this
    country has other desiderata in mind, in particular the concern of  the
    public and deterrent to those  from  abroad  who  might  come  to  this
    country and then commit serious criminal offences.

27. The fact of the matter is  that  a  Section  18  offence  attracting  a
    sentence of imprisonment of four and a half years after plea is by  any
    stretch of the imagination a serious offence.  Whether or not the  risk
    of reoffending was low, low to medium or medium would not have affected
    the end result or conclusion.

28. The Tribunal's conclusion at paragraph 48 is unimpeachable:

         "48. He has lived in Iran up until the age of 17  and  lawfully  in
             the UK until his incarceration in 2011 for 4.5 years.  He  has
             no family in the UK but has an economic  interest  in  running
             his business as a barber which was  established  in  the  full
             knowledge that he was subject to deportation.

         49.  We come to the conclusion in our proportionality analysis that
             the balance is  in  favour  of  the  respondent  removing  the
             appellant form the UK.  We  give  significant  weight  to  the
             nature of this offence and find that his private  life  rights
             do not tip the balance in his favour.

         50.  After careful consideration of the appellant's case we do  not
             perceive any circumstance which can be seen as an exception to
             the  deportation  as  a  result  of  his   criminality.    The
             appellant's position is not exceptional.  The  deportation  of
             the appellant is a proportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR."

29. For all those reasons  there  is  nothing  in  this  appeal,  which  is
    dismissed. We do not think that permission to appeal should  have  been
    granted in the first place. The decision  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    plainly did not involve any error of law.






Signed                                  Date 21st July 2014


Mr Justice Haddon-Cave

