
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01785/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 27th February 2014                         |on 11th April 2014           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S X L
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mr Price instructed by Corbin & Hassan Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Y J  Jones  and
        Mr M E Olszewski (hereinafter referred to as ' the Panel')  who  in
        determination promulgated on 4th November 2013 allowed SXL's appeal
        against the order for his deportation from the United Kingdom.



Background


     2. SXL is a citizen of China born in November  1977.  He  entered  the
        United Kingdom in July 2004 illegally and applied  for  asylum.  He
        was provided with the necessary forms to complete and  released  on
        condition he reported monthly although he failed  to  complete  the
        necessary paperwork or to report.  On 13th August 2004  his  asylum
        claim was refused on non-compliance grounds against which there was
        no appeal.


     3. On 18th November 2009 Anglo-Chinese Lawyers LLP  applied  on  SXL's
        behalf for leave to remain  under  the  ECHR  and  legacy  casework
        programme.


     4. Following an exchange of correspondence between  the  Secretary  of
        State and the lawyers, SXL attended an  asylum  interview  arranged
        for 28th February 2011.  On 9th March 2011  his  asylum  claim  was
        refused although on 10th March 2011 he  was  granted  discretionary
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom for three  years  until  20th
        March 2014.


     5. On 18th November 2010 SXL committed an  offence  of  production  of
        Class B controlled drugs, Cannabis. On 18  April  2011  he  pleaded
        guilty to the offence although on the 12th May 2011 he  claimed  he
        was not guilty through his counsel who, for  professional  reasons,
        had to withdraw as a result. Further  representation  was  arranged
        and as there had been no formal application to vacate  the  earlier
        plea he was sentenced on the basis of his guilty plea to 21  months
        imprisonment.


     6. On 14th June 2011 SXL was informed of his liability  for  automatic
        deportation.   Following  his  response  on  26th  March  2012   he
        undertook a screening interview and on 30th March  2012  a  further
        asylum interview after which, on 19th August  2013,  a  deportation
        order was made against him.


     7. The basis of the appeal against the deportation order is  that  SXL
        claims his deportation will breach his right to family life in  the
        United Kingdom because his partner is a  refugee  from  China  with
        refugee status valid until 4th November 2013. They have been  in  a
        relationship since 2007 and  have  two  sons  born  in  the  United
        Kingdom in 2008 and 2009, who have leave to  remain  in  line  with
        their mother.  The family life will be disrupted and their right to
        family life breached as his partner and the children  will  not  be
        able to go with him if he was deported to China.


     8. Having considered the evidence the Panel  set  out  their  findings
        from paragraph 28 of the determination. A summary of  the  relevant
        findings is as follows:


              i.  Mr  Price  conceded  that  SXL  is  subject  to  automatic
   deportation.                     Paragraph 398(b) applies to SXL and  his
   deportation is conducive to               the  public  good.   The  Panel
   considered paragraphs 399 and 399A of                   the  Rules  which
   were said not to apply to SXL [29].


              ii. In relation to the asylum claim - a  number  of  different
   discrepancies                were noted  in  SXL's  evidence.  The  Panel
   concluded that because  of                  his  discrepant  evidence  in
   respect of his claimed membership of the               CDP his claim  was
   not    credible    at    any    level    and    that    he     had     no
   involvement with the CDP in China or in the UK [35].


              iii.     SXL has established a family life in the UK with  his
   partner and                      biological children  although  this  has
   been established in the period                 he  has  been  in  the  UK
   without leave [38].


              iv. The Secretary of State accepts that the decision to deport
   amounted                to in an interference with his  family  life  and
   that it was unreasonable                  to expect the two  children  to
   return with SXL to China [39].  The                issue in the  case  is
   one of proportionality [40].


              v.  The offence is serious and in no way should be condoned or
                       minimised [41].   Maslov  v  Austria  considered  the
   approach to  be                    taken  by  national  authorities  when
   considering the deportation of                a foreign national  on  the
   grounds that his presence  constitutes  a                 danger  to  the
   community [41].


              vi. SXL was convicted of the production  of  cannabis  with  a
   value of                approximately �40,000.   This  was  an  organised
   crime involving other                 perpetrators. He has a few previous
   convictions for non-related                   offences [41 (i)].


              vii.     SXL spent the majority of his life in China  and  was
   in the UK                    unlawfully until granted discretionary leave
   to remain in 2011,                    apparently  on  the  basis  of  his
   partners refugee status, as did their                  two  children  who
   could not be removed from the UK [41 (ii)].


              viii.    There is no evidence of any "bad behaviour" since the
   arrest and                   detention and no assessment in  relation  to
   his risk of reoffending [41               (iii)].


              ix. SXL, his partner, and two children reside in a flat  above
   a named                 restaurant in a town in South Wales leased by his
   partner.  The                    children attend school in that town  and
   SXL and his partner work in               the restaurant [41 (v)].


              x.  The offence had  not  been  committed  when  SXL  and  his
   partner                      started their relationship  [41  (vi)].  The
   children are aged four and                five [41 (vii)].


              xi. In relation to the best  interests  of  the  children  the
   Panel found as                   follows:


                  "the best interests and  well-being  of  the  children  is
   served by                    remaining in the UK. The children were  both
   born in the UK and               have been brought up  in  the  UK.  They
   both attend school and  are                 learning  English  in  school
   although their first language  is  Mandarin.                   They  have
   never   lived   in   China.    The   One   Child   Policy    exists    in
   China and  the  evidence  in  the  Country  Information  Report  is  that
     either both or at least one of the children will not receive  education
              and/or medical assistance in China because the appellant has a
   son                 already living in China.  The children will remain in
   the UK with                  their mother.  We have had regard to section
   55 of the Borders and                 Citizenship Act 2009  and  consider
   that  the  welfare  of  the  children  is  a                    paramount
   consideration.    Although     the     crime     committed     by     the
   appellant is serious bearing in mind the  case  law  in  respect  of  the
     children and the appellant's partner in  this  case  it  would  not  be
          proportionate to deport the appellant and break up his family  for
   the                 foreseeable future" [41 (xi)].


              xii.     The Panel find that they are in no doubt that  it  is
   in the best interest                  of  the  children  to  have  direct
   physical contact with their father as he               is  concerned  and
   involved and is  building  a  relationship  with  them                and
   focusing on their best interests.    The  children  are  most  likely  to
     be further affected if their father is again removed from  their  lives
          such    as when he was imprisoned [44].


              xiii.    Taking all relevant matters  into  consideration  and
   balancing  them                    is  a  delicate  matter,  society   is
   entitled to express its revulsion against                   the  criminal
   offending,  but  it  is  not  reasonable   to   expect   the   wife   and
   children to return to China, it would not be in the best interests of the
                  children to be separated from their father,  his  presence
   has a positive                   impact on their lives, if he was removed
   to China communication                would have to be by  telephone,  e-
   mail and Skype and the children               are too young to partake in
   this type of  communication  effectively                  which  will  be
   wholly   unsatisfactory    and    not    in    their    best    interests
   [45].  As a result the decision to deport SXL  is  not  proportionate  to
          the legitimate aim  achieved.  His  criminal  activities  and  the
   adverse                 effect that his deportation  would  have  on  his
   partner and children                  make this a particular case, one of
   those cases, where the public                      interest in  deporting
   SXL is outweighed by  the  established  family  life                 that
   exists.  The  fact  he  was  granted  discretionary  leave   until   2014
   after he committed the offences was also considered [46].



Error of law


     9. There is no cross-appeal challenging the Panel's findings regarding
        the dismissal of the asylum claim or any of the protection grounds.
        The only issue before the Upper Tribunal  relates  to  whether  the
        finding  of  the   Panel   that   the   decision   to   deport   is
        disproportionate is infected by any material legal error.


    10. Permission to appeal was granted as it was considered arguable  the
        Panel erred in failing to consider the provisions of part 13 of the
        Immigration  Rules  of  which  no  reference   is   made   in   the
        determination, arguably erred by applying the reasoning  in  Maslov
        given SXL entered the United Kingdom in 2004 aged 27 and hence  had
        not spent the majority of his youth  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
        failed to consider the reasoning in SS (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
        550.


    11. In relation to the reference to SS (Nigeria) I note in the list  of
        cases the Panel state they specifically referred to,  at  paragraph
        28 of the determination, there is no reference to this authority.


    12. In paragraph 2 of the determination the Panel state the following:


              2.  This appeal is under section 82 and 92  of  the  2002  Act
   against the                  respondent's  decision  that  the  appellant
   does not fall within any of                the  exceptions  to  automatic
   deportation under section 33 UK Borders                Act 2007.


    13. Whilst the Secretary of State did not  consider  on  the  available
        evidence that SXL  is  able  to  rely  on  any  of  the  exceptions
        contained within the  Borders  Act,  the  decision  being  appealed
        against, the relevant  immigration  decision,  is  the  deportation
        order made because the Secretary of State has a statutory  duty  to
        make such an order.  If a person against  whom  an  order  is  made
        believes they can satisfy one of the exceptions the burden is  upon
        them to prove that this  is  so,  subject  to  the  normal  caveats
        regarding the burden of proof.


    14. A reading of the determination shows the Panel considered  all  the
        relevant facts but it is not clear they considered  the  Article  8
        element of this case properly, for example, the grant of permission
        to appeal refers to Part 13 of the Immigration Rules of which there
        is little mention in the determination other than at paragraph 29.


    15. A lot of case law relating to Article 8 and  deportation  has  been
        decided in relation to cases heard prior to 9th July 2002 when  the
        current  version  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was  introduced.  An
        important case arising from that time is that of Masih (deportation
        -  public  interest  -  basic  principles) Pakistan [2012]  UKUT
        00046(IAC) which is referred to by the panel in paragraph 28 of the
        determination.  In that case the Tribunal  said  that  so  long  as
        account is taken of the following basic  principles,  there  is  at
        present no need for further citation of  authority  on  the  public
        interest side  of  the  balancing  exercise.  The  following  basic
        principles can be derived from the present case law concerning  the
        issue of the public interest in  relation  to  the  deportation  of
        foreign criminals: (i) In a case  of  automatic  deportation,  full
        account must be taken of the strong  public  interest  in  removing
        foreign citizens convicted of serious offences, which lies not only
        in the prevention of further offences on the part of the individual
        concerned, but in deterring others  from  committing  them  in  the
        first  place.  (ii)  Deportation  of  foreign  criminals  expresses
        society's condemnation of serious criminal  activity  and  promotes
        public confidence in the treatment of  foreign  citizens  who  have
        committed them. (iii)  The starting-point for assessing  the  facts
        of the offence of which an individual has been committed, and their
        effect on others, and on the public as a whole, must  be  the  view
        taken by the sentencing judge. (iv)  The appeal  has  to  be  dealt
        with on the basis of the situation at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
        (v) Full account should also be taken of  any  developments  since
        sentence was passed, for example the  result  of  any  disciplinary
        adjudications in prison or  detention,  or  any  OASys  or  licence
        report.


    16. There have also been a number of cases in which the Court of Appeal
        has considered the weight that should  be  given  to  an  order  to
        deport  an  individual  made  under   the   automatic   deportation
        provisions, the most important  of  which  is  SS(Nigeria)  v  SSHD
        [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550  which  has  been  confirmed  in  subsequent
        decisions of the  Court.  In  that  case  the  appellant  had  been
        sentenced to 3 years for dealing drugs. He appealed relying on  the
        best interests of his children. The Court of Appeal  said  that  in
        previous cases in which  potential  deportees  raise  claims  under
        Article  8  relying  on  the  children's   interests   insufficient
        attention had been paid to the weight attached  to  the  policy  of
        deporting foreign criminals which came  from  primary  legislation.
        The deportation was upheld.


    17. In the determination under consideration there is no mention of the
        principles   arising   from   SS   (Nigeria)   or    an    adequate
        findings/explanation for why the need to maintain this family  unit
        warrants greater weight being attached to them  than  the  need  to
        deport arising from a policy contained in primary legislation.  The
        Panel seem to have devoted a lot  of  time  to  the  arguments  put
        forward on behalf of SXL without appearing to have  paid  the  same
        level of attention to those relied upon by the Secretary of  State,
        notwithstanding reference in  the  determination  to  some  of  the
        elements they were required to consider.


    18. The Grounds criticise the  Panel  for  relying  on  Maslov.   Under
        Article 8 ECHR jurisprudence  -  for  a  settled  migrant  who  has
        lawfully spent all or the major part of his or  her  childhood  and
        youth in [this]  country  very  serious  reasons  are  required  to
        justify expulsion -  and  the  principles  derived  from  Maslov  v
        Austria [2008] ECHR 546 are still be applied. The criticism that as
        SXL  does  not  fit  into  this  category  the  Panel   misdirected
        themselves in law  is  correct  although  any  such  error  is  not
        material, for  in  Boultif  v  Switzerland  [2001]  ECHR  54273  as
        confirmed by Uner v the Netherlands [2007] Imm  AR  303  the  Court
        said that in order to  assess  whether  an  expulsion  measure  was
        necessary  in  a  democratic  society  and  proportionate  to   the
        legitimate  aim  pursued,  the  following  criteria   had   to   be
        considered.


          (i) The nature and the seriousness of the offence committed by the
      Appellant;
          (ii)     The length of the Appellant's stay in  the  country  from
      which he or she was       to be expelled;
          (iii)    The time that had elapsed since the offence was committed
      and the               claimant's conduct during that period.
          (iv)     The nationalities of the various parties concerned;
          (v) The Appellant's family situation, such as length  of  marriage
      and  other         factors  expressing  the   effectiveness   of   the
      Appellant's family life;
          (vi)     Whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time  he
      or she entered        into the family relationship;
          (vii)    Whether there are children in  the  marriage  and  if  so
      their ages;
          (viii)The seriousness and the difficulties  which  the  Spouse  is
      likely to encounter       in the country of the Appellant's origin;
          (ix)     The best interests and well being of any children of  the
      Appellant;  and  in          particular   the   seriousness   of   any
      difficulties that they would  be  likely  to        encounter  in  the
      country to which the Appellant would be expelled;
          (x)  The solidity of social, cultural and  family  ties  with  the
      host country and          with the country of destination.


    19. These are the criteria the Panel considered  by  reference  to  the
        Maslov assessment.


    20. The Panel found that the determinative factor was the fact that  if
        SXL was deported  the  family  unit  will  be  broken  up  but,  as
        recognised by the Court of Appeal in AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA  Civ
        348, Sedley LJ said "the tragic consequence is that this  family...
        Would  be  broken  up  forever,  because  of  the  appellant's  bad
        behaviour. That is what deportation does."


    21. The fact the best interests of the children are to be brought up in
        a complete family unit is not challenged  but  such  interests  are
        only one element of the proportionality  equation,  albeit  a  very
        important one. They are not in themselves determinative.


    22. There is  however  a  more  fundamental  structural  error  in  the
        determination.  Although the panel, in paragraph  28,  mention  the
        case of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 they  do  not  appear  to
        have given adequate consideration to the  principles  arising  from
        the judgement of this and later cases  in  which  the  relationship
        between Article 8 and the Immigration Rules has been discussed such
        as Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  and  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
        Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, as confirmed by Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate
        aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).


    23. In MF (Nigeria) the Master of the Rolls indicated  that  where  the
        "new rules" (in force from 9 July 2012)  apply  (in  a  deportation
        case), the "first step that has  to  be  undertaken  is  to  decide
        whether deportation would be contrary to an individual's article  8
        rights on the grounds that (i) the case falls within para  398  (b)
        or (c) and (ii) one or more of the conditions set out in  para  399
        (a) or (b) or para 399A (a) or (b)  applies.   If  the  case  falls
        within para 398 (b) or (c) and one  or  more  of  those  conditions
        applies, then the new rules  implicitly  provide  that  deportation
        would be contrary to article 8" (paragraph 35, underlining  added).
        Paragraphs 399 and 399A can  be  thought  of  as  setting  out  the
        exceptions to deportation (see paragraph 14).


    24. In this case SXL has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
        less than four years but at least 12 months. Paragraph 398 states:


         398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
contrary to the UK's            obligations under Article  8  of  the  Human
Rights Convention, and

              (a)      the deportation of the person from the UK is
conducive to the public good                 because they have been
convicted of an offence for which they have been
sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
              (b)      the deportation of the person from the UK is
conducive to the public good                 because they have been
convicted of an offence for which they have been
sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
                  months; or
              (c)      the deportation of the person from the UK is
conducive to the public good                 because, in the view of the
Secretary of State, their offending has caused                 serious harm
or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular
disregard for the law,

              the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
whether paragraph 399           or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  it
will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances              that  the  public
interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors.



    25. Paragraph 399 states:

         399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
applies if -

              (a)      the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
relationship with a child               under the age of 18 years who is  in
the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or
                  (ii)     the child has lived in the UK continuously for
at least the 7 years                    immediately preceding the date of
the immigration decision; and in                      either case


                       (a)      it would not be reasonable to expect the
child to leave the UK;                           and
                       (b)      there is no other family member who is able
to care for the child                        in the UK; or

              (b)      the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
with a partner who is               in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
settled in the UK, or in  the  UK  with                   refugee  leave  or
humanitarian protection, and

                  (i)  the person has lived  in  the  UK  with  valid  leave
continuously for  at                      least  the  15  years  immediately
preceding  the  date   of   the   immigration                       decision
(discounting any period of imprisonment); and
                  (ii)     there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
life with that partner                       continuing outside the UK.



    26. And 399A:


         399A.     This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
applies if -

              (a)      the person has lived continuously in the UK for at
least 20 years                      immediately preceding the date of the
immigration decision (discounting                any period of
imprisonment) and he has no ties (including social, cultural
or family) with the country to which he would have to go if required to
              leave the UK; or
              (b)      the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at
least half of his life living                continuously in the UK
immediately preceding the date of the immigration                  decision
(discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties
(including social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would
              have to go if required to leave the UK.



    27. In paragraph 29 of the determination the Panel state that they have
        considered paragraphs 399 and 399A but that they do  not  apply  to
        SXL. It is not clear what the Panel  mean  by  such  a  comment  as
        clearly because the  sentence  SXL  received  is  one  specifically
        referred to in 398 (b) the above two paragraphs  of  the  Rules  do
        apply.  It can only be construed that what the Panel are saying  in
        paragraph 29 is that although the Rules  do  apply  to  SXL  he  is
        unable to satisfy  either  of  them.   This  is  not  a  matter  of
        semantics for if he is unable to satisfy the requirements of 399 or
        399A paragraph  398  makes  it  clear  that  it  will  only  be  in
        exceptional circumstances that the public interest  in  deportation
        will be outweighed by other factors.


    28. I find that the Panel  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  follow  the
        guidance provided in MF (Nigeria)  and  related  case  law  and  in
        failing to properly consider  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
        Rules so far as they relate to deportation  provisions  which  they
        were legally obliged to do. It is a structural failing  to  dismiss
        the Rules in the way the Panel did in paragraph 29 and proceeded to
        undertake a freestanding Article 8 assessment in  the  manner  they
        were undertaken prior to the introduction of the current version of
        the Immigration Rules without reference to those provisions.


    29. The question this Tribunal considered with  the  advocates  at  the
        hearing is whether that error is material in light of the  findings
        made by the Panel.


    30. As stated, the Panel should  have  considered  whether  there  were
        circumstances that meant the  public  interest  in  deportation  is
        outweighed by other factors particular to  SXL  and/or  his  family
        which is, in effect, a proportionality assessment.  In MF (Nigeria)
        the main issue concerned the position when the appellant could  not
        succeed substantively under paragraphs 398 or 399 of the rules on a
        deportation and the determinative question  is  whether  there  are
        "exceptional  circumstances"  such  that  the  public  interest  in
        deportation is outweighed by other factors (paragraph  398  of  the
        new rules).  Here the Court accepted a submission for the SSHD that
        "the reference to exceptional circumstances serves the  purpose  of
        emphasising that, in the balancing exercise, great weight should be
        given to the public interest in deporting foreign criminals who  do
        not satisfy paras 398 and 399 or 399A.   It is  only  exceptionally
        that such foreign criminals will  succeed  in  showing  that  their
        rights under article  8(1)  trump  the  public  interest  in  their
        deportation" (paragraphs 39 and 40).  The Court went on to say: "In
        our view, [this] is not to say that a  test  of  exceptionality  is
        being applied.  Rather it is that, in approaching the  question  of
        whether  removal  is   a   proportionate   interference   with   an
        individual's article 8 rights, the scales are heavily  weighted  in
        favour of deportation and something very compelling (which will  be
        "exceptional") is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
        removal" (paragraph 42).  Although the  Court  disagreed  with  the
        Upper Tribunal in MF's case on the question of  form,  it  did  not
        disagree in substance (paragraphs 44 and 50).  It differed from the
        UT in considering that the rules did mandate or direct  a  decision
        maker to take all relevant criteria into  account  (paragraph  44).
        Accordingly, the new rules applicable to deportation  cases  should
        be seen as "a complete code ... the exceptional circumstances to be
        considered in the balancing exercise involve the application  of  a
        proportionality test as required by the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence"
        (ibid).   "Even if we were wrong about that, it would be  necessary
        to apply a proportionality test outside the new rules as  was  done
        by the UT.   Either way, the result should be the same".  What  the
        Court said about the test of "insurmountable obstacles" can be seen
        as obiter but it did say that if that  means  "literally  obstacles
        which it is impossible to surmount, their  scope  is  very  limited
        indeed.  We shall confine ourselves to saying that  we  incline  to
        the view that, for the reasons stated in detail by the UT in Izuazu
        [[2013] UKUT 00045] at paras 53 to 59, such  a  stringent  approach
        would be contrary to article 8".


    31. In Kabia (MF: para 298 -  "exceptional  circumstances")  2013  UKUT
        00569 (IAC) it was held (i) The new rules  relating  to  article  8
        claims advanced by foreign criminals seeking to resist  deportation
        are a  complete  code  and  the  exceptional  circumstances  to  be
        considered in the balancing exercise involve the application  of  a
        proportionality test as required by the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence:
        MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
        EWCA Civ 1192 at para 43; (ii) The question being  addressed  by  a
        decision maker applying the new rules set out at paragraph  398  of
        HC 395 in considering a claim founded upon article 8  of  the  ECHR
        and that being addressed by the judge  who  carries  out  what  was
        referred to in MF (Article 8 - New Rules) Nigeria [2012]  UKUT  393
        (IAC) as the second step in a two-stage process  is  the  same  one
        that, properly executed, will return the same answer; (iii) The new
        rules speak of "exceptional circumstances" but, as  has  been  made
        clear by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria), exceptionality  is  a
        likely characteristic of a claim that properly succeeds rather than
        a legal test to be  met.   In  this  context,  "exceptional"  means
        circumstances in which deportation would  result  in  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the individual or their family such  that  a
        deportation would not be proportionate".


    32. The use of the word  exceptional  circumstances  in  some  respects
        mirrors the weight to be given to the public interest as recognised
        in SS (Nigeria). The key question for this Tribunal to consider  is
        whether  there  are  circumstances  in  this  case  in  which   the
        deportation would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
        SXL  and  his  family  such  that  the  deportation  would  not  be
        proportionate.


    33. In this respect Mr Price admitted that SXL and his partner work  in
        the same business which enables them to resolve  childcare  issues.
        SXL plays a role in the day-to-day care of  the  children  and  the
        family are supported by the business.  It was submitted that if  he
        was not available there will be nobody to care for the children and
        that the business could suffer; although he accepted  that  if  the
        business did fail the children and their mother  will  be  able  to
        rely upon state support and she will be available to care for them.


    34. The difficulty with the findings of the Panel is that they seem  to
        have found that it was the separation of this family unit  and  the
        fact that SXL would not be able to play the role that  he  does  in
        his children's lives that justified the  finding  that  they  made.
        There was insufficient evidence before the Panel that  if  SXL  was
        deported this family would "fall apart" as it has no doubt  had  to
        manage  in  the  past  during  periods  of  imprisonment  or  other
        separation.  Insufficient evidence was provided to  show  that  the
        children's mother is not  capable  of  meeting  the  emotional  and
        physical needs  of  the  children  and  a  finding  that  the  best
        interests of the children will be to remain with  their  mother  in
        the United Kingdom is correct.  If SXL was removed it has not  been
        proved that alternative childcare or other arrangements  could  not
        be made.  It has not been established  on  the  evidence  that  the
        effect of his removal would mean that the  business  had  to  close
        down or, if it did, that the children would suffer consequences  of
        economic hardship or deprivation.


    35. In relation to relationship issues and the  emotional  consequences
        of SXL's removal, there is insufficient evidence to show that  this
        would have a profound effect upon the children such as to establish
        unjustifiably harsh consequences.


    36. SXL was granted a period of leave in line with that of his  partner
        but the making of the deportation order  arises  from  a  statutory
        obligation  and  such  a  grant  does  not  create   a   legitimate
        expectation that SXL cannot be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom.
        The offence for which he was convicted was not a low level  offence
        but part of a commercial production of cannabis for which  SXL  was
        assessed by the sentencing judge on the evidence as having the role
        of a "farmer" as a result of which he was sentenced to a period  of
        imprisonment and for which the Judge referred to the likelihood  of
        his deportation from the United Kingdom.


    37. Although the consequences of removal will be  the  breaking  up  of
        this family and the fact that the children will have to be  brought
        up  by  their  mother,  in  assessing  whether  the   decision   is
        proportionate it is necessary to consider  the  provisions  of  the
        Immigration Rules as they are now drafted which reflect  ECHR  case
        law and the UK's Convention obligations.


    38. I find the Panel materially erred in law. Had they  considered  all
        relevant matters it may be arguable that  their  decision  was  not
        susceptible to challenge however generous it may be seen to  be  by
        the Secretary of State, but they did not.  I find the Panel did not
        provide adequate reasons to support their findings that it  is  not
        proportionate all the circumstances for SXL to be deported in light
        of the nature of the offence and the deterrent element which is  an
        important part of the public interest argument in relation to  this
        automatic deportation case.


    39. I set the determination aside although the immigration history  and
        findings relating to the existence of family and private life shall
        be preserved findings.


    40. Having considered the evidence and submissions made by Mr Price,  I
        find that it has not been established that should  SXL  be  removed
        from the United Kingdom it  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
        consequences for him or his family such that his deportation is not
        proportionate.  I accept there may be resultant hardship  and  some
        adverse consequences but it has not been established that they  are
        sufficient to justify this appeal being allowed.


Decision

    41. The First-tier Tribunal Panel materially erred in law. I set  aside
        their decision. I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal  is
        dismissed.




   Anonymity.


    42. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10th April 2014












