
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01507/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 September 2014                          |On 14 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        VIJAYAKARAN TISSAWEERASINGAM

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Seehra, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a Sri Lankan national, born on 3 March 1979.  He  seeks
    to appeal a decision made by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department on 15 July 2013 that he be deported from the United  Kingdom
    as a foreign criminal, he having been convicted on 17 March 2010 of two
    counts  of  theft,  and  sentenced  to  a  total  of   twelve   months'
    imprisonment.

2.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision on the  basis  that
    to remove him from the  United  Kingdom  would  be  in  breach  of  his
    fundamental human rights.

3.   That appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Elliman  and  Dr
    Okitikpi (non-legal member) for  hearing on 9 June  2014.   The  appeal
    was allowed.

4.   The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  sought  to  challenge
    that decision on the basis that the panel was in  error  in  concluding
    that there were exceptional circumstances in the case such as to permit
    the appeal to  be  allowed.   It  was  contended  that  there  were  no
    identifiable or exceptional circumstances in this particular  case  and
    that the panel, therefore, was in error in finding such a route  as  to
    overturn the deportation decision that had been made.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on a  somewhat  different  basis  that
    the test of  whether  the  claimant  was  "constantly  and  unceasingly
    engaged in criminal activity" was not a proper test to  be  applied  in
    the circumstances of the case.

6.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

7.   The claimant came to the  United  Kingdom  on  21  May  1999,  arriving
    illegally in Dover.  He was arrested the following day and made a claim
    for asylum.  That claim was refused on 9 July 2013 on the grounds  that
    he had failed to comply with the asylum process.

8.   In March 1999 he was convicted of indecent  assault  and  sentenced  to
    six months' imprisonment.  In January 2001 he received a police caution
     for attempting to obtain property by deception.  On 8 June 2006 he was
    convicted of driving offences.  On 17 March 2010 he  was  convicted  on
    two counts of theft  and  sentenced  to  twelve  months'  imprisonment.
    There was a further driving offence in May 2012.

9.   The claimant was interviewed about his asylum claim on  13  June  2013.
    He feared returning to Sri Lanka on the basis of his  support  for  the
    Tamil Tigers.  The Secretary of State for the Home Department,  in  the
    reasons for refusal did not accept that account and made findings as to
    the adverse credibility of the claim.  Thus the Secretary of State  saw
    no reason not to sign the deportation order against the claimant, which
    was done on 11 July 2013.

10.  In terms of his  family  and  private  life,  the  claimant  married  a
    British citizen on 1 July 2012  and  a  baby  has  been  born  to  that
    relationship on 29 November 2013.

11.  It would seem that the claimant and his wife first met when he  was  at
    college and she working.  It was only after  his  release  from  prison
    that the relationship became more serious, leading to the  marriage  in
    July 2012 and their beginning to live together.  The  wife  has  family
    commitments in the United Kingdom and  without  her  help  her  parents
    would be unable to afford to pay for their home.  The  claimant's  wife
    has lived in the United Kingdom all her life and has no  cultural  ties
    or any ties to Sri Lanka, her parents being from India  and  Singapore.
    She is a Hindu.

12.  At the hearing the panel heard evidence  from  the  claimant  and  also
    from his wife.  The evidence from her was that her family  are  all  in
    the United Kingdom.

13.  The Tribunal considered the asylum aspect to the claim in paragraph  25
    of the determination and concluded  that  there  was  no  risk  to  the
    claimant were he to return.

14.   The Tribunal accepted the genuine nature  of  the  relationship  which
    the claimant has with his wife and expressed themselves satisfied  that
    he had a genuine and  subsisting  parental  in  relationship  with  the
    child.  It was the conclusion of the panel that it was in the   child's
    best interests to have the support of both parents.

15.  The panel reminded themselves of the factors set out  in  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and reminded themselves of the following:-
         "'Exceptional' does  not  mean  'unusual'  or  'unique'.   Decision
         makers should be mindful that whilst all cases  are  to  an  extent
         unique,  those  unique  factors  do  not  generally   render   them
         exceptional. .... Instead,  'exceptional'  means  circumstances  in
         which deportation would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences
         for the individual or their family such that deportation would  not
         be proportionate. That is likely to be the case only very rarely."
16.  The panel noted paragraphs  399  and  399A  and  noted  that  if  those
    paragraphs did not apply it would only be in exceptional  circumstances
    that the public interest in deportation would be  outweighed  by  other
    factors.

17.  It was the conclusion of the Tribunal that  there  were  in  this  case
    matters which were capable of being exceptional in the  way  expressed.
    Those factors are set out in  paragraph  31  of  the  determination  in
    particular.

18.  The situation of the appellant and his wife and her family were  to  be
    considered as a whole.  The wife was not from Sri  Lanka  and  did  not
    speak the language of Sri Lanka and had never lived there.  She  was  a
    British citizen and her removal to Sri Lanka would be to  a  completely
    alien environment.  She had commitments in the United Kingdom that were
    over and above the normal ties of family, social life  and  employment.
    She had her financial and emotional commitments to her  family  in  the
    form of a mortgage that she shared with her mother.   It  was  accepted
    that if she could not meet her share of the payments, the impact on the
    family members who live in that home would be significant and  as  also
    the risk of losing the home for non-payment.

19.  The Tribunal commented as follows:- "It is this wider  impact  that  we
    consider to be significant and to render the appellant's  circumstances
    exceptional."

20.  The panel went on:

         "The family have no option other than to live separately (with  the
         child being left without one or other parent at any one time) or to
         live together in Sri Lanka leaving the  appellant's  wife's  mother
         and grandmother at the risk of losing their home and security which
         is an option we consider unreasonable for his wife".

21.  It was considered that there was nothing to indicate  that  the  family
    as a whole could  reasonably relocate to Sri Lanka.

22.  It was recognised that the appellant's offending history was not  minor
    but neither did it involve violence, drugs or  sexual  offending.   The
    Tribunal found that so far as the appellant's wife was  concerned,  all
    her family, career and livelihood are in the United  Kingdom  and  that
    she is the sole breadwinner for the family providing  all  the  support
    for her husband and child as well as for her parents.  Also that it was
    in the best interests of the child to  be  brought  up  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

23.  It is clear and I so find that the panel, in  considering  the  factual
    situation, reminded themselves correctly as to the  law  and  the  fact
    that it was only in the most exceptional circumstances that the  public
    interest  in  effecting  deportation  would  be  outweighed  by   other
    considerations.

24.  The grounds of appeal do  not  contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    misdirected themselves as to  the  law  but  rather  contend  that  the
    circumstances identified by the panel as exceptional were in  fact  not
    exceptional.  It is contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been
    materially misdirected in concluding that the individual  circumstances
    of the claimant were so exceptional that they outweighed  the  pressing
    public interest in deporting him.  It is contended therefore that  that
    assessment is flawed.

25.   Mr  Duffy,  who  represents  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, contends that the court  fell  into  fundamental  error  in
    approach by considering that the presence of a British  born  wife  and
    child were elements capable of meeting the high threshold envisaged  as
    being exceptional.  It would be the case in  the  majority  of  matters
    leading to deportation that there would be a family who would suffer as
    a consequence of the offending behaviour of the claimant.   He  submits
    that to allow the appeal on that basis would be  to  defeat  the  whole
    purpose of the legislation and of the importance which  parliament  has
    decreed should be placed upon removing foreign criminals.   He  invites
    me to find that the panel has wholly overlooked that matter.

26.  Miss Seehra, who acts on behalf of the claimant,  invited  me  to  find
    that it was not simply a consideration confined to the wife  and  child
    but was a consideration involving  the  whole  family  unit  and  their
    financial inter-dependence.  She submitted that the best  interests  of
    the child was not a factor specifically  set  out  in  the  Immigration
    Rules and therefore was a factor  properly  to  be  borne  in  mind  in
    considering the question as to whether removal was such as to result in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  or  their  family
    such that deportation would not be proportionate.

27.  The merits of this  appeal  are  finely  balanced.   It  seems  to  me,
    however, and I so find that the burden of the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    indeed of the submissions of Mr Duffy are more to  the  merits  of  the
    matter rather than identifying any obvious error of law.

28.  The Tribunal correctly identified the legal issues and the test  to  be
    followed and interpreted the facts before  them  in  a  particular  way
    which led to a particular result.  The Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department disagrees with those conclusions.

29.  The difficulty which faces me is of  course  that  I  am  to  determine
    errors of law and not to adjudicate upon disputes as to fact unless  it
    can be demonstrated that there was, in the finding of the  Tribunal,  a
    lack of reasons or a perversity of approach such as  to  amount  to  an
    error of law.  I do not find that to be so in this case.

30.  It may be considered that  the  approach  taken  by  the  panel  was  a
    somewhat generous one. They were entitled to  come  to  the  conclusion
    that removal would have unjustifiably harsh results.  I  bear  in  mind
    the interests of the family as a  whole  and  not  just  those  of  the
    claimant.

31.  Even if the panel was in error  a  relevant  consideration  is  whether
    that error is a material one in the light of the legislation  that  has
    now been enacted under Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.  I  note
    in  that  regard  Part  5A  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  public  interest
    considerations of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as
    amended.  Part 5A only applies where  the  Tribunal  considers  Article
    8(2) ECHR directly.  It requires  that  consideration  be  given  under
    Section 117C to the number  of  matters  where  foreign  criminals  are
    involved.

32.  The issue  of  proportionality  is  recognised  given  the  wording  of
    117C(2)  "the  more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  the  foreign
    criminal, the greater is the public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
    criminal".  It goes on to  provide  that  in  the  case  of  a  foreign
    criminal who has not been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  for
    four years or more the  public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
    Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.  Exception 2 applies where "C has a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a 'qualifying  child'
    and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child  would  be
    unduly harsh."

33.  It would seem that on a preliminary consideration  that  the  situation
    of the appellant was more likely than not to be one  that  fell  within
    that Exception.  If there were to be rehearing of the case then clearly
    regard would be paid to Section 117C.  Mr Duffy did not  disagree  with
    that proposition but submitted that there would still  be  an  area  of
    argument as between the parties as to whether  or  not  the  effect  of
    removal was unduly harsh.

34.  Thus it seems to me that Section 117C and  the  relevant  Exception  as
    set out therein is supportive of the approach than was in fact taken in
    this case  by  the  Tribunal.   The  Tribunal  has  asked  the  correct
    questions and applied the correct test and also noted that the claimant
    had been fifteen years in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  his  family
    situation was a compelling factor in his favour.

35.  As I have indicated, I regard the grounds of  appeal  as  submitted  by
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department to be in this particular
    case more of a merits challenge than identifying  a clear error of law.



36.  In all the circumstances therefore the Secretary of State's  appeal  is
    dismissed. The original decision of the Tribunal  shall  stand,  namely
    that the appeal against deportation is  allowed  as  also  is  that  in
    relation to human rights.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
