
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01358/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 10 December 2013                           |on 18 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               HAMED JAMES SAID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr B Criggie, of Hamilton Burns & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant has given various names and dates of birth.   He  presently
   identifies himself as Hamed James Said, born on 2 August 1984.   He  says
   he is from Burundi, but the respondent does not accept that  he  is  from
   that country, and thinks it likely that he is from Tanzania.

2) By determination promulgated on 1 October 2013 a panel of the  First-tier
   Tribunal comprising Judge Debra Clapham and Ms  E  Morton  dismissed  the
   appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 18 June  2013  to
   make a deportation order to either Burundi or Tanzania.

3) The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on these grounds:

      Ground 1


   ... at paragraph 69 ... the panel states:


   There is no reason why he cannot return to Burundi or Tanzania either  on
   his own or with his partner and children.


   ... The panel has erred ... by inadequately reasoning their  finding  ...
   the panel's reasoning is confusing and unclear especially in the light of
   the content of paragraph 69, the beginning of which states:


   In relation to the appellant's own child we do not accept [the Presenting
   Officer's] assertion that even if the appellant were to be deported,  the
   appellant could maintain family life from abroad.  The case  law  ...  is
   quite clear.  Family life cannot be achieved via remote means.


   The panel has failed to give sufficient reasoning for their finding  that
   the appellant can return to Burundi or Tanzania on his own.  In doing  so
   the panel has failed to give due consideration to the best  interests  of
   the appellant's child as per ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UK SC4.


   Ground 2


    ... The panel ... erred ... at paragraph 70 ... where they state:


   We see no reason why she cannot continue  her  education  and  subsequent
   career either in Burundi or Tanzania.


   There was no evidence  ...  to  indicate  availability  and  standard  of
   educational facilities  in  Burundi  or  Tanzania.   Nor  was  there  any
   evidence to demonstrate whether foreign nationals  like  the  appellant's
   partner could access such institutions and at what  cost.   In  employing
   speculation as to the availability of education and career prospects  the
   panel erred in law.


   Ground 3


   ... The  panel  erred  ...  at  paragraph  70  by  failing  to  give  due
   consideration to the appellant's  partner's  rights  as  per  Beoku-Betts
   [2008] UKHL 39.


   The panel at paragraph 65 ... acknowledged their duty to consider Article
   8 in terms of general jurisprudence and  in  particular  ...  Boultif  as
   confirmed by Uner. In Uner at paragraph 57 the court held that  in  order
   to assess whether an expulsion measure  was  necessary  in  a  democratic
   society and proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued, the court was to
   have regard to:


   ... the seriousness of the difficulties which the  spouse  is  likely  to
   encounter in the country to which the appellant is to be expelled.


   The panel have failed to consider the difficulties which the  appellant's
   partner may face in either Burundi and Tanzania.  In so doing  the  panel
   have  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  their  finding  that  the
   appellant's partner can relocate with the appellant.


4) Mr Criggie said that Grounds 1 and 2 raise much the same  issue,  derived
   from different  parts  of  the  determination,  criticising  the  panel's
   assessment of the reasonability of his wife and children going  with  him
   to either country.  There is a child of the relationship, and his partner
   has a child from a previous relationship.  While the  appellant  has  not
   enabled his true origins to be known, that was irrelevant to the  present
   issue, which was the same whether removal  might  be  to  Burundi  or  to
   Tanzania.  There are two children of a  Somalian  mother  and  the  issue
   involves all three going to a country  which  is  not  their  country  of
   origin.

5) (Mr Criggie next  accepted  that  a  point  mentioned  in  the  grant  of
   permission over whether the panel referred to an incorrect  paragraph  of
   the Immigration Rules makes no difference, because the resolution of  the
   case depends on Article 8 considerations only.  He also accepted that the
   judge granting permission misapprehended that the panel at  paragraph  65
   when referring to MS meant the Court of Appeal case with the initials MF,
   whereas the panel plainly had in mind MS [2013] CSOH 1.  Nothing turns on
   the terms of the grant of permission, and  these  matters  are  mentioned
   here only for completeness, but it does show that if a case  is  worth  a
   reference at all, it is worth providing its citation.)

6) Mr Criggie said that while Boultif and  other  guiding  jurisprudence  is
   mentioned in the determination, there was error not by failing to mention
   the correct principles  of  case  law,  but  by  failing  to  apply  them
   correctly. The appellant's offence was committed in February 2006, nearly
   8 years ago, and there had been no re-offending.   The  children  in  the
   case were born on 12 November 2009 and 31 October 2011.  They  have  only
   ever lived in the UK.  Their mother has refugee status, and  is  studying
   with a view to becoming a  nurse.   The  criteria  of  Boultif  were  not
   properly addressed in the  proportionality  assessment,  and  a  contrary
   conclusion should have been reached.  The appellant's immigration history
   should not have been given as much adverse weight as it  was.   It  could
   not be said that there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant's
   partner and children moving to either Burundi or Tanzania, but  it  could
   be said to be unreasonable, and that the outcome was disproportionate.

7) Mr Mullen submitted that a great  deal  is  now  made  of  the  time  the
   appellant has spent in the UK, but  his  presence  here  has  never  been
   lawful, there has been no delay by the Secretary of State, and  his  non-
   removal is entirely due to his own attitude of hiding his  true  identity
   and origin.  The family situation was formed entirely  while  his  status
   was known to be precarious, and the prospect of  deportation  or  removal
   must have been in the mind of the appellant and of his partner since they
   met in 2010.  The appellant should not succeed simply because he had made
   it practically very difficult to remove him.  The two children are not UK
   citizens.   Burundi  and  Tanzania  are  both  parties  to  the   Refugee
   Convention, so the appellant's partner and the children could  expect  to
   be permitted to enter there with him.  The grounds did not  disclose  any
   error of law but simply disagreement with the outcome on proportionality.



8) I reserved my determination.

9) In my opinion, the grounds of  appeal  do  not  disclose  any  more  than
   disagreement with the panel's proportionality conclusions.  They  do  not
   disclose any error of legal approach by the panel.

10) The facts of the case are plain.  Deportation of the  appellant  (if  it
   can ever be accomplished) would separate him from  his  partner  and  the
   children, if they stay in the UK.  That would be a serious disruption  of
   family life, but it is one the adult parties should always  have  had  in
   mind, and it would arise only partly from the respondent's action,  being
   also up to the decision of the family.   Alternatively,  if  they  decide
   that all should leave, then partner and children lose  what  may  be  the
   relative advantages of remaining here.  The panel had to  decide  whether
   interference in either of those ways would  be  disproportionate  to  the
   public interest  in  deporting  someone  with  the  appellant's  criminal
   history and very bad immigration history.  That was quite a strong public
   interest.  The panel was entitled to decide as it did.

11) As to such specifics as are in the grounds, the  panel  was  correct  to
   identify that family life could not be carried on by remote  means  only.
   That was not a principle by which the case had to succeed.   It  was  not
   for the panel to investigate the likely  consequences  of  the  potential
   courses available to  the  appellant  and  his  family.   If  there  were
   disadvantages  as  to  education  and   career   prospects,   and   other
   difficulties  to  be  faced,  it  was  for  the  appellant  to  lay  that
   information before the panel.  The family does not have  to  decide  that
   the children will go to Burundi or Tanzania if the appellant does; but if
   they do, there is nothing to suggest that that they will be any worse off
   than most other children  there.   Rather,  with  two  parents  able  and
   willing to care and provide for them, they would no doubt be  better  off
   than many.

12) The conclusion reached was properly  available  to  the  panel,  and  no
   legal error of approach has been identified.  The  determination  of  the
   panel shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                11 December 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal



