

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01584/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2014                           |On 26 February 2014          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FMS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Joseph, instructed by Gloucester Law Centre

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      us to rescind the order and we continue it pursuant to rule 14 of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Trevaskis and Mr M E  Olszewski  JP)  which
      allowed an appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR against the Secretary of
      State's decision that s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  applied  and
      to make a deportation order against FMS.  That decision followed  FMS'
      conviction on 24 August 2012 at the Gloucester Crown Court of wounding
      and assault occasioning actual bodily harm for which he was  sentenced
      to 2 years' imprisonment  and  6  months'  imprisonment  respectively;
      those sentences to run consecutively.

   3. For convenience, we will refer to the parties as they appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

   4. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant relied upon Article 8 of
      the ECHR and, in particular, the impact upon  his  relationships  with
      his two children in the UK (KF and KI) who were  6  and  4  years  old
      respectively at the date of the hearing.  Both  children  are  British
      Citizens.

   5. The First-tier Tribunal made a number of findings: the  appellant  had
      "generous unsupervised contact" with them; that such contact was  "not
      contrary to  the  welfare  of  the  children"  (see  para  39  of  the
      determination); and the appellant's relationships  with  his  children
      would be "seriously disrupted if he is deported, and we find that that
      disruption would be harmful to their best interests" (see para  41  of
      the determination).

   6. At para 44, the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  Article  8  was
      engaged in the following terms:

           "44.  We find that Article 8 is engaged  by  this  appeal.   The
                 appellant has been in the United Kingdom  since  2002.   He
                 has established family life with his former partner and his
                 children.   He  has  established  private  life  with   his
                 friends, who have supported his appeal."

   7. Those findings are not challenged but it is  perhaps  surprising  that
      the First-tier Tribunal found that the  appellant  continued  to  have
      family life with his former partner given that it  was  accepted  that
      his relationship  with  her  was  "now  over"  (see  para  24  of  the
      determination).  She was, in  fact,  the  victim  of  the  appellant's
      second offence, namely that of assault occasioning actual bodily harm.

   8. Having found that Article 8 was engaged, in  para  45  the  First-tier
      Tribunal went on to find that the decision was disproportionate:

           "because of its effect on the  appellant's  family  and  private
           life."

   9. As a consequence, the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's
      appeal under Article 8.



The Appeal

  10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal essentially on  two
      grounds.  First, the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  make  adequate
      findings to demonstrate that there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"
      which outweighed the  public  interest.   Secondly,  relying  upon  SS
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550,  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  had
      failed to give  adequate  consideration  to  the  public  interest  in
      deportation when assessing proportionality.

  11. On 20 November 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ Manuell) granted  the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal on those grounds.

  12. Thus the appeal came before us.

The Submissions

  13. In his submissions, Mr Richards relied upon  the  grounds  of  appeal.
      First, he submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  engage
      in the balancing exercise between the rights of the individual and the
      public interest.  Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that the  First-tier
      Tribunal had erred in law in its assessment of  the  public  interest.
      In particular, he submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  fallen
      into that error in para 42 of  its  determination  which  was  in  the
      following terms:

           "42.   We  find  that  the  Respondent   has   over-stated   the
                 seriousness  of  the  offences  for  the  purposes  of  the
                 deportation decision  and  we  do  not  consider  that  the
                 Judge's sentencing remarks  justify  that  assessment;  the
                 deterrent effect of the deportation decision is over-stated
                 in our judgement, for the same reasons."

  14. Mr Richards submitted that this was contrary to the  established  case
      law that serious offending invoked as an aspect of the public interest
      the importance of deterring foreign nationals from committing  crimes.
      Mr Richards relied upon the Court of Appeal decision in OH (Serbia)  v
      SSHD [2009] INLR 109  and  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Masih
      (Deportation - Public Interest - General Principles)  Pakistan  [2012]
      UKUT 00046 (IAC).  Mr Richards submitted that  there  was  nothing  to
      justify the First-tier Tribunal "downgrading" the seriousness  of  the
      offence or the importance of deterrence particularly in  an  automatic
      deportation case where the legislative policy was that the deportation
      of a "foreign criminal" namely someone who had been  convicted  of  an
      offence for which they were sentenced to a term of imprisonment of  at
      least 12 months was "conducive to the public  good".   Relying  on  SS
      (Nigeria) at [54], he  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      failed to demonstrate in its reasoning that there was a  "very  strong
      claim indeed" based upon the impact upon the appellant's  family  life
      to outweigh the public interest.

  15. Mr Joseph on behalf of the  appellant  accepted  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had not considered, in terms, whether there were "exceptional
      circumstances" under para 398 of the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
      amended) such  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest.   However,  he
      submitted that that error was not material as the First-tier  Tribunal
      had, in substance, considered the appellant's claim under  Article  8.
      The First-tier Tribunal  had  not,  therefore,  offended  against  the
      approach set out by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1192 at [43]-[44].  Secondly,  however,  Mr  Joseph  accepted
      that he was in some difficulty in relation  to  paragraph  42  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal's decision.  He accepted  that  the  Tribunal  had
      downplayed the seriousness of the appellant's offending, in particular
      the importance of deterrence.

Discussion

  16. At the conclusion of  the  submissions,  we  indicated  that  we  were
      satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law  in
      allowing the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.   We  now
      give our reasons for that decision.

  17. There are a  number  of  difficulties  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision.

  18. First, at paragraph 40 of its  determination  the  Tribunal  concluded
      that the appellant:

           "...cannot meet the requirements  of  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
                 Immigration Rules."

  19. That is undoubtedly correct.  As the First-tier Tribunal  pointed  out
      in paragraph 40, the appellant could  not  show,  although  he  had  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his  children  who
      were under the age of 18 and British Citizens, that there was:

           "no other family member who is able to care for the child in the
           UK".

  20. The children are in the care of their mother, the  appellant's  former
      partner.

  21. Having noted,  therefore,  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of that rule, the First-tier Tribunal made  no  reference
      to the principal Immigration Rule which was engaged as a result of the
      appellant's proposed deportation.  That  is  para  398  of  the  Rules
      which, so far as relevant, is in the following terms:

           "Where a person claims that their deportation would be  contrary
           to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
           Convention, and

           ....

           b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
              public good because they have been convicted  of  an  offence
              for  which  they  have  been  sentenced  to   a   period   of
              imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;

           ....

            the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,  it
           will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
           interest in deportation will be outweighed  by  other  factors."
           (emphasis added)

  22. At no point did the First-tier Tribunal  direct  itself  that  it  was
      concerned to determine whether there were "exceptional  circumstances"
      such as to outweigh the public interest in deportation represented  by
      the appellant's offending.

  23. That might properly be regarded  as  an  error  in  form  rather  than
      substance, if, in fact, the First-tier Tribunal had gone on fully  and
      properly to deal with Article 8 "outside the Rules".  That is because,
      as the Court of Appeal recognised in MF (Nigeria), the  provisions  in
      paras 398, 399 and 399A are a "complete code" encompassing, in effect,
      the balancing exercise involved in proportionality.  At  [44]  of  the
      Court's judgement that is recognised as follows:

           "We would, therefore, hold that the new  rules  are  a  complete
           code and that the exceptional circumstances to be considered  in
           the  balancing  exercise   involved   the   application   of   a
           proportionality   test   as   required   by    the    Strasbourg
           jurisprudence.  We accordingly respectfully do  not  agree  with
           the UT that the decision-maker is not "mandated or directed"  to
           take all the relevant Article 8 criteria into account....."

  24. Consequently, had the First-tier Tribunal taken into account "all  the
      relevant Article 8 criteria", both telling in  favour  of  deportation
      and  resisting  deportation,   the   First-tier   Tribunal's   failure
      specifically   to   consider   whether   there    were    "exceptional
      circumstances" (or as glossed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  at  [76]  -
      "sufficiently compelling" circumstances) then any error by the  First-
      tier Tribunal would not have been material.  But it did not do so  for
      the reasons we now give.

  25.  Secondly,  turning  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   assessment   of
      proportionality, we accept Mr Richards' submissions  that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal failed properly to  carry  out  that  exercise.   It  is
      established law that the public interest in deportation cases takes on
      three facets: (1) the risk of  reoffending;  (2)  the  need  to  deter
      foreign nationals from committing serious crimes by  leading  them  to
      understand one consequence maybe deportation; and (3) as an expression
      of society's revulsion  of  serious  crimes  and  in  building  public
      confidence in the treatment of foreign  citizens  who  have  committed
      serious crime.  Those three facets are set  out  in  the  often  cited
      passage in the judgement of Wilson LJ (as he then was) in OH  (Serbia)
      at [15].

  26. Those facets of  the  public  interest  remain  engaged  in  automatic
      deportation appeals (see RU (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2011] EWCA  Civ  651;
      Gurung v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 62 and AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  1634).
      The continuing importance of the public interest in carrying  out  the
      balancing exercise required by proportionality and, in particular, the
      importance of deterrence was noted by Pitchford LJ in AM  at  [31]  as
      follows:

           "31.  While the landscape for qualification for deportation  has
                 changed in consequence of the 2007 Act by the  creation  of
                 'automatic deportation' of 'foreign criminals', it seems to
                 me ...inevitable  that  in  measuring  proportionality  the
                 public interest in deterrence is a material  and  necessary
                 consideration.   The  public  interest  is   an   important
                 component  of  the  balancing  exercise  required  to  test
                 proportionality (for  the  purposes  of  section  33(2)(a))
                 whether or not the Secretary of State expressly says so  in
                 her  decision  letter  or  in  the   Presenting   Officer's
                 submissions to a Tribunal.  It is an indelible  feature  of
                 the balancing exercise that the decision maker  weighs  the
                 consequences of deportation against the full import of  the
                 legitimate aim to be achieved."




  27. In his concurring judgement in AM, Elias LJ also emphasised at [42]:

           "...the importance of a Tribunal giving  full  weight  to  these
           different aspects of the public interest in the  proportionality
           assessment. "

  28. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  consider  the  public  interest.   The
      Tribunal, having cited the guidance set out in the head-note of Masih,
      recognised that the:

           "deterrent effect of the deportation of foreign criminals is  an
           important consideration in this case."

  29. At paragraph 36, the Tribunal noted that the appellant's offences were
      "serious".  At para 36, the First-tier Tribunal noted  the  Sentencing
      Judge's comment that the  offences  were  out  of  character  for  the
      appellant, he  had  no  previous  convictions  for  violence  and  the
      offences were committed in the context  of  relationship  difficulties
      which, while not providing an excuse,  provided  a  context  for  them
      being "out of character".   The Tribunal  noted  that  the  Sentencing
      Judge considered the appellant to present an  overall  "low"  risk  of
      harm which they took to mean that the  appellant  was  not  a  man  of
      "violent character or propensity".

  30. At  paragraph  37,  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
      genuinely remorseful and, given that his  partner  had  brought  their
      children to visit him 14 times in  12  months  in  prison,  there  was
      evidence that she had forgiven him for his offences.   We have already
      set out para 42 of the Tribunal's determination  (above  at  para  13)
      where  it  concluded  that  the  respondent  had   "over-stated"   the
      seriousness  of  the  offence  and  the  "deterrent  effect"  of   his
      deportation.

  31. Despite the Tribunal reminding itself of the importance of the  public
      interest, in particular the deterrent effect of deportation of foreign
      criminals in para 42, in our judgment, the Tribunal fell into error in
      seeking to diminish the importance of the public interest.  There  was
      no justification for concluding, in particular, that  the  offence  of
      malicious wounding with a sentence of imprisonment of 2 years  merited
      anything other than  "full  weight"  in  carrying  out  the  balancing
      exercise required in assessing proportionality.

  32. Likewise, it is difficult to see why the "seriousness" of the  offence
      is diminished because of anything said by the Sentencing Judge in  his
      sentencing remarks.  The offence occurred in a club against  a  person
      whom the appellant thought was having an affair with his partner.  The
      appellant hit the victim with a beer bottle that he had  in  his  hand
      and, after it smashed on the floor, it would appear  that  the  victim
      was badly cut by the fragments of glass.  In all events, the  Tribunal
      offered  no  substantive  reasons  for   its   conclusion   that   the
      "seriousness" of the offence had been overstated by the  Secretary  of
      State.  It was, of course, not the  Secretary  of  State's  view  that
      counted.  As this was an automatic deportation,  it  was  Parliament's
      policy.  The Sentencing Judge considered the  offence  to  be  serious
      and, by virtue of  the  2007  Act  the  sentence  passed  engaged  the
      legislative irrebuttable presumption that the appellant's  deportation
      was in the public interest.  In our  judgement,  in  para  42  of  its
      determination, the Tribunal fell into error in its approach.

  33. Finally, the Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for its  finding
      that the appellant's deportation would be  disproportionate.   It  was
      incumbent  upon  the  Tribunal  to  give  reasons  for  reaching   its
      conclusion that the public interest was outweighed by the impact  upon
      his relationships with his children.  Whilst the  Tribunal  recognised
      the seriousness of the appellant's offending and the impact  upon  his
      children, its stated conclusion in  para  45  that  "the  decision  is
      disproportionate" is not accompanied by any reasons.  At no point  did
      the Tribunal, for example, reason that the impact upon the appellant's
      relationships   with   his   children   gave   rise   to   "compelling
      circumstances" (see MF) or amounted to a "very strong claim" (see SS).
       We do not suggest that any particular form of words is required.  The
      phraseology used in the case law is intended only as an indication  of
      the strength of the individual's circumstances  that  is  required  to
      outweigh the public interest in an automatic deportation case.   Here,
      leaving aside what we have already said to be in effect a misdirection
      as to the weight to be given to the deterrent effect  of  deportation,
      the Tribunal set out the pros and cons of deportation and then  merely
      asserted  the  conclusion  that   the   appellant's   deportation   is
      disproportionate.  The reader is left uncertain as  to  why  the  cons
      outweighed the pros rather than the pros outweighed the cons.  In  our
      judgement in failing to give even  a  brief  explanation  of  why  the
      Tribunal struck the balance one way rather than another, the  Tribunal
      erred in law.

Decision and Disposal

  34. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
      appellant's appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error  of
      law.  That decision is set aside.

  35. Mr Joseph indicated that the appellant might wish  to  submit  updated
      evidence concerning his relationship with his two children now that he
      has been out of prison for sometime.   That, of course, is  a  central
      issue in the appeal.  It was accepted by both representatives that  we
      could not proceed to remake the decision  at  this  hearing.   In  the
      light of that, and that additional evidence  maybe  submitted  on  the
      central issue of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  children,
      having  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
      Statements we concluded that it was appropriate to remit  this  appeal
      to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

  36. Thus, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (other  than
      Judge Trevaskis or Mr M  E  Olszewski  JP)  to  determine  the  appeal
      afresh.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
