
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01315/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2015                           |On 19 February 2015          |
|Determination given orally following the      |                             |
|hearing                                       |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      OLALEYE ATANDA OLALEKAN OGUNRINDE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Rahath Abdar, Legal Representative, Kesar & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Ths is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision made by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Somal which was  promulgated  on  2  December  2014
    following a hearing at Nottingham on 17 November 2014 to which  I  will
    refer  below.   For  ease  of  reference  I   shall   throughout   this
    determination refer to Mr Ogunrinde (who was the original appellant) as
    "the claimant" and to the Secretary of  State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 15 June  1958  and
    he arrived in this country in  August  1997  and  following  successive
    variations of his leave to remain was eventually in June  2000  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  His wife and one child joined him in  2009
    and they were granted indefinite leave to remain  in  this  country  in
    April 2013.  The couple also have another child, born in the UK, who is
    a British citizen.  Other than in respect  of  the  matters  which  now
    concern this Tribunal it is not suggested that this claimant  has  been
    other than of good character and nor is it suggested that anyone in his
    family has behaved in a way that he or she should not.

 3. Very regrettably indeed, at the end of 2012, the claimant  drove  while
    unfit to do so and he drove very badly indeed.  He was convicted of  an
    offence of dangerous driving and driving while  unfit  because  he  was
    drunk, for which he was  sentenced  to  fourteen  months'  imprisonment
    suspended for eighteen months.  He apparently drove the wrong way  down
    a one way street and hit a stationary car.  Luckily, there was not more
    serious damage caused.  As  the  judge  who  eventually  sentenced  him
    remarked, it was an appalling episode of driving while he was over  the
    limit.  While he was not immediately sentenced to imprisonment  he  was
    of course also disqualified from driving when sentenced in  June  2014.
    What made this even more serious was that in December 2014, barely  six
    months after he had received the suspended sentence of imprisonment and
    been disqualified, he again drove while disqualified,  although  it  is
    not suggested that on this later occasion he was unfit through drink or
    drugs.

 4. Driving while disqualified is a very  serious  matter  indeed  and  the
    claimant was brought back before the judge who had  originally  imposed
    the suspended sentence who took a  very  dim  view  of  the  claimant's
    behaviour.  The judge  only  activated  ten  months  of  the  suspended
    sentence partly because the claimant had carried out some of the unpaid
    work he had been ordered to do (there  having  also  been  a  community
    penalty imposed as part of the original sentence) and also he had  paid
    costs and a fine.  In addition  to  the  ten  months'  imprisonment  in
    respect of the original offence at the  claimant  was  sentenced  to  a
    further two months' consecutive for driving whilst disqualified, making
    a total of twelve months to be  served  immediately.   It  is  accepted
    (correctly) on behalf  of  the  respondent  that  technically,  because
    sentences cannot be aggregated for present purposes, the  claimant  has
    to be treated as someone who has not been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least one year.

 5. Nonetheless, the respondent thereafter made a decision  to  deport  the
    claimant in reliance upon the  provisions  contained  within  paragraph
    398(c) of the Immigration Rules which  at  the  time  of  her  decision
    provided that deportation of a  foreign  criminal  would  be  justified
    where:

         "The deportation of a person from the UK is conducive to the public
         good because,  in  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
         offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender
         who shows a particular disregard for the law".

 6. It was then stated within paragraph 398 as in force at that  time  that
    "The Secretary of State in assessing  a  claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation  will
    be outweighed by other factors".

 7. The claimant appealed against the decision and his appeal was heard, as
    I have  already  indicated,  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Somal
    sitting at Nottingham on 17  November  2014  and  in  a  "Decision  and
    Reasons" promulgated on 2 December 2014, she allowed the appeal.

 8. The Secretary of State now appeals with leave against this decision  on
    two grounds.  The first is that the judge within her determination  had
    regard to the Rules as drafted at the time the Secretary of  State  had
    made her decision whereas in fact by the date of hearing the  Rule  had
    been changed.  I set out for the purposes of this determination the new
    Rule as follows:

          "398.   Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

                  ...

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  [my  emphasis
                  because these words have been added] because, in the  view
                  of the Secretary of  State,  their  offending  has  caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State
                  in assessing that claim will  consider  whether  paragraph
                  399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
                  interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other
                  factors where there are very compelling circumstances over
                  and above those described in paragraph 399  and  399A  [my
                  emphasis]"

 9. The differences are first, the addition of the words "and in the public
    interest" and secondly, that  where  neither  paragraph  399  nor  399A
    applies,  it  will  only  be   where   there   are   "very   compelling
    circumstances" rather than  in  "exceptional  circumstances"  where  an
    appeal could succeed under Article 8.

10. It is the Secretary of State's case as advanced both in the grounds and
    before me that because the Tribunal had regard to the wrong version  of
    this rule it failed to have proper regard to the  public  interest  and
    also (although this was not advanced with any  force  before  me)  that
    there  is  a  distinction  to  be  drawn   between   "very   compelling
    circumstances" and "exceptional circumstances".

11. The second  ground  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  at
    paragraph 20 that this claimant was not a persistent offender  and  nor
    did he cause serious harm was "wholly  inadequate".  It  is  said  with
    regard to serious harm that "there was the potential for  it  to  cause
    much more serious harm".  He was, it  is  said,  "extremely  fortunate"
    that he did not hit another motorist or pedestrian,  or  cause  another
    motorist, pedestrian, himself or his children serious harm.  It is also
    said by Mr Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State that because the
    judge wrongly stated that  the  offences  were  fourteen  months  apart
    whereas they were in fact only twelve months apart, and further did not
    appear to have had regard to the  fact  that  the  second  offence  was
    committed only six months or so after the imposition of  the  suspended
    sentence, the finding that the claimant was not a "persistent offender"
    is not sustainable.  Mr Bramble sensibly did not  repeat  the  argument
    set out in the grounds that the claimant had "gone on to commit a  much
    more serious offence" because although driving whilst  disqualified  is
    undoubtedly a serious offence it cannot realistically be argued that it
    is "much more serious" than the original offence and indeed it is plain
    from  the  sentences  which  were  imposed  which  were   ten   months'
    imprisonment for the earlier offence and two months for the later  that
    the sentencing judge regarded the earlier offence as the more serious.

12. In my judgement the grounds are not realistically arguable.  As I  have
    already indicated, the offences of which  the  claimant  was  convicted
    were serious ones and it may well be  that  had  the  judge  imposed  a
    sentence of imprisonment of twelve months or more, which he might  very
    well have  done  had  he  activated  more  of  the  original  suspended
    sentence, the claimant would have had difficulty  in  arguing  that  he
    should  not  be  deported  by  virtue  of  the  automatic   deportation
    provisions pursuant to paragraph 398(b) of the Rules which provide that
    the deportation of someone from the UK "is conducive to the public good
    because they have been convicted of a offence for which they have  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of ... at least  twelve  months".
    However, it is not suggested in this case, as  I  have  already  noted,
    that this subsection applies in respect of this claimant.

13.  I do not consider the changes within the Rules to be material  in  any
    event. Insofar as it is now asserted that there is a valid  distinction
    which can be made between the old and new Rule because it  is  now  the
    case that it is not just to the public good but  also  "in  the  public
    interest" to deport offenders, it is clear (see paragraph 4)  that  the
    judge did understand the public interest which was involved.

14. So far as it is now argued that there is a meaningful distinction which
    can be made between "exceptional circumstances"  and  "very  compelling
    circumstances", as the judge noted in her determination, the  Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 explained at  paragraph  43
    that the meaning to be given to the word "exceptional" was  that  "very
    compelling reasons will be required to outweigh the public interest  in
    the  deportation"  and  that  "these   compelling   reasons   are   the
    'exceptional  circumstances'".   There  is  accordingly   no   material
    difference between these expressions in  the  context  of  the  present
    case.

15. Moreover, in my judgement it is not even necessary to consider  whether
    there  is  any  material  difference  between  the  relevant  rule   as
    previously drafted and the rule which was in place at the date  of  the
    decision, because this claimant could only fall to  be  deported  under
    paragraph 398(c) (on either version)  if  it  could  properly  be  said
    either that his offending "has caused serious harm" or that  he  is  "a
    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law".    I
    say at once that I entirely endorse the observations made on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State that his appalling driving  could   have  caused
    serious harm, but the fact is that luckily for the  community  and  for
    the claimant the offences which he committed did   not  actually  cause
    serious harm.  The Rules do not  provide  that  the  deportation  of  a
    person is conducive to the public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
    because somebody commits an offence which might have caused or had  the
    potential to cause serious harm but because it did cause serious  harm,
    and as I have said,  this offence in fact did not.

16. Accordingly I entirely agree with the finding made  by  the  First-tier
    Judge which was entirely open to her that the  offence  did  not  cause
    serious harm. Indeed, had she found that it had, on the facts  of  this
    case such a finding would arguably have been unsustainable.

17. As to her finding that the claimant was not a persistent offender,  the
    judge stated at paragraph 20  that  he  had  not  shown  a  pattern  of
    offending over a period of  time.  The  judge  had  in  mind  that  the
    claimant had been convicted on two occasions only  for  offences  which
    were committed 12 months apart (and  I  do  not  consider  the  judge's
    erroneous statement that the offences  had  been  committed  14  months
    apart to be of  material  importance)  and  she  also  noted  that  the
    claimant had not committed any other offence during the seventeen years
    he had lived in the UK.

18. In  these  circumstances  I  consider  the  judge  was  again  entirely
    justified in finding that this claimant was not a  persistent  offender
    and indeed were I remaking the decision, on the facts of  this  case  I
    would feel obliged, using ordinary language and usage to  construe  the
    meaning of "persistent offender", to reach the same conclusion.

19. It follows that the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal must be dismissed and the  effect  of  that  is
    that the earlier decision allowing the claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to deport him will be affirmed.

20. I would, however, make this  one  further  observation.  This  claimant
    might consider himself extremely fortunate that the Rules are such that
    on this occasion the Tribunal has  in  accordance  with  the  law  been
    obliged to find that the decision to deport him was not sustainable and
    that he was not liable under the rules to be deported.  However, should
    he now go on to commit any further offences he might find it very  hard
    indeed to argue in the future that he was not a persistent offender and
    he should appreciate that one of the consequences which would be likely
    to follow if he did is that he would then find himself the subject of a
    deportation  order  which  he  would  be  unable  to   appeal   against
    successfully.  So the claimant's future to that extent is  in  his  own
    hands because he must take these proceedings as a very serious  warning
    to him as to the consequences that would very likely follow were he  to
    commit further offences.



Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal this appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's  appeal  against
the decision of the Secretary of State to deport him is affirmed.



Signed:

[pic]    Date: 17 February 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
