
[pic]




                                   UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION CHAMBER

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham                               Decision Promulgated
On: 10 January 2014                                                   On:
15 January 2014


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                                     JS
                                     HK
                                     SS
                                     AS
                                     ARS

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Sharma instructed by Charles Simmons Immigration
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellants are all nationals of India.  The  first  two  appellants  are
married  and  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth  appellants  are  their  minor
children. Anonymity was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  continue
that order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 given that three of the appellants are minors and  serious  harm  could
arise to  them  were  their  identities  or  information  leading  to  their
identification made known in public.

This is an appeal by the  appellants  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Pirotta and Dr O J de Barros  dated  17  October  2013  which
dismissed the appeals against the respondent's deportation decision dated  2
July 2013.

The background to this case is that in October 2004  the  first  and  second
appellants   came illegally to the UK with the third and  fourth  appellants
who were then aged 8 and 5 respectively. The first appellant  used  a  false
identity document to obtain work and also drove without  insurance.  He  was
convicted of those  offences  in  December  2008,  sentenced  to  12  months
imprisonment  and  the  sentencing  judge   recommended   deportation.   The
respondent made a deportation order under s. 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
2007 against the first appellant on 24  June  2013  and  made  decisions  to
deport the family on 2 July 2013.

 There were three grounds of appeal which can be summarised as follows:

 a. failure to apply the Razgar questions, that failure leading to material
    confusion in the determination and  to  the  application  of  incorrect
    legal tests
 b. failure to identify or identify correctly in law the best interests  of
    the two older children
 c. error in refusing an adjournment  for  a  social  work  report  on  the
    children's best interests

Mr Mills described the structure of the decision and lack  of  reference  to
well-rehearsed principles in deportation cases concerning families  as  "not
ideal".  That must be so. Very careful  reading  is  required  to  establish
that the panel did accept that family and private life was engaged and  that
the real issue for consideration was proportionality. Mr Sharma argued  that
the wrong legal tests were applied to the second Razgar question of  whether
Article 8 was engaged and  that  references  to  "compelling  circumstances"
"exceptional circumstances" and "unduly harsh" showed that  incorrect  legal
test had been applied to that  question  and  also  in  the  proportionality
assessment.  It was my view that a  fair  (if  more  than  usually  patient)
reading of the determination is that the first four  Razgar  questions  were
met  and  that  the  issue  that   really   had   to   be   considered   was
proportionality.  The panel cannot be said to have applied  the  wrong  test
in the second Razgar question, therefore.  Following  the  guidance  of  the
Court of Appeal in MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  at,  for
example, [40] to [43], it did not appear to me that referring  to  the  high
test that must be met for a deportation appeal to succeed in the terms  used
by this panel, similar to those used by the Court of Appeal, could  be  said
to be erroneous.

It was also my judgement  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
refuse an adjournment. No mention was made for the need for  a  social  work
report at the Case Management Review on 12 August  2013.  The  parties  were
informed in a notice dated 19 August 2013  of  the  hearing  on  15  October
2013. No reference was made to a social work  report  until  an  adjournment
request dated 10 October 2013, renewed at the hearing on  15  October  2013.
As identified by the First-tier Tribunal at [8] - [10], more  than  adequate
time had been afforded to provide such a report. It cannot be the case  that
s.55 of the UK Borders, Citizens and Immigration Act 2009  always  makes  it
necessary for the Tribunal to adjourn to obtain such  a  report.  Here,  set
out by the panel at [11],  no  particular  features  that  might  create  an
essential need for such a report were identified and  that  was  a  relevant
factor the First-tier Tribunal  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  when
refusing to adjourn. Nothing material  can  arise  from  the  date  for  the
hearing being fixed earlier than indicated at the CMR and on a date when  Mr
Sharma could not attend when nearly 2 months notice was given.

The statement at [11] that the panel might be in a "better position" than  a
social worker to  asses  the  impact  of  deportation  on  the  children  is
somewhat unfortunately expressed but it remained the  case  that  the  panel
were in a position to make  an  assessment  on  the  evidence  before  them,
including the oral evidence of the oldest child, rather than only  a  social
worker being able to do so.

I did find merit in the second ground concerning the approach taken  to  the
best interests of the two older children, however.

Firstly, there  is  no  clear  and  independent  assessment  of  those  best
interests  as  a  primary  factor  to  be  weighed  in  the  proportionality
assessment. At [50] the panel  states  that  "[the  children]  must  not  be
punished for the decisions made  by  their  parents",  a  reference  to  the
parents having brought the family to the UK illegally.  That  is  a  correct
self-direction, in line with  the  guidance  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
(Tanzania) (FC) the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  UKSC
4 at [44]. However, the panel do not follow their own  direction.  The  same
paragraph of the determination specifically sets the length of residence  of
the children against "the  context  of  illegality,  brought  about  by  the
decision of their parents". The recording of the length of residence of  the
two older children at [47] is immediately followed  by  the  statement  that
"[t]heir parents had no reservations about removing  them  from  a  familiar
environment where they lived legally to a four foreign countries where  they
were illegal". That paragraph goes  on  to  refer  to  the  first  appellant
knowing that the family's position was precarious  and  again  mentions  the
parents' knowledge of  the  illegality  of  the  family's  residence.  These
paragraphs would appear to be part of the assessment of the  best  interests
of the two older children but are tainted by the inclusion of  a  number  of
references to the conduct of the parents as in some way reducing the  weight
to be placed on the long residence of the children. The  best  interests  of
the children were not correctly assessed therefore, materially so.

Further, at the time of the hearing both of the older children had  been  in
the UK for 9 years and  for  over  half  of  their  lives.  That  period  of
residence was during  particularly  formative  years  of  their  childhoods;
Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)  Iran
[2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) applied. It was not disputed that  the  importance  of
the principle of long residence at such an age was  put  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal or that it is indeed a highly relevant although  not  determinative
factor even in deportation cases, indicated by  the  respondent's  inclusion
of it in the Immigration Rules at paragraph 399(a). The panel  set  out  the
fact of the older children's length of residence but do  not  indicate  that
they regarded it as an important aspect of their best interests.  As  above,
if anything, they appeared to consider it to be of less value  as  a  result
of the parents' illegal actions. Also, the  panel's  comment  at  [54]  that
"[the children's] stay in the United  Kingdom  is  not  the  most  important
feature of their upbringing, rather the context of  their  family  life  was
having a home with their parents" appears to take an incorrect  approach  to
the long residence at formative ages, particularly where  the  oldest  child
was 17  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  and  at  an  age  where  increasing
independence from his parents would  be  the  norm.  Indeed,  he  gave  oral
evidence that he was thinking about going to university.

I was satisfied that these errors of  approach  to  a  core  aspect  of  the
appeal amounted to a legal error such that the decision had to be set  aside
and remade.  The parties were in agreement that the  lack  of  structure  in
the determination and the nature of these errors of  law  made  preservation
of any of the determination problematic so that the matter should be  remade
de novo and that it was appropriate to remit the appeal  to  be  decided  by
the First-tier Tribunal following paragraph 7.2 (b) of Part 3 of the  Senior
President's Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012.







DECISION

The Immigration Judge made an error on a point of law and  the  decision  is
set aside to be re-made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 10 January 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
