
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01223/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Crown Court        |Promulgated  & Sent to parties       |
|On 23 March 2015                     |On 13 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mohammed Faisal Ahmed
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Khan, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hindson  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision to deport him to Somalia  as
      a foreign criminal pursuant to section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
      2007.   The claimant is a citizen of Somalia, born in what is now  the
      semi-autonomous  region  of  Somaliland.   The   First-tier   Tribunal
      dismissed the claimant's appeals on asylum and humanitarian protection
      grounds, and also under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.  The appeal was allowed
      only pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.

   2. The claimant was born in December 1987 and came to the United  Kingdom
      on a settlement visa in November 1989.  He is now 28 years old and has
      an appalling criminal history in the United Kingdom, with  convictions
      for 32 offences over an 11 year period, the last of which resulted  in
      a custodial sentence of 3 years, imposed at Cardiff Crown Court on  16
      August 2013.  It is not disputed that he is a person to  whom  section
      32 applies and in respect of whom the Secretary of State must  make  a
      deportation order, and may not revoke it, unless one of the Exceptions
      in section 33 is applicable.

First-tier Tribunal decision

   3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the claimant to be  an  unreliable
      witness and his account of his late-disclosed homosexuality and  other
      matters intended to support an asylum or humanitarian protection claim
      to be fabricated.

   4. However, the following facts and matters were not disputed before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, and are set out at paragraph 46  of  the  judge's
      decision:

          "46.   None of the following has been challenged.  The  [claimant]
          has been in the United Kingdom lawfully, since he  was  less  than
          two years old, a total of some 25 years.  He speaks  English.   He
          has been educated here both at school and college.  He has  had  a
          number of jobs here.  He  has  never  returned  to  Somalia  since
          coming to the United Kingdom.  He speaks very little  Somali.   He
          has no family in Somalia.  He  has  some  family  members  in  the
          United Kingdom.  While in the United Kingdom he has  always  lived
          with members of his Somali family."

   5. The judge considered that Exception 1 in section  33  was  applicable.
      He had regard to the principles set out in  sections  117A,  117B  and
      117C of Part 5A of the Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as  amended)
      and directed himself carefully thereon,  as  well  as  having  express
      regard to the fact that deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the
      public interest (see [55]).

   6. The judge's core reasons for so concluding were set out at  paragraphs
      56-57 of the decision as follows:

          "56.   This is a case to which Exception  1  potentially  applies.
          The [claimant] has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
          for virtually all of his life  and  I  am  satisfied  that  he  is
          socially and culturally integrated into the  country.   He  speaks
          English fluently, has been educated here and has worked here.   He
          has always lived with other members of the  Somali  community  but
          has not returned to Somalia since coming to the United Kingdom and
          has no contact with anyone in that country.

          57.    I am satisfied that there would be significant obstacles to
          his integration into Somalia.  He left there when he was less than
          two years old and has had no contact with the country since  then.
          I accept that the general situation in Somalia, in  particular  in
          Mogadishu, has improved in recent times.  The [claimant] was  born
          in a town that is now in Somaliland and I accept that the position
          there is perhaps better than Somalia itself.  Nevertheless,  I  am
          satisfied that it would be extremely difficult for  the  appellant
          to reintegrate into society in Somalia, or Somaliland,  given  the
          age  at which he left and the fact that he has no family or  other
          ties to the country."

   7. The judge found  that  Exception  1  was  met  and  removal  would  be
      disproportionate.

Secretary of State's grounds of appeal

   8. The Secretary of State appealed.  The grounds may be summarised thus:

      Ground 1    The Secretary of State  contended  that  in  finding  that
      there were 'significant obstacles' the judge had misdirected  herself,
      since section 117(4)(c) required 'very significant  obstacles'  to  be
      shown.

      Ground 2    The Secretary of State argued that the First-tier Tribunal
      erred in not making it  clear  what  country  was  meant  (Somalia  or
      Somaliland) when saying that the claimant had 'no family or other ties
      to the country'.

      Ground 3    In the light of  the  negative  credibility  finding,  the
      Secretary of State  contended  it  was  not  open  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to accept the findings in paragraph 46 as true.

      At paragraph 12 of her grounds, under ground 3, she sets out a list of
      criteria which Mr Dimwycz has today confirmed are extracted  from  her
      own internal guidance, as follows:

          "12.   For the avoidance of doubt, the [Secretary of State]  avers
              that relevant considerations to the obstacles facing this (or
              any) deportee are:

                 Familiarity with language and culture in  the  country  to
                   which the foreign criminal is to be deported;

                 Whether the foreign criminal has lived in the  country  to
                   which he is to be deported, how long for, and how old  he
                   was when he left or last visited;

                 Whether the foreign criminal  or  his  family  has  hosted
                   visits in the United Kingdom by family and  friends  from
                   the country of return, or whether  the  foreign  criminal
                   has visited family and friends there;

                 Whether the foreign  criminal  ahs  ties  which  could  be
                   strengthened on return even if they are not  very  strong
                   at the date of decision;

                 Whether the foreign criminal received education or  worked
                   in the country to which he will be deported,  or  whether
                   he has received education  or  developed  skills  in  the
                   United Kingdom which  he  could  use  to  integrate  into
                   society on return;

                 Whether the foreign criminal has  previously  demonstrated
                   an ability to integrate into a new place, e.g. if he came
                   to the United Kingdom as an adult."

   9.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Chambers, who noted that the Judge had  given  the  appropriate  self-
      direction on 'very significant obstacles' and that  the  finding  that
      there would be merely 'significant obstacles', while possibly  a  slip
      of the pen, was at least arguably an  error  of  law.   Permission  to
      appeal was granted on that ground alone.

  10. That was the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal
      for an error of law hearing

Upper Tribunal hearing

  11. At the hearing today, Mr Diwnycz accepted that there was no  merit  in
      any of the other grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State.
      The only 'country'  in  question  was  Somalia:  Somaliland,  a  semi-
      autonomous region, does not have the status of a separate country  and
      ground 2 was unarguable as a reasons challenge.

  12. As regards ground 3, the Secretary of State had not challenged any  of
      the matters set out in paragraph 46 at the  hearing,  and  Mr  Diwnycz
      accepted that the judge had not erred in setting them out briefly,  as
      she had done.  The list of factors extracted  from  the  Secretary  of
      State's guidance at paragraph 12 did not assist her:  the claimant had
      very little familiarity with Somali language or culture, had not lived
      there since he was younger than 2 years old, had not visited family in
      Somalia, nor was it asserted that  he  had  hosted  visits  by  Somali
      family members from Somalia.  He had no ties to strengthen on  return,
      had been educated and worked exclusively in the United Kingdom and had
      come to the United Kingdom so young that his ability to  integrate  as
      an adult was of no relevance.

  13.  That  leaves  the  question  whether  in  stating  that  there   were
      'significant obstacles' rather than 'very  significant  obstacles'  as
      section 117C requires, this judge materially erred  in  law.   In  our
      judgment, he did not:  the decision is very thorough and full,  taking
      into account all relevant facts, materials and legal provisions.   The
      judge's conclusion was that:

          "57.   I am satisfied that there would be significant obstacles to
          his integration into Somalia.  ...  Nevertheless, I  am  satisfied
          that  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  for  the  appellant  to
          reintegrate into society in Somalia, or Somaliland, given the  age
          at which he left and the fact that he has no family or other  ties
          to the country." [Emphasis added]

  14. We remind ourselves that the judge set out the whole of sections  117B
      and 117C in his decision and that his self-direction was correct.   We
      do not consider, taken as a whole, that his finding  in  paragraph  57
      was made at a level below that  of  'very  significant  obstacles'  to
      reintegration.  Indeed, on the facts of this appeal, it  is  difficult
      to see what other conclusion could have been reached.  The claimant is
      a 'home-grown criminal' with no connections at all to his  country  of
      origin.  We find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  this
      decision and we uphold it.

      Conclusions

      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law. We  do  not  set  aside  the
      decision.




      Signed      Date 25 March 2015


      Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
