
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01811/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th July 2015                     |On 16th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON
                         upper tribunal judge smith


                                   Between

                            Nerijus Jarusevicius
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Lithuania born on  30th  June  1977.
    Following his conviction on 1st July 2010 at Chelmsford Crown Court for
    conspiracy to handle stolen goods, the Appellant was  sentenced  to  42
    months' imprisonment, and on 9th September 2014 the Respondent  decided
    to make a deportation order against him.  The Appellant  appealed  that
    decision under Regulation 26  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations  2006,  and  that  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cameron (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House on 9th April
    2015.  The Judge decided to allow the appeal for the reasons  given  in
    his Decision dated 21st April 2015.  The  Respondent  sought  leave  to
    appeal that Decision, and on 26th May 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. We must first decide if the Decision of the Judge contained an error on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal because he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Respondent had shown that the  Appellant's  removal  was  justified  on
    grounds of public policy and/or public security.   This  test  was  the
    appropriate test taking as a starting point a previous finding  by  the
    Tribunal that the Appellant had  not  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
    residence.

 4. The Judge found that the Appellant's removal was not justified  because
    although he was satisfied that the Appellant's offending  was  serious,
    he found that the Appellant was at a low risk of further offending  and
    a low risk of harm to the public.  This finding was made mainly on  the
    basis that the Appellant had been granted bail on  1st  September  2011
    since when there had been no further offending.  Indeed, there  was  no
    evidence that there had been any breach of the terms of the Appellant's
    bail nor of his probation or licence.  Therefore the Judge  found  that
    if the Appellant were allowed to remain in the UK he would not  pose  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  interests  of
    public policy and public security.

 5. The Judge also took account of the fact that  since  his  release  from
    detention the Appellant had lived with his two children and his mother.
    His children are his daughters Ieva born on 19th June 2005 and  Justina
    born on 5th September 2007.  They were both born in the UK.  There  was
    no evidence that their mother had played any part in their lives  since
    the Appellant's release from detention, and  the  Judge  was  satisfied
    that since then the Appellant had  cared  for  his  children  with  the
    assistance of his mother.  The Judge found  that  the  children  had  a
    strong bond with their father, and that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect them to relocate to Lithuania with him.  The Judge was satisfied
    that if the children remained in the UK the Appellant's  removal  would
    adversely affect them.  The children's grandmother would not be able to
    take over his role in their lives partly because of her limited ability
    to speak English.

 6. At the hearing, Mr Wilding referred to the grounds of  application  and
    argued that the Judge had erred in law in his consideration of  whether
    the Appellant was a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to
    public security.  The Judge had failed to make a  proper  and  holistic
    assessment of the threat which the Appellant posed.  The Judge had only
    relied upon the fact that the Appellant had not  reoffended  since  his
    release on  bail.   The  Judge  had  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    Appellant's  entire  criminal  history  contained   in   the   previous
    Determinations which were before the Judge.  The Judge  had  not  taken
    into  account  the  Appellant's  present  circumstances  such  as   his
    employment  and  financial  position  when  considering   whether   the
    Appellant might reoffend again.

 7. Mr Wilding then argued that as regards the  Appellant's  children,  the
    Judge had not adequately explained  his  findings.   For  example,  the
    Judge's finding as regards to the adverse affect upon his  children  of
    the Appellant's removal was restricted to one brief  paragraph  of  the
    Decision, being paragraph 99.  There was insufficient analysis  of  the
    care available to the children from a source other than the  Appellant.
    The Judge had not considered in any depth the ability of the children's
    grandmother to look after  them,  nor  the  assistance  available  from
    outside agencies such as social services or the children's schools.

 8. In response, Mr Chirico referred to his skeleton argument and submitted
    that there was no such errors of law.  He reminded us that at the  bail
    hearing in September 2011 it had been  conceded  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant was at a no more than low risk of reoffending.
     His conduct since then had shown that  opinion  to  be  correct.   The
    Judge had considered all the relevant circumstances and had come  to  a
    conclusion which was open to him on the evidence.   In  particular,  as
    regards the  present  risk,  the  Judge  had  taken  into  account  the
    Appellant's changed attitude towards  his  offending.   The  Judge  had
    correctly considered the Appellant to be rehabilitated.

 9. As regards the effect upon the children of the Appellant's removal, the
    Judge had considered all the circumstances at the date of hearing.   He
    had come to a correct conclusion that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect the children to relocate to Lithuania.  They had  been  born  in
    the UK and had spent very little time in Lithuania.  The  eldest  child
    was now a British citizen, and neither child had a complete command  of
    the Lithuanian language.  The Judge had been right  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's removal would have a disproportionately adverse affect upon
    the Appellant's children.

10. We agree with the submissions of Mr Chirico that the  Decision  of  the
    Judge did not contain an error on a point of law and  therefore  should
    not be set aside.  We are satisfied that the Judge  came  to  decisions
    which were open to him on the evidence before  him  and  which  he  has
    adequately explained.  The Judge acknowledged that  the  Appellant  had
    committed a serious offence and set out at paragraph 70 of the Decision
    the comments of the Trial Judge.  The Judge indicated by what he  wrote
    at paragraph 75 of the Decision that he was aware  of  the  Appellant's
    immigration history and also his previous offending.  However the Judge
    noted at paragraph 80 of  the  Decision  that  the  Appellant  had  now
    admitted his part in the offence, and based  upon  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had not  reoffended  since  September  2011,  the  Judge  was
    entitled to find that the Appellant was at a low  risk  of  reoffending
    and also at a low risk of harm to the public.   Mr  Wilding's  argument
    that the Judge had given insufficient reasons for this conclusion is no
    more than a disagreement with his Decision and does not reveal an error
    of law.

11. As regards the position of the Appellant's children,  the  Judge  fully
    explained at paragraphs  81  to  85  inclusive  his  finding  that  the
    children had been cared for by their father with the assistance of  his
    mother  since  he  returned  to   the   family   home   following   his
    incarceration.  And the Judge went on to explain the nature and  extent
    of the subsequent relationship between the Appellant and his  children,
    and the Judge was entitled to find that the  Appellant's  mother  would
    not be able to fill this  role  adequately  since  she  did  not  speak
    English.  There is sufficient reasoning of the Decision that  it  would
    be disproportionate to expect the children  to  relocate  to  Lithuania
    with their father bearing in mind  their  histories,  and  the  Judge's
    opinion that it would be in the best interests of the children for them
    to be cared for by a parent rather  than  outside  agencies  cannot  be
    faulted.

12. For these reasons, we find no error of  law  in  the  Decision  of  the
    Judge, and that Decision is confirmed.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  order  for  anonymity.   There  was  no
application to us for it to be continued and we find no  reason  to  do  so.
We therefore lift the order.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


