
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd March 2014                               |On 27th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K. Mak, MKM Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity direction  that  no  report  or
      other publication of these proceedings or any part or  parts  of  them
      shall name or directly or indirectly identify the claimant.  Reference
      to the claimant may be by  use  of  his  initials  but  not  by  name.
      Failure by any  person,  body  or  institution  whether  corporate  or
      incorporate (for the avoidance of doubt to  include  either  party  to
      this appeal) to comply with this direction may lead to a  contempt  of
      Court.   This direction  shall  continue  in  force  until  the  Upper
      Tribunal (IAC) or an appropriate Court lifts or varies it.

   2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Flynn and Ms J  A  Endersby,  non-legal
      member) who allowed his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
      of State that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

 1. The history can be summarised as follows.  The  Respondent  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 12th May 1999 and was given leave to enter  as  a
    visitor until 10th November 1999.  On 31st  July  2000,  he  was  given
    indefinite leave to remain.  An application made for naturalisation  on
    28th December 2007 was refused because the required documentation and a
    full fee had not been submitted.

 2. Whilst the Respondent has been present in  the  United  Kingdom  it  is
    plain from the Secretary of State's decision letter that the Respondent
    had committed criminal offences.  On 24th August 2012 he was  convicted
    of two counts of robbery and was sentenced on 5th October 2012  to  two
    years' imprisonment.

 3. As a result of his convictions, the  Respondent  was  informed  of  his
    liability to automatic deportation on 3rd December 2012.  He  responded
    giving details of facts on which he wished to  rely  on  10th  December
    2012.

 4. A deportation order was signed against the Respondent and on 11th  June
    2013 a decision was made that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007
    applied.  The reasons were set out in a detailed decision letter.   The
    Respondent appealed against that decision and the appeal was  heard  on
    11th December 2013 before the First-tier Tribunal  panel  (Judge  Flynn
    and Ms J A Endersby, non-legal member).

 5. In a decision promulgated on 13th January 2014 the  panel  allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  During the course of the  hearing,
    the panel  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Respondent  and  from  the
    Respondent's partner and also the  Respondent's  mother.   The  witness
    evidence and summary of the same is set out at paragraphs 11 to  34  of
    the determination.  The  conclusions  of  the  panel  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 40 to 62 of the determination.   They  correctly  identified
    and set out the relevant Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  44  of  the
    determination.  At paragraph 45 they made  reference  to  the  offences
    that had triggered the  liability  for  deportation,  namely  that  the
    Respondent had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of two  years
    and therefore  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  398(b)  that  the
    deportation of a person from the UK is conducive  to  the  public  good
    because they have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at
    least twelve months.  They also noted that as paragraph 398(b)  applied
    so should paragraphs 399 and 399A.  It had been submitted on behalf  of
    the Respondent at the hearing that he met  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    specifically the requirements of paragraph 399A(b).  This sets  out  as
    follows:-


         "399A.   This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -


                (a)    ...


                (b)    the person is aged under 25 years, he  has  spent  at
                    least half of his life living  continuously  in  the  UK
                    immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the   immigration
                    decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he
                    has no ties (including social, cultural or family)  with
                    the country to which he would have to go if required  to
                    leave the UK."

 6. In this context it  is  right  to  observe  that  the  decision  letter
    recognised that the Respondent was a person who was aged under  25  and
    had spent at least half of his life  living  continuously  in  the  UK.
    However what was not accepted was the second part of paragraph  399A(b)
    that "he has no ties (including social, cultural or  family)  with  the
    country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK".

 7. Thus the panel considered the evidence before them in that respect.  In
    doing so they followed the guidance of the Upper Tribunal  in  Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 and  set  out  what  the
    Tribunal had said in respect of paragraph 399A(b) and  the  meaning  of
    the word "ties".  In doing so the panel applied that  decision  to  the
    facts as they have found them to be.  At  paragraph  52  they  recorded
    that whilst they had concluded that the Respondent's father had contact
    with his mother and daughter by telephone and  visits  to  Jamaica  and
    that he could resume contact if he wished, the panel was satisfied that
    there had been no contact by the  Respondent  with  anyone  in  Jamaica
    since he had arrived.  They also found that he had  never  returned  to
    Jamaica since leaving at the age of 8 and that he had "not retained any
    real ties with Jamaica".  Thus they were  satisfied  that  he  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 399A(b).  The panel went  on  to  make  other
    findings  relating  to  paragraph  399(a)  and  the  position  of   the
    Respondent's partner and son and his best  interests.   Those  findings
    follow at paragraph 54 onwards.  Their overall finding in this  respect
    was set out at paragraph 61, namely that they found that the Respondent
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  partner  and  their
    son and that he met the requirements of paragraph  399A(b)  because  he
    was under the age of 25 and had spent more than half his  life  in  the
    UK.  They  also  recorded  their  overall  conclusion  that  they  were
    satisfied that the Respondent for the reasons they  had  given  had  no
    ties with Jamaica.

 8.   Thus they reached the ultimate conclusion on the evidence before them
    that the decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance  with
    the  law  as  the  Respondent  could  meet  paragraph  399A(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  They made it clear at paragraph  62  they  did  not
    consider "Mr Mak's highly persuasive submissions with  respect  to  the
    family's Article 8 rights and in particular the best interests  of  the
    child in accordance with Section 55 of the 2009 Act" because it was not
    necessary to consider Article 8  any  further  having  found  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with  the  law
    as the Respondent had demonstrated he met the requirements of paragraph
    399A(b) thus they allowed the appeal.

 9.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State on two grounds.  It  is  important  to  set  out
    those two grounds  for  reasons  that  will  become  abundantly  clear.
    Ground (1) made reference to the panel having allowed the appeal  under
    paragraph 399A(b).  It was submitted that whilst  the  panel  had  made
    reference to the case of Ogundimu (as cited) the panel  had  failed  to
    carry  out  an  assessment  into  the  possibility  of  the  Respondent
    returning to Jamaica and whether in fact  he  could  re-integrate  into
    society there.  The Secretary  of  State  further  submitted  that  the
    panel's findings were imbalanced, particularly in the light of the very
    real possibility that the Respondent may  have  siblings  remaining  in
    Jamaica, even if his father had not been in touch for a year.   It  was
    further submitted that the panel failed to give adequate  consideration
    to the possibilities surrounding the Respondent's re-integration  given
    that he was surrounded by family members in the UK who had potential to
    create links in Jamaica to assist him on return.

10.   The second ground advanced on behalf of the Respondent concerned  the
    findings made by the panel relating to his continued presence in the UK
    and that being in the child's best interests.  In this  regard  it  was
    submitted that the panel had failed to give adequate  consideration  to
    his past offending and the risk of re-offending  and  the  impact  that
    this would have on the child's best interests.

11. Limited permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ransley on 29th January 2014.  It is necessary to set out  the  reasons
    for granting permission.  Judge Ransley said this:-

         "The grounds assert that the judge has made a material error in law
         for failure to give any reasons or adequate reasoned findings on  a
         material matter.  Ground (1) asserts that the judge has  failed  to
         carry out an assessment  into  the  possibility  of  the  Appellant
         returning to Jamaica and whether he could re-integrate into society
         there.  The determination shows that the  panel  has  accepted  the
         Appellant's evidence that he has no contact with anyone in  Jamaica
         since he arrived in the UK at age 8 and that he has never  returned
         to Jamaica since leaving at the age of 8.  The panel accepted  that
         he had no ties in Jamaica (paragraphs 49, 50-52).  By making  these
         findings of  fact,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  ruled  out  the
         possibility  of  the  Appellant  returning  to  Jamaica   and   re-
         integrating into society there.  This finding is open to the  panel
         and it does not involve an  arguable  error  of  law.   Ground  (2)
         asserts that the panel failed to give adequate consideration to the
         Appellant's past offending, his heightened  risk  of  re-offending,
         the legitimate  aims  of  preventing  crime  and  disorder  and  of
         deterring other foreign criminals in a similar  position.   In  the
         determination (60) it was stated that the panel had  taken  account
         of SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  However, I find that  neither
         in (60) or  anywhere  else  in  the  determination  did  the  panel
         consider the Appellant's past offending or risk of re-offending, or
         evaluate  the  public  interest  justifications  in  deporting  the
         Appellant.  For this reason there is an arguable error  of  law  in
         the determination."

12. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal,  Ms  Isherwood  appeared  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State and Mr Mak, who  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, appeared on behalf of the Respondent.   After  the
    grounds of permission had been filed and the  grant  of  permission  by
    Judge Ransley, a Rule 24 reply was filed on  11th  February  2014.   In
    that Rule 24 response it summarised  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel,  namely  that  at  paragraphs  52  and  61,  the  panel
    concluded that the requirements of  paragraph  399A(b)  (private  life)
    were satisfied and thus the appeal was allowed under  that  Rule.   The
    reply went on to state:

         "The Respondent's challenge  to  the  appeal  being  allowed  under
         paragraph 399A(b) was rejected by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley
         in the decision on permission.  No challenge was made to the appeal
         being allowed under paragraph 399A.   In  these  circumstances  the
         Respondent's grounds that the panel failed  to  take  into  account
         past offending, risk of re-offending and the legitimate aims of the
         public  is  irrelevant  and   entirely   misconceived   since   the
         Immigration Rules clearly  do  not  require  these  factors  to  be
         assessed".

    The reply goes on to state and make clear that the appeal  was  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules and that the  panel  at  paragraph  62  had
    stated that it was unnecessary  to  consider  the  matter  under  wider
    Article 8 jurisprudence, which are the only circumstances in which  the
    public interest in deportation would therefore be relevant.

13. At the hearing Ms Isherwood had not seen a copy of the  reply  although
    it is plain that it had been served upon the Secretary of State  as  it
    had been upon the Upper Tribunal.  She therefore took time to read that
    reply.  Having done so, it was plain from the grant of permission  that
    in respect of the two grounds advanced on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State, no permission had been granted on Ground  (1)  relating  to  the
    panel having  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    specifically under paragraph 399A(b). Furthermore, no  application  had
    been made to renew that ground to the  Upper  Tribunal  for  permission
    after that had been refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  those
    circumstances, the fact that  permission  was  granted  in  respect  of
    Ground (2)  could  not  undermine  the  panel's  conclusion  under  the
    Immigration Rules under paragraph 399A(b), permission having  not  been
    granted  on  that  particular  ground.   In  those  circumstances,   Ms
    Isherwood had nothing further that she wished to advance on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.

14.  I  have  therefore  reached  the  conclusion  that  it  has  not  been
    demonstrated that the panel erred in law.  It was accepted on behalf of
    the Secretary of State and by the panel, that the  other  part  of  the
    requirement of paragraph 399A(b) of the Rules were met.  The only issue
    was whether the Appellant had no "ties (including social, cultural  and
    family) with the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
    leave the UK".  The panel set out its findings in this  respect  within
    the determination at paragraphs 49 and 50-52, relating back to the oral
    evidence that it had the benefit of hearing.  The panel, having had the
    opportunity to hear the oral evidence of the  Respondent,  his  partner
    and mother, reached the conclusion that the Respondent had  no  contact
    with his mother (who lived in Jamaica) and that he  had  met  her  only
    once when  she  confirmed  that  she  had  no  responsibility  for  him
    (paragraph 49).  The panel also concluded on the evidence  before  them
    that there had been no contact by the Respondent with anyone in Jamaica
    since he arrived in May 1999 nor that he had ever returned  to  Jamaica
    since leaving at the age of 8.  The overall  conclusion  based  on  the
    evidence and applying the Tribunal decision in Ogundimu  was  that  the
    Respondent had not retained any real ties with  Jamaica.   As  Ogundimu
    makes it plain, each case turns on its own facts.

15. Whilst  the  grounds  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  sought
    permission to appeal the decision made under paragraph 399A(b),  it  is
    plain from reading the grant of permission that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge (Judge Ransley) specifically considered background  but  did  not
    grant permission on it for the reasons given.  Judge Ransley considered
    the findings that had been made by the panel and reached the conclusion
    that they were reasonably open to them on this  issue  under  paragraph
    399A(b) and that "by making the finding that the FTT has ruled out  the
    possibility of the Appellant returning to  Jamaica  and  re-integrating
    into society there.  This finding is open to the panel and it does  not
    involve an arguable error of law".

16. Thus the judge expressly considered the grounds advanced on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State but did not grant permission on this ground.  No
    application has been made by the  Secretary  of  State  to  seek  renew
    permission to appeal on that ground as the Rules provide for.  In  this
    case it can be seen that this was a qualified grant  of  permission  in
    which the judge expressly when setting out  the  reasons  for  reaching
    that view, refused to grant permission on Ground (1) which  in  essence
    was the main ground of appeal.  The permission being limited to  Ground
    (2) as recognised in the reply under Rule 24, that permission on Ground
    (2), even if it were found an error  of  law,  would  not  be  material
    because the Respondent's appeal succeeded under the  Immigration  Rules
    and specifically paragraph 399A(b) for which permission  has  not  been
    granted.

17. Thus it has not been demonstrated that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel involved the making of an error of  law.   The  decision
    shall therefore stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

