

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01448/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 January 2016                        |On 21 March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                            HUSSAIN SHAIBU TAMRIN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Otchie, Counsel instructed by Calices
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation  order.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  ("the  judge")
    allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 27  January  2015.  She
    considered the appellant's immigration history and length of  residence
    in the UK. The appellant said that  he  entered  the  UK  illegally  in
    January 1998 and remained in the UK unlawfully until  he  came  to  the
    attention of the authorities when he was arrested for possession  of  a
    controlled Class B drug in May 2011 [2]. He applied for leave to remain
    on human rights grounds. The application was refused  on  09  September
    2011. The judge set out the appellant's criminal conviction, for  which
    he received a 12 month sentence of imprisonment, and the reasons  given
    by the respondent for making a deportation order [3].   The  respondent
    considered the fact that the appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with a British partner and that they  had  three  children
    together. She considered that it would not be unduly harsh for them  to
    live in Ghana or to remain in the UK without him.

3.    The judge summarised the proceedings and the submissions made  at  the
    hearing and outlined the relevant legal framework [5-8]. She went on to
    make detailed findings on the facts of the case within the  context  of
    the exceptions outlined in section 33 of the UK Borders Act  2007.  The
    appellant did not assert that he would be at risk on return. The  judge
    correctly identified the fact that the case focussed on  an  assessment
    of Article 8 of the European Convention [12]. In assessing  whether  he
    met the requirements of the exceptions to  deportation  she  considered
    the public interest considerations outlined in sections 117B-C  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002").  She
    considered the appellant's immigration history in some detail and  took
    into account the fact that he had remained in the UK  unlawfully  [12].
    She noted  that  the  appellant  speaks  English.  He  was  financially
    dependent on his partner. There was no evidence to suggest that he  had
    been dependent on public funds [13-14]. She gave little weight  to  the
    relationship with his partner, which was established at a time when  he
    was in the UK unlawfully [15].

4.    The judge then turned to consider the public  interest  considerations
    relating to deportation appeals contained in section 117C. She reminded
    herself that deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is  in  the  public
    interest and that the more serious the offence the greater  the  public
    interest is in  deportation.  She  recognised  the  serious  nature  of
    offences involving drugs and took into account the remarks made by  the
    sentencing judge. The judge  also  noted  that  the  appellant  had  no
    previous convictions and that he was sentenced at the lowest end of the
    scale for the offence [16].

5.    The judge went on to consider the impact that deportation  would  have
    on the appellant and  his  family  with  reference  to  the  exceptions
    outlined in section 117C(5). The appellant's partner and  children  are
    British citizens and were  'qualifying  persons'  for  the  purpose  of
    section 117D [17]. The judge then went into a detailed analysis of  the
    history and strength of the family relationships and  the  impact  that
    deportation would have on  each  member  of  the  family  [18-24].  She
    considered whether it would be "unduly harsh" to expect his partner and
    children to accompany him to Ghana. She took into account the rights of
    the partner and children arising from  their  citizenship  as  well  as
    their absence of connection to Ghana. She  reminded  herself  that  the
    best interests of the children are a primary consideration and referred
    to relevant case law. The judge concluded that in all the circumstances
    of the case it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  to  expect  the  family  to
    accompany the appellant to Ghana [19-22].

6.    The judge also considered what the position would be if the  appellant
    were deported but his partner and children remained in the UK. She took
    into account the evidence given by the appellant's  partner  about  her
    history of depression and the difficulties that she would face  if  she
    was left to care for three children on her own. The  judge  found  that
    the difficulties that the mother would face would inevitably impact  on
    the experience of the three children [23]. Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances of the case the judge concluded that it would be  "unduly
    harsh" on the three children to deport the appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom [24]

7.    The respondent seeks to appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  assess  the  appeal
           through the 'lens of the immigration rules': SSHD v AJ  (Angola)
           [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.

      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing  to  consider  whether
           the consequences of separation would be unduly harsh.

       (iii)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  focussing  on  the  best
           interests of the children in assessing whether deportation would
           be unduly harsh.

Decision and reasons

8.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

9.    The date when the judge heard and decided the  appeal  in  early  2015
    was only a few months after the commencement of Part  5A  of  the  NIAA
    2002, which introduced the public interest considerations contained  in
    sections 117A-D. At the time it was not yet  clear  how  the  statutory
    provisions, including the exceptions to  deportation,  were  likely  to
    interact with the provisions contained within paragraphs 398-399 of the
    immigration rules. Decisions emphasising the  immigration  rules  as  a
    complete code such as MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2014] 2 All ER  543  and  AJ
    (Angola) were decided without reference to  those  provisions.  Further
    case law relating to the interaction between the two sets of provisions
    did not emerge until the beginning of 2015:  see  Chege  (section  117D
    Article 8 approach) [2015] UKUT 165.

10.   In view of the fact that section 117A requires a court or tribunal  to
    have regard to the public interest considerations contained in sections
    117B-C in deportation cases, the judge's approach cannot be criticised.
    Changes to the immigration rules coincided with the commencement of the
    statutory provisions. The test of "unduly harsh"  formed  part  of  the
    exceptions to deportation contained in paragraph 399 of the immigration
    rules and section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002. While it seems  clear  that
    it was intended that the new provisions should be harmonised  with  one
    another the wording of  the  immigration  rules  introduced  particular
    steps to the assessment of "unduly harsh".  Paragraph  399(a)  requires
    consideration of whether it would be unduly harsh to require a child to
    live in the country where the person is  to  be  deported  as  well  as
    whether it would be unduly harsh to remain in the UK without the person
    who is  to  be  deported.   If  the  intention  was  to  harmonise  the
    provisions so that they could be used together in  a  sensible  way  it
    seems surprising that the wording differed  between  the  two  sets  of
    provisions. Nevertheless, it seems clear that the core purpose  of  the
    exceptions contained  in  the  immigration  rules,  which  are  loosely
    mirrored in the statutory exceptions, is to assess whether  deportation
    is likely to be "unduly harsh" on a child.

11.   Although it has now become clear  that  the  focus  of  an  assessment
    should still be made, in the first instance, through the 'lens  of  the
    rules' I am satisfied that, even if  the  judge  did  not  specifically
    refer to the criteria outlined in paragraph 399(a), in  substance,  she
    dealt with all the relevant matters. She considered the position of the
    family as a whole, both in relation to the situation  that  they  would
    face if they had to accompany the appellant to Ghana, as  well  as  the
    situation they would face if  they  remained  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant.

12.   The judge took  into  account  and  gave  due  weight  to  the  public
    interest considerations and was entitled to make findings  relating  to
    the best interests of the children. It is not arguable  that  the  best
    interests of the children are not relevant to the overall assessment of
    whether the  effect  of  deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  on  a
    qualifying child. The respondent has a duty to consider the welfare  of
    children by virtue of  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 ("BCIA 2009"). The best interests of children  are
    a primary consideration in the assessment of a case  under  Article  8:
    see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4. While the  public  interest  in
    deportation is an additional and very weighty factor that must be taken
    into account, the exceptions to deportation contained in paragraph  399
    and section 117C(5) accept that the public interest in deportation  may
    be outweighed in  circumstances  where  deportation  is  likely  to  be
    "unduly  harsh"  on  other  family  members.  The  public  interest  is
    reflected in the stringent nature of the test of "unduly harsh".  While
    I agree that the test is not simply a  best  interests  assessment,  it
    cannot be said that the judge erred in considering the  best  interests
    of  the  children  as  part  of  her  overall  assessment  of   whether
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" on the children in this  particular
    case.

13.   For the reasons given above I conclude that even if the  judge  failed
    to make close reference to the provisions contained in paragraph 399(a)
    of the immigration rules it made no material difference to the  outcome
    of the appeal because she had, as a matter of fact, considered all  the
    relevant factors before coming to the conclusion that deportation would
    be "unduly harsh" on the children. While another judge might have  come
    to a different conclusion on the facts of the case  her  findings  were
    open to her on the evidence.  The  judge  was  required  to  take  into
    account the best interests of the children as part of that  assessment.
    It could not be said that her conclusions relating  to  the  effect  of
    deportation on the appellant's children were irrational  or  outside  a
    range of reasonable responses to the evidence.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand

Signed   [pic]   Date  10 March 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








