
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01421/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            DONALD CLINTON BAILEY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr C. Jacobs of counsel, instructed by Bushra Ali,
solicitors


                                  DECISION

      1. The Secretary of  State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal
         against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox  who,  by  a
         decision promulgated on 4 February 2015, allowed Mr Bailey's appeal
         against a deportation order that had been made  against  him  as  a
         consequence  of  his  conviction  and  imprisonment  for   criminal
         offences committed by him. That means that it is the  Secretary  of
         State that is the appellant before the Upper Tribunal and Mr Bailey
         is the respondent. However, as it will be  necessary  to  reproduce
         extracts from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, it  is
         convenient, in the interests of consistency, for me to refer to  Mr
         Bailey  as  the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
         respondent.

      2. As we shall see, Mr Bailey's immigration history and his history of
         criminal offending is at the heart of the issues that  fall  to  be
         considered and so it is necessary to set  out,  at  the  outset,  a
         summary of those matters.

      3. The appellant, who is a citizen of Jamaica born on 19  March  1975,
         arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2000 and was admitted  as  a
         visitor for three months until 17 June 2000. He was then  25  years
         old. Having applied for and been  granted  an  extension  of  leave
         until 18 September 2000, so that he had the benefit of a  full  six
         months leave, presumably as a visitor,  he  overstayed  that  leave
         and in October 2002 he was married to a British citizen and applied
         for leave to remain on the basis  of  that  marriage.  However,  in
         November 2002 the appellant was convicted of a number of  offences,
         including failing to stop after a road  traffic  accident,  driving
         otherwise in accordance with a driving licence and driving  without
         insurance. After this, his application  for  leave  to  remain  was
         rejected because essential documentary material was absent from it.
         He made a further such application that was  rejected  for  similar
         reasons in March 2003. Undeterred,  he  made  yet  another  similar
         application, in April 2003.

      4. While that application was pending two significant events occurred.
         On  2  November  2005  the  appellant  was  convicted  before   the
         Northampton Crown Court for offences of assault occasioning  actual
         bodily  harm  and  harassment,  for  which  he  was  sentenced   to
         concurrent prison sentences of 2 years. A further conviction  arose
         in November 2005 for driving whilst disqualified and uninsured. The
         appellant was released from custody in May 2006 and in October 2006
         he withdrew his application for leave  as  a  spouse  because  that
         relationship had broken down.

      5. In 2007 the appellant commenced his relationship with  his  present
         partner, Ms Hamid, with whom he now has two children,  born  on  26
         March 2008 and 13 July 2009. In July 2009, shortly after the  birth
         of his second daughter, the appellant was served with notice of his
         liability to be removed as a person unlawfully present in the UK.

      6. It is pertinent to observe that the appellant's leave expired on 18
         September  2000  and  the  first  of  his  subsequent   series   of
         applications for leave to remain  was  made  on  5  November  2002.
         Therefore, contrary to a submission made to the judge that  he  had
         leave continued by s3C of the Immigration Act  1971,  a  submission
         the judge accepted, the  appellant  had  been  in  fact  unlawfully
         present between September 2002 and 24 November  2009  when  he  was
         granted discretionary leave to remain, until 24 November  2012,  in
         response to an application made on 28 August  2009.  The  appellant
         made a further application,  on  11  March  2010,  to  convert  his
         discretionary leave into leave to remain, that being successful.

      7. The difficulty with  those  last  two  applications  was  that  the
         appellant  had  failed  to  disclose  his   criminal   convictions,
         answering in the negative a direct question enquiring if he had any
         criminal convictions.

      8. Thus, that grant of leave was, on its face, obtained fraudulently.

      9. Those applications had  been  successful  because  the  information
         offered by the appellant was accepted at face value, the respondent
         explaining that a lack of resources meant  that  every  application
         could not be checked. However, when the appellant submitted an  in-
         time application for  further  leave,  that  was  referred  to  the
         Criminal Casework Team and, on 17 March  2014,  the  appellant  was
         advised that he was liable to be deported.

     10. The decision under challenge in these proceedings is  that  of  the
         respondent made on 4 July 2014 to  make  a  deportation  order.  In
         explaining the reasons for  that  decision,  the  respondent  said,
         referring to the appellant's  conviction  for  assault  occasioning
         actual bodily harm and harassment:

             "The Secretary of State regards as particularly serious  those
             offences involving violence, sex, arson and drugs.

             Also taken into account is the sentencing Court's view of  the
             seriousness of the  offence,  as  reflected  in  the  sentence
             imposed, as well as the effect of that type of  crime  on  the
             wider community. The type  of  offence  and  its  seriousness,
             together with the need to  protect  the  public  from  serious
             crime and its effects are important factors  when  considering
             whether deportation is in the public interest. In addition  to
             those factors your client's  offence(s)  have  been  carefully
             looked at. ..."

         The   respondent   then   considered   the    appellant's    family
         circumstances, with reference to both  the  applicable  immigration
         rules then in force and  her  duty  under  s  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. However, it  was  plain  that
         did not assist the appellant because  as  the  decision  was  taken
         before para 399(a) of the rules was amended  with  effect  from  28
         July 2014, he did not fall  within  the  exception  to  deportation
         provided because there was another family member, their mother, who
         could remain in the United Kingdom to care for the  two  daughters.
         Nor did the appellant's relationship with Ms Hamid bring him within
         the  exception  provided  by  the  rules   in   respect   of   such
         relationships.

     11. Similarly, it is not in dispute that it was open to the  respondent
         to find that the appellant could not rely upon  the  provisions  of
         the rules to avoid deportation on the basis  of  his  private  life
         established in the UK.

     12. Under a heading "Discussion, Findings and  Conclusions"  the  judge
         set out the reasoning that  led  to  his  decision  to  allow  this
         appeal. He said, at para 10, that he was initially "puzzled" by the
         deportation decision. Although the appellant had committed  serious
         offences in 2004 he had not been made subject to deportation at the
         time despite being imprisoned. The judge said:

             "... he had not offended since but  had  rather  settled  down
             (since about 2006) into a family life  relationship  with  his
             partner and daughters  and  had  been  granted  extensions  of
             leave. It seems to me  extraordinary  in  those  circumstances
             that in February 2014 (some  fifteen  months  after  his  2012
             application for further leave to remain) his case should  have
             been referred to the Criminal Casework  Team  leading  to  the
             decision now under appeal. Indeed, at the outset  I  asked  Mr
             Smith (who appeared for  the  respondent)  whether  he  really
             wished to defend the decision..."

         But, the judge went on to say that as the case  proceeded,  and  it
         became clear that the appellant had  secured  leave  to  remain  by
         falsely representing that he had  no  convictions,  it  became  "at
         least possible to understand why the respondent took the  view  she
         had". He continued:

             "Now all of this does put the matter in a  somewhat  different
             light. Nevertheless, it was still Miss Rutherford's submission
             (counsel  for   the   appellant)   that   the   decision   was
             "outrageous"."

         This was because, the appellant had not earlier been  made  subject
         to deportation action; he was a "hardworking man"  who  had  turned
         his life around and during the period when the respondent failed to
         take enforcement action he  had  formed  a  relationship  with  his
         present partner, a British citizen, and they had had two children.

     13. The judge then went on  to  set  out  a  lengthy  extract  from  Ms
         Rutherford's skeleton argument, making clear that  he  agreed  with
         all that she had written. Indeed, at para 16  of  his  decision  he
         said that he "adopted" those sections he  reproduced.  Although  at
         the time of the decision the issue  under  the  rules  was  whether
         there was another family member available to care for the  children
         should the appellant be deported, by the date of  the  hearing  the
         rules had been changed and the question  for  the  judge  was  that
         posed by the current version of the rules, that being  whether  the
         effect of the appellant being deported and the  children  remaining
         here without him, with their mother,  would  be  unduly  harsh:  YM
         (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.   The  judge  found  that  it
         would be unduly harsh to expect the children and Ms Hamid  to  give
         up their lives in the UK and to move to Jamaica.  That  perhaps  is
         uncontroversial  given  that  the  children  are  British  citizens
         settled in their education. It is necessary to set out the  reasons
         why Ms Rutherford submitted, and the judge accepted, it would  also
         be unduly harsh upon the children to remain in the  United  Kingdom
         without their father:

             "In the alternative it would be unduly harsh to expect them to
             remain here without their father. He is part of  their  family
             unit. Not only does he provide  for  them,  he  plays  a  very
             active role in their upbringing.  To  remove  him  from  their
             lives, when all they have known is living with  both  parents,
             would be grossly unfair, especially in  the  circumstances  of
             this case."

     14. The section of Ms Rutherford's skeleton argument reproduced by  the
         judge concluded with a  reference  to  s117C  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended. The effect of that was
         that it was not in the children's best interests  to  be  separated
         from their father and the  effect  upon  them  of  the  appellant's
         deportation would be unduly harsh. This was because:

             "... the SSHD accepts that their father's deportation  is  not
             necessarily in the children's best interests. Therefore it  is
             in their best interests that their father be allowed to remain
             in the UK so they can maintain their relationship with him."

         Building upon that  premise,  the  judge  reproduced  more  of  the
         skeleton argument that he had "adopted":

             "There has been an extraordinary amount of delay in this case.
             The delay is significant and is of relevance when  determining
             the Article 8 aspect of this case..."

     15. If the Secretary of State's representative did make any submissions
         to the contrary we do not know what they were because the  decision
         of the judge is silent as to that. The judge concluded:

             "In  my  assessment,  the  Appellant  falls  squarely   within
             exception 2 at Section  117C(5)  of  the  2002  Act.  In  such
             circumstances Parliament has decreed that the public  interest
             does  not  require  the  Appellant's  deportation.   Therefore
             whether one talks  in  terms  of  "exceptional  circumstances"
             under  the  Rules  or  "disproportionality"  under  Article  8
             itself, the result  is  the  same.  The  deportation  decision
             cannot stand and the appeal must be allowed."

     16. It is not altogether easy to follow that reasoning and to  be  sure
         of the precise basis upon which the decision to  allow  the  appeal
         was founded. It would appear from the opening words of that finding
         that the appeal has been allowed because the judge found  that  the
         effect upon the children of the appellant's  deportation  would  be
         unduly harsh so that, the exception in s117C(5) applied.

     17. That seems to be the view also of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  who
         said, in granting permission to appeal:

             "It is arguable that any consideration  of  "undue  harshness"
             under para 399 of  the  immigration  rules  should  involve  a
             public interest assessment.  It  is  also  arguable  that  the
             Judge's failure to consider the  appellant's  unlawful  status
             when his relationship with his  partner  was  established  may
             have affected his conclusions."

         I would add that the same can be said in respect of  an  assessment
         under s117C(5). Although expressing the view that  there  was  less
         cogency in it, Judge Blum granted permission also on the basis that
         the judge erred in placing the weight he did  on  the  respondent's
         delay.

Submissions

     18. For the Secretary of State Mr Whitwell submitted that the  decision
         of Judge Cox disclosed a number of material errors of law.  He  had
         failed to appreciate that the  appellant's  private  life  and  his
         relationship with his partner were both established  while  he  was
         unlawfully present in the United Kingdom. The judge failed to  have
         regard to the public  interest  arguments  when  carrying  out  his
         assessment  and  failed  to  realise  that  the  appellant  had  no
         expectation of being granted any form of leave after having  served
         his prison sentence in 2006. The leave he did secure  was  obtained
         by falsely asserting that he had no convictions, a false  statement
         he made not once but three times  in  submitting  applications.  Mr
         Whitwell submitted that the judge erred also  in  failing  to  have
         proper regard to the case being put forward  by  the  Secretary  of
         State. Having taken the  provisional  view  that  the  decision  to
         deport was "outrageous" the judge  adopted  the  skeleton  argument
         setting out the appellant's case and failed  to  engage  adequately
         with the arguments that pointed the other way.

     19. Mr Whtwell submitted also  that  in  leaving  out  of  account  any
         consideration of the public  interest  arguments  when  considering
         whether the impact upon the children  would  be  unduly  harsh  the
         judge had fallen into legal error,  for  reasons  set  out  in  KMO
         (section 117-unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC).

     20. For the appellant Mr  Jacobs  submitted  that  the  judge  made  no
         material error of law. There had been far too long a  delay  before
         taking deportation action and the judge was entitled  to  consider,
         as he did, that this  was  a  determinative  factor.  Although  the
         appellant had no leave to remain when he established and built  his
         private and family life, the appellant and his family   could  not,
         Mr Jacobs argued, have had any expectation that deportation  action
         would be pursued. Developing that submission, Mr Jacobs  said  that
         the expectation that there  would  be  no  deportation  action  was
         reinforced by the grant  of  leave  in  November  2009.  Mr  Jacobs
         accepted, though, that the judge was wrong to proceed on the  basis
         that the appellant had leave under s3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

     21. Mr Jacobs did not accept that the judge had failed to consider  the
         respondent's case. He  pointed  to  paragraphs  11  to  13  of  the
         decision, submitting that in the  first  of  those  paragraphs  the
         judge  identified  the  Secretary  of  State's  "best  points";  at
         paragraph 12 he discussed the points that spoke in the  appellant's
         favour and in paragraph 13 he explained that he adopted the  course
         set out in the  skeleton  argument  submitted  on  the  appellant's
         behalf as his prefers view of those competing submissions.

     22. The primary position adopted by Mr Jacobs was that  the  judge  did
         factor the public interest  arguments  into  his  assessment  under
         s117C(5) so that in finding that the effect of deportation upon the
         appellant's children would be unduly harsh he did take the approach
         advocated in KMO. That was because in applying s117C(5)  he  "must"
         have done so. If that submission  was  not  accepted,  and  in  the
         alternative, Mr Jacobs said that the correct approach was that  set
         out in the earlier reported decision MAB (para 399 "unduly  harsh")
         USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) so that KMO was wrongly decided and  so
         if the judge had not had regard to the public interest arguments no
         error of law was disclosed.




   Conclusion:

     23. I am satisfied that, for the reasons that follow the judge did make
         material errors of law such that his determination cannot stand.

     24. The judge  determined  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  a  mistaken
         understanding of the appellant's immigration history. It  is  clear
         from paragraph  12  that  the  judge  thought,  wrongly,  that  the
         appellant had 3C leave, whereas in fact, as I have observed  above,
         for most of the period up to November  2009  when  he  was  granted
         leave, the appellant was present unlawfully with no  leave  of  any
         kind. This error was a material one because the acceptance  of  the
         appellant as a "hard working man "who  had  "settled  down  into  a
         family life relationship with his partner  and  daughters  and  had
         been granted extensions of leave" did not adequately represent  the
         salient facts to be factored into the assessment.

     25. The judge failed, therefore,  to  recognise  that  the  appellant's
         private and family life was established and developed while he  was
         unlawfully present in the United Kingdom. The judge was required by
         s117B(4)   to  give  little  weight  to  private   life   and   the
         relationship formed with  the  appellant's  partner  while  he  was
         present unlawfully but because of the  error  made  concerning  his
         immigration status, he left that out of account.

     26. The judge was wrong also to give the weight he did to the  asserted
         delay by the respondent in taking enforcement action. No regard  at
         all was given to the fact that between September 2000, when a brief
         period of leave as a visitor had come to an end, and November  2009
         when  the  appellant  secured  the  grant  of  leave   by   falsely
         representing that he had no criminal convictions, the appellant was
         in fact under a legal obligation to leave the  United  Kingdom  and
         the respondent was entitled to assume that  he  would  and  so  was
         under  no  obligation  to  enforce  his  departure.  Instead,   the
         appellant remained unlawfully, committed serious criminal  offences
         and entered  into  two  successive  relationships,  which  produced
         children, all when he should not have been in the United Kingdom at
         all.

     27. Despite Mr Jacob's valiant efforts to draw from the determination a
         construction  that  demonstrates  the  contrary,  I   am   entirely
         satisfied that the judge failed to have proper regard to  the  case
         being advanced by the respondent. There is some reference to points
         taken by the respondent at paragraph 11 of the decision, but it  is
         impossible to see that the public interest arguments have  informed
         the assessment of  whether  the  effect  of  deportation  upon  the
         children would be unduly harsh. The judge allowed the  appeal  with
         reference to s117C(5). But the question of whether the effect  upon
         the children of the deportation would be unduly  harsh  has  to  be
         informed by all of the relevant circumstances and here  it  is  not
         apparent that has been the case.

     28. Both parties to an appeal are entitled to see that their  case  has
         been considered and the appeal determined on the basis of a correct
         understanding of the significant and relevant facts in  play.  That
         has not been the position in this appeal.

   Summary of decision:

     29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discloses  material
         legal error and is set aside.

     30. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to
         the extent that the appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
         to be determined afresh.


         Signed   [pic]
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 15 December 2015
