
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01830/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 March 2016                          |On 14 April 2016                  |
|Oral judgment                             |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                    [a c]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss V Laughton, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co
For the Respondent:    Miss N Willocks Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fisher promulgated on 10 February 2015, following a  hearing  at  North
    Shields  on  15  January  2015,  in  which  the  judge  dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds against the refusal of his claim  for
    asylum or leave to remain in the United Kingdom on any other basis.

2.   Judge Fisher did not accept that the appellant's account was  credible,
    in particular, relating to the issue of the applicants sexual  identity
    as a gay man and any risk that he may face on return to  Nigeria  as  a
    result.

3.   There are within the bundles available to the judge, in addition  to  a
    report from Janet Owen concerning the sexual  identity  issue,  reports
    from psychologists and psychiatrists relating to the appellant's mental
    health and reference to suicidal ideation. It was noted in paragraph 32
    of the determination that Miss Rasoul,  Counsel,  who  represented  the
    appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did   not   advance   the
    appellant's case  on  the  basis  that  Article  3  would  be  breached
    following the decision in J [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  This case has to  now
    be read in light of other case law such as N v UK and more recently  GS
    and EO (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT 00397(IAC) in which
    medical issues were looked at in some detail by the Court of Appeal.

4.   Article 8 was raised in relation to family and private life,  in  which
    the medical evidence appears to have  been  referred  too,  but  in  GS
    (India) the required structure of an Article 8 case based upon  medical
    evidence is set out by the court. Such a claim in proper form  was  not
    made out on the basis of the documents before the Tribunal hearing  the
    matter in North Shields.  What I will say at this  stage,  although  no
    specific material error is identified, is that if there are issues that
    arise as a result of mental health issues and the appellant's  position
    as a vulnerable individual which should  have  been  considered  it  is
    arguable Miss Laughton should have the opportunity to raise them at the
    next hearing provided she sets out  in  clear  terms  in  her  skeleton
    argument the exact nature of such a claim and the evidence being relied
    upon.

5.   I  also  mention  the  vulnerable  witness  issue,  as  one  ground  of
    challenge is that the judge did not treat the appellant as a vulnerable
    witness when  assessing  his  evidence.  It  does  not  appear  that  a
    submission was made to the Tribunal that the appellant should be viewed
    as such by Miss Rasoul although, for the reasons set out in the grounds
    seeking permission to appeal, it is arguable this is a matter in  which
    such a submission should be made at the start of the next hearing where
    the judge who hears  the  appeal  can  consider  whether  it  has  been
    established that the appellant is  a  person  who  should  be  properly
    viewed as a vulnerable witness and treated accordingly.

6.   Judge Fisher's starting point was  the  previous  determination.  Judge
    Fisher cannot be criticised for taking that as his  starting  point  in
    accordance with the Devaseelan  principles.  At  paragraph  23  of  his
    determination Judge Fisher sets out the  conclusions  of  the  previous
    Tribunal and notes halfway down that paragraph:

         "The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  appellant's  claim  to   fear
         persecution as a result of his sexual activities was false and that
         his injuries were more likely to have been caused during the war in
         Liberia than as a result of an attack on him and his partner."

7.   At paragraph 56 of the earlier determination the  panel  observed  that
    the appellant had been engaged on a path of  providing  misleading  and
    untruthful information to the UK authorities and that he sought to  use
    a false passport to travel to France.  At that time the Tribunal was of
    the belief that the appellant has spent time in Liberia.  His case  was
    found to be "yet another lie".

8.   At paragraph 24 of his determination Judge Fisher records that  he  has
    grave concerns about the appellant's credibility and reliability  as  a
    witness based upon his previous conduct in relation to  misleading  the
    UK authorities and previous claims for international protection.

9.   At paragraph 25 the Judge does not find the appellant has  been  candid
    with either him or Miss Owen, found the claim he had been  disowned  by
    his mother due to rumours of his sexuality not to be  true,  and  found
    that was part of the very core of the applicants case before the Judge.

10.  At paragraph 26 the Judge again refers to mistreatment  statements  and
    lies told by the appellant before concluding in paragraph 26: "I do not
    find that I can attach any real weight  to  his  evidence,  written  or
    oral."  I find that to be a clear finding by the Judge in  relation  to
    the weight given to the appellant's evidence.

11.  At paragraph  27,  the  first  three  words  of  which  are  "In  those
    circumstances", Judge Fisher goes on  to  consider  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the evidence of a witness who gave oral evidence on  behalf
    of the appellant and also the evidence of  a  Mrs  Janet  Owen  who  is
    described as an impressive witness who describes herself as a community
    support  worker  with  a  group  specialising  in  those  with   sexual
    orientation and gender identity  issues  in  the  north  east  and  her
    relationship and connection with a group known as the Rainbow Group.

12.  The Judge had to take that evidence into account but what Judge  Fisher
    was required to do  is  to  consider  that  evidence  as  part  of  the
    credibility assessment, not come to the conclusion that  the  appellant
    could not be believed and then taking that finding  regarding  lack  of
    credibility as determinative, effectively placing little or  no  weight
    upon the evidence that is  set  out  in  paragraphs  27  and  28.   Two
    relevant cases I have in mind in relation to this are the  case  of  HE
    [2004] UKIAT 321 in which the Tribunal said that where  the  report  is
    specifically relied upon as  a  factor  relevant  to  credibility,  the
    adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part of the findings  on
    credibility rather than just as an add on which does not undermine  the
    conclusions to which he would otherwise  come.   However  the  Tribunal
    also said that where the report simply recounts  a  history  which  the
    adjudicator is minded to reject and contains  nothing  which  does  not
    depend on truthfulness of the appellant the part which it can  play  in
    the assessment of credibility is negligible.

13.  I refer to the second part of the finding in HE because  Miss  Owen  in
    her report makes specific reference to an element  of  the  appellant's
    account which she  herself  is  able  to  confirm  accords  with  other
    evidence  she  is  aware  of  although,  as  a  result  of  a  duty  of
    confidentiality, she is unable to provide further detail in relation to
    the identity of the person concerned or the reason why she is  able  to
    make such a statement.

14.  That observation relates to a specific comment on a matter  that  arose
    during a sexual act being undertaken by the appellant with another male
    within the United Kingdom.  Whilst accepting that sexual conduct is not
    necessarily determinative of sexual identity, in the  context  of  this
    report, is was a very powerful observation made by Miss Owen.

15.  The second case is that of SS v Secretary  of  State  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1153 in which the Court of Appeal said that an error of law only  arose
    in this  type  of  situation  where  there  was  artificial  separation
    amounting to a structural failing, not where there was a mere error  of
    appreciation of the medical evidence. The Court of Appeal distinguished
    Mibanga, so I will say nothing further in relation to the Mibanga case.

16.  The judge on the face of the determination appears to have fallen  into
    the type of error  identified  by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  namely  the
    artificial separation point.   It  was  for  that  reason  I  made  the
    observation during submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State that
    perhaps the judge's findings on credibility should  more  appropriately
    have been included in paragraph 29. The rider being that  the  evidence
    in [27] and [28] properly supported them.  What we have is  an  adverse
    finding as to the credibility of the appellant in relation to  anything
    he says and the use of that to reject the evidence that follows.  I  do
    find this a material error of law  relating  to  the  core  element  in
    relation to which risk on return is claimed.  It amounts to a  material
    failing, making the further assessments by the  judge  in  relation  to
    that element arguably unsafe.

17.  In paragraph 29 of Judge Fisher's  determination,  the  conclusion  the
    appellant is not a genuinely gay man and that the judge did not  accept
    the appellant is reasonably likely to be gay is  arguably  infected  by
    the structural failure referred to above.

18.  In relation to the rejection of Janet Owen's evidence, for the  reasons
    stated above, the judge has given inadequate reasons for rejecting  the
    account given by Janet Owen especially in light of the other  statement
    by Janet Owen in the report that even if the appellant has  lied  about
    his past events and past history, her conclusion  in  relation  to  his
    sexual identity still stands.  The judge in paragraph 28 states he  was
    somewhat surprised that Miss Owen said if it  was  the  case  that  the
    appellant had lied  about  his  background  it  would  not  affect  her
    conclusion about his sexual orientation. That  is  a  comment  of  some
    concern because whether one's mother or grandmother did  whatever  they
    are said to have done or whether a person lied or made a false claim in
    relation to false identity in the past, that  may  not  necessarily  be
    determinative of the issue of sexual identity especially  where  it  is
    accepted that an individual may hesitate in terms  of  revealing  their
    true sexual preferences.

19.  The judge did observe that a lot of the information Miss Owen  referred
    to about sexual conduct and sexual practises is available in the public
    domain but that ignores Miss Owen's comment  that  the  nature  of  the
    detail the appellant gave to her was clearly indicative of a person who
    had been  involved in such sexual practices  and,  as  stated  earlier,
    there is the observation in relation to  something  of  which  she  had
    notice, of which only the appellant and  other  person  involved  could
    have known which gave weight to her observations.

20.  The submission made on behalf of the Secretary of State that the  issue
    of credibility was a matter for the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which was the best submission  Miss  Willocks  Briscoe  could  make,  I
    accept is an accurate statement of law. The problem in this case is not
    a misunderstanding of the legal principles, it is the  legal  error  in
    the structure by which the judge arrived at  the  conclusions  he  did.
    Weight is a matter for the Judge provided it is shown he has considered
    the evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and has given
    sufficient  reasons  for  the  decision  made.  In  this  case  neither
    requirement is arguably satisfied.

21.  For the above reasons I find material error of law.  The  determination
    must be set aside.

22.  As the process applied by the  judge  was  not  a  lawful  process  the
    appellant has been denied the opportunity to  have  his  case  properly
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

23.  I consider that it is appropriate in  all  the  circumstances  for  the
    matter to be remitted to North Shields to be heard by Designated  Judge
    Zucker or another experienced First-tier Judge nominated  by  him,  but
    excluding Judge Fisher and Judge Holmes who heard  the  appeal  of  the
    appellants partner and whose decision dismissing the same is also under
    challenge, on a day to be  fixed  before  the  end  of  July  2016  (if
    possible) on a date convenient to Miss Laughton who will have to travel
    from London to North Shields for the purposes of the hearing.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 8 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

