
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01233/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2015                      |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           KRZYSTOF ZENON JAWORSKI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   We shall refer to the respondent as the appellant as he was before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. He is a citizen of Poland and his date of birth is
    18 January 1987.

2.   The parties are aware of the appellant's immigration history and  there
    is no need for us to set it out in full.  The appellant has been in the
    UK since March 1995, since the age of eight.  He  came  here  with  his
    family.  He has here legally since October 2003.  Between 2004 and 2013
    he committed a number of criminal offences.  On 19 November 2013 he was
    convicted of assault by beating and ABH at Blackfriars Crown Court  and
    sentenced to fifteen months in total.  On 24 June 2015 a  decision  was
    made to deport him. He appealed against this decision  and  his  appeal
    was allowed under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations") by a panel comprising Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Abebrese and Miss S E Singer

3.   Permission to appeal against the decision  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cheales. Thus the matter came before us.

The Law

Directive 2004/38

4.   Recitals 23 and 24  in  the  preamble  to  Directive  2004/38  read  as
    follows:-

         "23. Expulsion of  Union  citizens  and  their  family  members  on
             grounds of public policy or public security is a measure  that
             can seriously harm persons who, having availed  themselves  of
             the rights and freedoms conferred on them by the Treaty,  have
             become genuinely integrated into the host  Member  State.  The
             scope  for  such  measures  should  therefore  be  limited  in
             accordance with  the  principle  of  proportionality  to  take
             account of the degree of integration of the persons concerned,
             the length of their residence in the host Member State,  their
             age, state of health, family and economic  situation  and  the
             links with their country of origin.

         24.  Accordingly, the greater the degree of  integration  of  Union
             citizens and their family members in the  host  Member  State,
             the greater the degree of protection against expulsion  should
             be.  Only  in  exceptional  circumstances  where   there   are
             imperative grounds of public  security,  should  an  expulsion
             measure be taken against Union citizens who have  resided  for
             many years in the territory  of  the  host  Member  State,  in
             particular  when  they  were  born  and  have  resided   there
             throughout  their  life.   In   addition,   such   exceptional
             circumstances should also apply to an expulsion measure  taken
             against minors, in order to protect  their  links  with  their
             family, in accordance with the United  Nations  Convention  on
             the Rights of the Child, of 20 November 1989."

5.   Article 27(1) and (2) of the Directive provide:

         "(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member  States  may
             restrict the  freedom  of  movement  and  residence  of  Union
             citizens   and   their   family   members,   irrespective   of
             nationality, on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health. These grounds shall not  be  invoked  to  serve
             economic ends.

         (2)  Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public  security
             shall comply with the principle of proportionality  and  shall
             be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the individual
             concerned.   Previous  criminal  convictions  shall   not   in
             themselves constitute grounds for taking such measures.

             The  personal  conduct  of  the  individual   concerned   must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of   society.
             Justifications that are isolated from the particulars  of  the
             case or that rely  on  considerations  of  general  prevention
             shall not be accepted."

6.   Under Article 28 of the Directive:

         "(1) Before taking an  expulsion  decision  on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security, the host Member  State  shall  take
             account of considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual
             concerned has resided on its territory, his/her age, state  of
             health, family and economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
             integration into the host  Member  State  and  the  extent  of
             his/her links with the country of origin.

         (2)  The host Member State  may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
             against Union citizens or their family  members,  irrespective
             of nationality, who have the right of permanent  residence  on
             its territory, except on serious grounds of public  policy  or
             public security.

         (3)  An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union citizens,
             except if the decision  is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of
             public security, as defined by Member States, if they:

             (a)  have resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous
                  ten years; or

             (b)  are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary for the
                  best interests of the child, as provided for in the United
                  Nations Convention on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  of  20
                  November 1989."

The 2006 Regulations

7.       "Decisions taken on  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
    health grounds:

         21-(1)   In this regulation a  'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
               decision taken on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
               security or public health.

           (2)    A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                ends.

           (3)    A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                person with a permanent right of residence under  regulation
                15 except on serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                security.

           (4)    A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-



                (a)    has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                    period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                    decision; or

                (b)    is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision
                    is necessary in his best interests, as provided for in
                    the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the
                    General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November
                    1989.

           (5)    Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
                policy or public security it shall, in addition to complying
                with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken
                in accordance with the following principles-

                (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality;

                (b)     the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned;

                (c)    the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                    represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
                    threat affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                    society;

                (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                    which relate to considerations of general prevention  do
                    not justify the decision;

                (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                    themselves justify the decision.

           (6)    Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                public policy or public security in relation to a person who
                is resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must
                take account of considerations such as  the  age,  state  of
                health, family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the
                person's length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
                person's social and cultural  integration  into  the  United
                Kingdom and the  extent  of  the  person's  links  with  his
                country of origin.

           (7)    In the case of a relevant decision taken  on  grounds  of
                public health-

                (a)    a disease that does not have  epidemic  potential  as
                    defined by the relevant instruments of the World  Health
                    Organisation or is not a disease (listed in  Schedule  1
                    to the Health Protection (Notification Regulations 2010)
                    shall not shall not constitute grounds for the decision;
                    and

                (b)    if the person concerned is  in  the  United  Kingdom,
                    diseases  occurring  after  the   three   month   period
                    beginning on the date on which he arrived in the  United
                    Kingdom shall not constitute grounds for the decision."

8.   The Court of Justice of the European Communities  in  the  judgment  of
    SSHD v MG [2014] EUECJ C-400/12 made the following ruling:

         "(1) On a proper a  proper  construction  of  Article  28(3)(a)  of
             Directive 2004/38/EC of the European  Parliament  and  of  the
             Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of the Union
             and their family members to move and reside freely within  the
             territory of the Member States amending Regulation  (EEC)  No.
             1612/68  and  repealing  Directives  64/221/EEC,   68/360/EEC,
             72/194/EEC,  73/148/EEC,  75/34/EEC,  75/35/EEC,   90/364/EEC,
             90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC,  the  10-year  period  of  residence
             referred  to  in  that  provision  must,  in   principle,   be
             continuous and must be calculated by counting  back  from  the
             date of the decision ordering  the  expulsion  of  the  person
             concerned.

         (2)  Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted  as
             meaning that  a  period  of  imprisonment  is,  in  principle,
             capable both of interrupting the continuity of the  period  of
             residence for the purposes of that provision and of  affecting
             the decision regarding the grant of  the  enhanced  protection
             provided for  thereunder,  even  where  the  person  concerned
             resided in the host Member State for the  10  years  prior  to
             imprisonment. However, the fact that that  person  resided  in
             the host Member State for the 10 years prior  to  imprisonment
             may be  taken  into  consideration  as  part  of  the  overall
             assessment  required  in  order  to  determine   whether   the
             integrating links previously forged with the host Member State
             have been broken."

The Background and the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

9.   Before the First-tier Tribunal there was a record  of  the  appellant's
    previous convictions.  Those noted on this record were  agreed  by  the
    appellant.  There are a number of offences committed by  the  appellant
    when he was a child and for which he was convicted by the Youth  Court.
    On 10 January 2013 he was convicted of possession of a class A drug for
    which he was fined.  On 28 October 2013 he was convicted of  possession
    of a class B drug for which he was fined. (He  was  also  convicted  of
    failing to surrender on this  occasion  and  fined).   At  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal there was reference to a conviction  for
    ABH in 2005 which was not reflected in the record.  It  came  to  light
    because of reference to it in an OASys  report.  It  appears  that  the
    victim died as a result of the injuries, but it  is  obvious  that  the
    appellant was not found to be legally responsible for this  because  of
    the nature of the conviction.  It is not clear from the  evidence  what
    sentence the appellant received, but the Secretary  of  State  was  not
    relying on any term of imprisonment that may have resulted  from  this.
    The trigger offences are those which the appellant was convicted of  on
    13 November 2013 and it is this period of imprisonment that ensued that
    is relied on by the Secretary of State to maintain that  the  appellant
    is not entitled to enhanced protection under the 2006 Regulations.

10.  At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  and  his
    wife gave evidence.  The Tribunal  found  that,  bearing  in  mind  the
    appellant's length of residence  and  ties  to  the  UK,  it  would  be
    difficult for him to reintegrate should he return to Poland.  The panel
    indicated that they accepted the appellant's submissions in relation to
    the seriousness of the offences committed by the appellant reflected in
    the sentence and at [15] the Tribunal stated as follows:

         "The Tribunal is of  the  view  that  the  appellant  does  satisfy
         Regulation 21(4) in that the conviction was granted on 19  November
         2013 and that he was given discretionary leave on 23 October  2003.
         Therefore, when one counts back he has on balance  resided  in  the
         United Kingdom for a period  of  ten  years  and  therefore  it  is
         suitable in this instance for this matter to  be  determined  under
         level 3 imperative test.  The panel based on the findings above  do
         not find that  the  offences  are  so  serious  so  as  not  to  be
         determined under the level 3 imperative test."

11.  At [16] the Tribunal went on to find as follows:

         "The Tribunal also finds that the appellant does have a  family  in
         this country and this is not only his wife and three children  with
         whom he resides with but also his parents and his  extended  family
         in this country.  He has resided in this country since the age of 8
         and  the  Tribunal  makes  a  finding  that  he  does  not  have  a
         relationship with his family who may  remain  in  Poland.   In  any
         event the evidence on the family  who  are  in  Poland  was  rather
         vague.  The Tribunal therefore accepts that the appellant  has  all
         his cultural and social links in the United  Kingdom  and  that  it
         would not  be  proportionate  for  this  to  be  interrupted.   The
         Tribunal also considered the personal conduct of the appellant  and
         notes that he did plead guilty  and  has  served  his  sentence  in
         prison.  He also has the support of his  family  and  that  he  had
         called his wife to give evidence on his behalf and the panel  found
         her to be a credible witness in respect of her  evidence  regarding
         her relationship with the appellant and their family life."

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

12.  The first ground of appeal maintains that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not engage with the acquisition of imperative protection in  accordance
    with SSHD v MG [2014] EUECJ C-400/12.  The second ground maintains that
    the overall proportionality assessment  is  flawed  because  the  Judge
    adopted the incorrect threshold and the fact  that  the  appellant  has
    been assessed at medium risk of re-offending and medium risk of harm is
    a significant factor in the  overall  proportionality  assessment.  The
    third ground maintains that the position in relation to family ties  in
    Poland is inconsistent with Balogun v UK  [2012]  ECHR  614.   In  oral
    submissions Mr Clarke  accepted  that  the  second  and  third  grounds
    overlap.

13.  Mr Clarke conceded  that  the  appellant  has  accumulated  ten  years'
    residence in the UK prior to the imposition of a custodial sentence  in
    2013 and that he has permanent residence here  in  the  UK.  Mr  Clarke
    maintained that integration was broken as a  result  of  the  custodial
    sentence in  2013  and  the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to  enhanced
    protection under reg 21 (4). He is entitled to protection under reg  21
    (3). He conceded that if we were not with him in relation to the  first
    ground of appeal, it would be difficult for him to persuade us that the
    second and third were made out.

14.  Mr Jaworski was  not  represented.  We  gave  him  the  opportunity  to
    address us.  The appeal had been adjourned on two occasions  to  enable
    him to obtain legal representation and he did not make  an  application
    to adjourn the hearing before us.

Conclusions

15.  It is clear from  the  case  of  SSHD  v  MG  that  grant  of  enhanced
    protection provided for in Article 28(3)(a) of Directive  2004/38  must
    be calculated by counting back from the date of the  decision  ordering
    the person's expulsion and that the fact that the appellant has resided
    in the UK during the ten year period to imprisonment may be taken  into
    consideration as part of the overall assessment which is  required  for
    determining whether the integrating links previously  forged  with  the
    host Member State, in this case the UK, have been broken and  thus  for
    determining whether the enhanced protection provided for Article  28(3)
    and Regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations will be granted.

16.  The panel proceeded on the basis that the appellant had resided in  the
    UK for a period of ten years, having counted  back  from  the  date  of
    conviction.  However,  this  is  an  error  because  they  should  have
    considered the period of residence during the ten years  preceding  the
    decision to expel the appellant as opposed to when he  was  imprisoned.
    Had they done  this  they  would  have  concluded  that  there  was  an
    interruption in continuity. Imprisonment is capable of interrupting the
    continuity of the period  of  residence  and  therefore  affecting  the
    decision regarding the grant of the enhanced protection even where  the
    person concerned, as the appellant, has  resided  in  the  host  member
    state for ten years prior to imprisonment.

17.  The issue that the Tribunal should have considered was  the  degree  of
    integration established prior to the custodial sentence and whether  or
    not this had been broken as a result of the imprisonment.  If  so  this
    would prevent the appellant from enjoying enhanced protection.

18.  The findings of the panel in relation to the  appellant's  family  life
    here and the lack  of  ties  with  Poland  are  in  our  view  entirely
    sustainable.  The appellant has a wife and three young children here in
    the UK and notwithstanding his criminal convictions prior to  the  date
    of imprisonment in 2013, it is  clear  that  the  appellant  was  fully
    integrated into life here in the UK at the date of imprisonment. He had
    been here for eighteen years (since the age of eight) and  had  a  wife
    and children here. The period of imprisonment of fifteen months must be
    considered in the context of the fact that the appellant has been  here
    since 1995 and in our  view  it  is  an  untenable  argument  that  the
    integrating links were broken as a result of this relatively short term
    of imprisonment. The panel inadequately reasoned  their  decision  that
    the appellant benefited from enhanced protection and  fell  into  error
    when calculating the relevant period;  however,  they  arrived  at  the
    correct conclusion.

19.  Under all three levels of protection the  decision  must  be  taken  in
    accordance with the principles set out in reg 21 (5), and account taken
    of reg 21 (6). The  panel  did  not  make  specific  reference  to  the
    regulations, but it assessed proportionality  in  the  context  of  the
    appellant's  family  life  and  integration  here  and  considered  the
    appellant's links with  Poland.   The  grounds  do  not  make  specific
    reference to reg 21 (5) or (6) and Mr Clarke did not refer specifically
    to  them.  Grounds  two  and  three   challenge   the   proportionality
    assessment. We take  on  board  Mr  Clarke's  concession  that  if  the
    appellant benefits from enhanced protection grounds two and three  have
    limited force. We agree with this and  briefly  deal  with  them.  Both
    grounds  maintain  that  the  proportionality  assessment   is   flawed
    primarily because the panel erroneously found that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to enhanced protection. However,  it  is  our  view  that  the
    appellant is entitled to enhanced protection  and  any  proportionality
    assessment must be considered in the light of this.

20.  Ground two maintains that as the appellant has been assessed as  medium
    risk of re-offending and harm, deportation is proportionate. The ground
    does not identify an error of law, but simply amounts to a disagreement
    with the findings of the panel and an attempt to re-argue the case.  In
    any event, the panel took into account the risk  of  re-offending  (see
    [14]) and weighed it into the balance. There is no  specific  reference
    in the determination to reg 21 (5)  (c),  but  the  evidence  does  not
    establish that the appellant's conduct represents  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society. Ground three maintains that the appellant's  lack
    of engagement with family members in Poland does not disclose  a  basis
    to resist deportation and his family life here  is  not  determinative.
    The ground does not disclose an error of law, but  as  ground  two,  it
    amounts to a disagreement with the findings of the panel and an attempt
    to re-argue the case.  In any event, the appellant's family  life  here
    and his lack of family life in Poland were not determinative factors in
    the proportionality assessment conducted by the panel,  but  they  were
    factors weighed into the balance in accordance with reg 21  (6).   (The
    facts in Balogun v UK are not analogous to the facts in this case.  The
    appellant was subject to a deportation  under  the  1971  Act  and  the
    proportionality assessment was under Article 8. The appellant's  mother
    lived in the country of origin and the court did not  accept  that  the
    appellant had family life here which would engage Article 8).

21.  The appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed.  There  is  no
    material error of law and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    allow the appeal under the 2006 Regulations is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 4 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

