
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01043/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 01 September 2015                 |On 03 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SIMBA MAYEMBE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent :   Mr A Otchie, counsel, instructed by Victory at Law
Solicitors
For the Appellant :    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department  appeals  against  the
       decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Swaniker  who,  in  a
       determination promulgated on 06 May  2015,  allowed  the  Appellant's
       appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 29  May  2014  to
       make a deportation order against him pursuant to section 32(5) of the
       UK Borders Act 2007.

    2. For the sake of convenience I will refer to the parties as they  were
       before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

    3. The Appellant is a national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
       (DRC), date of birth 11 February 1993. He entered the United  Kingdom
       in 2004 when he was 11 years old as a dependent of  his  parents.  In
       2007,  following  an  earlier  refusal   of   his   father's   asylum
       application, the Appellant was granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
       outside the immigration rules in line with that of the  rest  of  his
       family.

    4. On 25 October 2012 the Appellant was convicted of robbery of  a  taxi
       driver at knife-point and a further offence  during  the  operational
       period of a suspended sentence. He was sentenced  to  a  total  of  3
       years imprisonment, the robbery offence attracting a sentence of  two
       and a half years. These offences were committed  when  the  Appellant
       was 19 years old. The Appellant has previous convictions for criminal
       damage and theft in 2009, and  possession  of  a  class  A  drug  and
       robbery in 2011. He  received  a  10  months  suspended  sentence  in
       respect of the 2011 robbery, which had been suspended for 24 months.

    5. Having satisfied herself that the section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
       2007 applied to  the  Appellant  by  reason  of  his  conviction  and
       sentence of over 12 months imprisonment,  the  Respondent  considered
       whether the Appellant fell within any of the exceptions contained  in
       section 33  of  the  same  Act.  Having  considered  the  Appellant's
       background the Respondent found that the Appellant did not  meet  the
       requirements set out in paragraph  399(a)  or  (b)  or  399A  of  the
       immigration rules and that there were no  exceptional  circumstances,
       as required by paragraph 398, outweighing the public interest in  his
       deportation. The Respondent's assessment took  account  of  the  fact
       that the Appellant had a British national child with his  ex-partner,
       who was born on 04 February 2010. The  Respondent  accepted  that  it
       would be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom
       as she was a British citizen and had lived in the United Kingdom  all
       her life. The Respondent was however of the view that the child could
       remain with her mother in the United Kingdom.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    6. The Appellant's appeal against this decision was heard  on  11  March
       2015. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant,  his  sister,  his
       mother, his father, and the estranged mother  of  his  daughter.  The
       Judge first considered whether the Appellant met the requirements  of
       the immigration rules relating to deportation  decisions.  The  Judge
       considered the immigration rules as they were  when  the  deportation
       decision was made  (29  May  2014).  The  Judge  concluded  that  the
       Appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 399(a) as  the
       mother of his daughter would be able to care for her  in  the  United
       Kingdom. The Appellant was not in a relationship within anyone within
       the terms of paragraph 399(b). The Judge then went on to consider, in
       the context of the immigration rules constituting  a  complete  code,
       whether  there  were  exceptional  factors  such  as  to  render  the
       deportation a breach of section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. In so
       doing the Judge had regard to all the factors listed in section  117A
       to D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  Judge
       paid particular regard  to  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
       daughter and the impact on the child's relationship with  her  father
       in the event of his deportation. Having regard to the evidence before
       her the Judge found the Appellant's deportation would have an  unduly
       harsh impact on the child. The Judge then went  on  to  consider  the
       fact that the Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom since he  was
       11 years old (he was 22 years old at the date of the appeal hearing),
       that he had not returned to the DRC since his arrival and that he had
       no family in that country. The Judge fully considered the seriousness
       of the Appellant's criminal history and his index offence that led to
       the deportation  order,  and  the  strong  public  interests  in  his
       deportation. The  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  offence  fell
       towards the lower end of the scale of offending behaviour and that he
       was a young man of 19 years old when his index offence was committed.
       The Judge took account of the NOMS report relating to  the  Appellant
       and his conduct since his release from prison. Having holistic regard
       to her findings the Judge was satisfied that the public  interest  in
       the Appellant's deportation was  outweighed  by  the  impact  on  his
       family and that his deportation was not  necessary  in  a  democratic
       society.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    7. The Grounds contend that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  consider
       whether there were very compelling circumstances over and above those
       contained in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the immigration rules,  given
       that the Judge was not satisfied the Appellant met  the  requirements
       of paragraph 399. The Grounds further contend that the Judge erred in
       her assessment of the unduly harsh  test.  The  Respondent  submitted
       that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  relied  on  'fundamentally   normal'
       circumstances that did not establish  an  exception  to  the  express
       requirement under section 117C that deportation  was  required.   The
       Respondent contended that the decision to deport  the  Appellant  was
       proportionate and in line with the seriousness of  his  offence.  The
       Respondent stated that the child's primary carer was her mother,  and
       that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  presence  was
       necessary to prevent the child being ill-treated or  her  development
       being significantly impaired. While the Respondent acknowledged  that
       the Appellant's absence may result in 'some negative emotional impact
       on the child' the Respondent was of the  view  that  the  Appellant's
       relationship could continue through remote forms of communication and
       that there was no evidence the child would be  unable  to  visit  her
       father. The Grounds further argue that the  Judge  erred  in  law  by
       finding that the Appellant's offence fell towards the  lower  end  of
       the scale of offending on the basis that he was young, impressionable
       and led by bad company.

The error of law hearing

    8. At the hearing Mr. Clarke, representing the Respondent, accepted that
       the drafter of the Grounds proceeded on  the  basis  that  the  Judge
       considered the immigration rules as they  were  after  28  July  2014
       rather than at the date of the decision. In  these  circumstances  he
       proceeded to only rely on Ground 2,  that  relating  to  the  Judge's
       assessment of 'undue hardship'. Mr Clarke submitted  that  the  Judge
       was not entitled to find that the  Appellant's  offence  was  at  the
       lower end of the  offending  spectrum.  Mr  Clarke  pointed  out  the
       aggravating features of the offence, that it was pre-planned, that it
       was  committed  while  the  Appellant  was  subject  to  a  suspended
       sentence, and that the victim was vulnerable (he was a taxi  driver),
       and that the Appellant committed other offences in his youth. It  was
       submitted that to be unduly harsh required something more  than  mere
       separation.

    9.  Mr  Ochie,  representing  the  Appellant,  relied  on  his  skeleton
       argument. He submitted that the Judge placed detailed reliance on the
       authority of Chege (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015]  UKUT
       00165 (IAC) and that she properly took account  of  the  age  of  the
       child, the lack of contact the Appellant had with anyone in  the  DRC
       and the Appellant's relationship with his other family members.

   10. I indicated that I would reserve my decision.

Discussion

   11. The deport decision was made on 29 May 2014, prior to an amendment to
       the immigration rules on 28 July 2014  that  altered  the  provisions
       relating to deportations. However, paragraph A362 of the  immigration
       rules indicates that, "Where Article 8 is raised in  the  context  of
       deportation under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under  Article  8
       will only succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July
       2014 are met, regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or
       the deportation order, as appropriate, was served." It is clear  from
       both YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
       EWCA Civ 1292 (paragraph 39) and Chege (section 117D -  Article  8  -
       approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC) (paragraph 13) that, in the context
       of a  deportation  appeal,  the  Judge  should  have  considered  the
       immigration rules are they were at the date of the hearing and not at
       the date of the decision (consider also the authority of MK  (section
       55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC)).

   12. The Judge therefore misdirected herself in law  when  she  considered
       the appeal in the context of the immigration rules as  they  were  at
       the date of the decision. I must now consider whether this  error  of
       law materially undermined her  decision.  The  amended  form  of  the
       immigration rules, as from 28 July 2014, required, inter  alia,  that
       it be unduly harsh for the Appellant's child to live in the DRC,  and
       that it be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the
       Appellant. This mirrors the wording of section 117C, as inserted from
       28 July 2014 into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by
       the Immigration Act 2014. The Judge gave detailed  consideration,  in
       the context of Exception 2 in section 117C, as to whether the  effect
       of the Appellant's deportation on his child would be unduly harsh. At
       paragraph 29 the Judge specifically considered whether  it  would  be
       unduly harsh for the child to live in the DRC or  for  the  child  to
       remain without her father in the United  Kingdom.  In  so  doing  the
       Judge  materially  replicated  the  test  established  in   paragraph
       399(a)(ii) as of 28 July 2014. In these circumstances I am  satisfied
       that, in substance, the Judge has considered the relevant test  under
       paragraph 399(a)(ii) and that her consideration  of  the  immigration
       rules as of the date of the deportation decision does not  of  itself
       materially undermine her determination.

   13. In criticizing the Judge's assessment of the unduly  harsh  test  the
       Respondent  submitted  that   the   Appellant's   family   life   was
       'fundamentally normal' and that his separation from his  5  year  old
       daughter did not, without more, constitute undue hardship.

   14. In assessing whether the Judge legally erred in concluding  that  the
       deportation would have an unduly  harsh  impact  on  the  Appellant's
       daughter, both in respect of whether she could relocate  to  the  DRC
       and in respect of her remaining without the Appellant in  the  United
       Kingdom, I take account of the recently promulgated authority of  MAB
       (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC).  Headnotes  2
       and 3 of this authority establish  that  'unduly  harsh'  is  a  high
       threshold. "Unduly harsh" for an individual involves "...  more  than
       "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable,  unwelcome   or   merely
       difficult and challenging" consequences and  imposes  a  considerably
       more elevated or higher threshold. The consequences for an individual
       will be "harsh" if they are "severe" or  "bleak"  and  they  will  be
       "unduly" so if they are 'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh  taking
       into account of all the circumstances of the individual."

   15. In Bossade (ss.117A-D-interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415
       (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that the part 5A considerations in  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended,  only  come
       into play, in the  context  of  deportation  appeals,  at  the  stage
       involving a proportionality assessment under  paragraph  398  of  the
       immigration rules. With respect  to  consideration  under  paragraphs
       399, as in the present appeal, part 5A considerations have no  direct
       role when a court or tribunal is deciding whether an applicant  meets
       the substantive conditions  of  that  paragraph.  This  approach  was
       endorsed in MAB where the Upper Tribunal  indicated  that,  "...  the
       phrase "unduly harsh" in para 399 of the Rules (and s.117C(5) of  the
       2002 Act) does not import a balancing exercise requiring  the  public
       interest to be weighed against the circumstances  of  the  individual
       (whether child or partner of the deportee). The focus is solely  upon
       an evaluation of the consequences  and  impact  upon  the  individual
       concerned."

   16. Applying the above legal clarification  to  the  determination  under
       appeal, I am satisfied, for the following  reasons,  that  the  Judge
       properly applied the unduly harsh test in respect of  the  impact  on
       the Appellant's daughter of his proposed deportation.

   17. The Judge heard evidence from a number of witnesses, including his ex-
       partner, the mother of his child, relating to the extent and depth of
       his relationship with his daughter.  The  Judge  found  the  evidence
       credible and was satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship  with  his  daughter.  The  Judge  noted  the
       Respondent's concession in the decision under appeal that it was  not
       reasonable to expect the child to relocate to the DRC given that  she
       resided with her mother and was British. Given that the Appellant and
       the  mother  of  his  child,  which  whom  the  child  resided,  were
       estranged, the Judge concluded there was no realistic prospect of the
       mother abandoning her life, family and friends in the United  Kingdom
       to  enable  the  Appellant  to   continue   enjoying   a   meaningful
       relationship with his daughter.

   18. The Judge specifically found that  the  Appellant  had  a  close  and
       loving father-child relationship and that the Appellant was very much
       involved in the life of  his  daughter  and  was  concerned  for  her
       welfare. The Judge found the evidence of the nature  and  quality  of
       the relationship to be compelling. The Judge took account of the fact
       that the child was young, and noted the importance, at her  stage  of
       life, of the contribution and influence that the Appellant had on his
       daughter. The Judge made a finding of fact that,  given  the  parties
       economic circumstances as appeared from the evidence before  her,  it
       was unlikely that the Appellant's ex-partner would be  able  to  make
       many visits to the DRC with their daughter. The Judge found that  the
       level of the Appellant's interaction and active participation in  her
       life would come to an abrupt end upon his  deportation.  This  was  a
       conclusion the Judge was entitled to reach  on  the  evidence  before
       her.

   19.  The  Judge  found,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  that  the  Appellant's
       deportation would likely have a confusing and detrimental  effect  on
       his daughter who, at the age of 5, would be  unlikely  to  understand
       why her father had to leave the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  did  not
       consider, on the particular facts of this case, that the  possibility
       of remote communication could form any sound  basis  for  maintaining
       and developing a parent-child relationship or act as a substitute for
       a meaningful relationship. The Judge concluded that the  child  would
       be seriously adversely affected by the deportation of her father  and
       that to be deprived of his love and support would be unduly harsh. In
       so concluding the Judge had regard to what she found, as a  fact,  to
       be the inordinately severe impact on the child  as  required  by  the
       unduly harshness  test.  The  Judge  took  account  of  all  material
       considerations in reaching her conclusion as to  the  impact  on  the
       child and she applied the correct legal test.

   20. Given that the focus in respect of the assessment under paragraph 399
       is solely upon the evaluation of the consequences and impact upon the
       child, there was no requirement for the Judge to consider the factors
       under section 117A to D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act 2002, or for her to consider the circumstances and seriousness of
       the Appellant's offending.

Notice of Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed no material error of  law.



[pic]         02 September 2015
Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
