
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01301/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Mellow, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I make this order because  the  appellant
    claims to be a victim of trafficking. If that claim is right then she is
    entitled to privacy.

 2. This is an appeal brought by a female whose nationality  is  in  dispute
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to hear and dismiss  her
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to  deport  her  and
    remove her to Nigeria.  There are  several  unusual  elements,  not  the
    least being that the appellant has on different occasions  held  British
    passports, which have been subsequently revoked,  and  that  she  denies
    empathically being a citizen of Nigeria.

 3. When the case came before the First-tier Tribunal on 15  June  2015  the
    appellant did not appear.  An explanation for her absence was given.  It
    was that she was required by the appropriate housing authority to remove
    to different accommodation on the day that she should have  been  before
    the Tribunal.  One might have expected a  responsible  person  in  those
    circumstances to have notified her solicitors quickly,  who  could  have
    been expected to have both remonstrated with the authority and/or sought
    an adjournment. Neither of those things was done and when the case  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  she  was  faced  with  an  absent
    appellant, an explanation for absence that  was  wholly  unsubstantiated
    and not much else.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly asked herself if the appellant's
    presence was really important and concluded  that  it  was  not  because
    there was no statement from the appellant even though it was a case that
    cried out for an explanation from  the  appellant  and  there  had  been
    abundant time in which to produce a witness statement.

 5. If that is all there was to the case I would have been hard to  persuade
    that the judge had erred in refusing to adjourn.  I have the benefit  of
    hindsight and that might cause me  to  fall  into  error  but  with  the
    benefit of hindsight it is clear that the explanation  offered  for  her
    absence (that she was  required  to  remove  that  day)  is  a  truthful
    explanation.  There is a document from Clear Springs Group confirming it
    unequivocally. This is not a case of an appellant failing to appear  for
    a reason that she made up.

 6. There is a lot of evidence before the Tribunal that this appellant is  a
    vulnerable woman. I do not think it  is  helpful  to  go  into  all  the
    details here but there is a history of alleged sex trafficking and there
    are findings that the appellant  has  a  suicidal  ideation  and  mental
    health problems.  Although I understand the judge's  desire  to  get  on
    with the case, she should have applied her  mind  conspicuously  to  the
    requirements of the Rules. She should  have  looked  at  the  obligation
    under the Rule and asked herself whether the case could be  disposed  of
    justly without adjourning. If she had done that she would have concluded
    that it was not possible to do justly continue  with  the  hearing.  The
    vulnerability issues that were raised cast doubt on an apparent  finding
    that it was the appellant's fault  that  she  did  not  attend  and  the
    appellant's fault that she had not prepared a statement.

 7. I have been told today that the appellant had struck up  an  appropriate
    but personal relationship with her solicitor and her solicitor  was  not
    able to attend to her affairs for the entirely good reason that she  was
    on maternity leave. The appellant found it  difficult  to  have  similar
    confidence in a male solicitor that had replaced her.

 8. From the  perspective  of  a  person  who  understands  something  about
    preparing and presenting case and who might ordinarily be thought to  be
    thought of sound mind, this does not amount to much.  But  that  is  not
    what we are dealing with. We are dealing with a woman who is vulnerable.
    Although I recognise my findings are illuminated by hindsight, the judge
    should have given more thought  to  the  reasons  for  the  absence  and
    considered the possibility that it  was  not  a  case  of  an  appellant
    wilfully not cooperating but of an appellant  who  could  not  cooperate
    and, more importantly, who would cooperate if more time  was  given  and
    her solicitors were allowed more  time  in  which  to  give  appropriate
    advice.

 9. It is marginal but I am persuaded that the judge erred  in  law  in  not
    adjourning.

10. I am also satisfied that the judge erred in  law  making  the  decisions
    that she did because there are important tracts of  evidence  that  were
    not  considered.   Particularly  there  was  a  linguistic  report  from
    Professor French which, at face value, is persuasive evidence  that  the
    appellant is not Nigerian. It may not stand up to scrutiny  or  may  not
    amount to much when the evidence is considered "in the round" but it was
    not considered at all and it was a mistake on the judge's part.

11. Further the judge did not look or appear to look  at  a  medical  report
    from Professor Katona working for the Helen Bamber Foundation.  It  gave
    many reasons to  be  concerned  about  the  appellant's  mental  health.
    Neither did the judge look at a different medical report that dealt with
    suicidal ideation.

12. These omissions mean that her findings are not sound and  the  case  has
    to be heard again.

13. This is a case where the appellant did not get a  fair  hearing  in  the
    First-tier and Mr Tufan who was very careful to reserve the Secretary of
    State's position about any findings that ought  to  be  made  could  not
    argue against the basic premise that the disposal was unfair.

14. It follows under the terms of the Practice Direction  that  this  appeal
    is particularly  suitable  for  being  heard  again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

15. Counsel has asked for an expedited hearing.  I make it plain that  I  am
    not making such an order.  I do not know if I have power  to  order  the
    First-tier Tribunal to expedite the hearing but if I do I  do  not  make
    that order because I am in no position to  understand  the  implications
    for other cases of giving priority  to  this  one.   I  do  respectfully
    endorse Counsel's observations that this is a  case  that  needs  to  be
    heard and it may be the First-tier Tribunal  thinks  it  appropriate  to
    expedite the case. That is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal, not for
    me.

Notice of Decision

16. Nevertheless for all the reasons given I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I make an order that the case is heard again in the
    First-tier. No findings of fact are preserved.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 February 2016               |

