

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01476/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 8 April 2015                      |On 13 April 2015                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MELVIN LUIS CAVALLO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Italy, born on 3 January  1989.   He  was
    convicted  on  4  and  sentenced  on  31  March  2014  to  12   months'
    imprisonment for assault to severe injury and  robbery.    For  reasons
    explained in a letter dated 16 July  2014  the  respondent  decided  to
    deport him under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 3. The appellant claims to have been in the UK since 2006.  The respondent
    accepted that there was evidence that the appellant was in  the  UK  in
    2008 when named on his son's birth  certificate  and  at  the  time  of
    various criminal convictions, but not that he was continuously resident
    for 5 years, or exercising treaty rights, or had acquired the right  of
    permanent residence.  The question  was  whether  his  deportation  was
    warranted on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public  security.    The
    respondent held that  it  was,  and  that  even  if  he  had  permanent
    residence the requirement for serious grounds of  public  policy  would
    have been satisfied.

 4. A panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge P A Grant-Hutchison
    and Mr A E Armitage allowed the  appellant's  appeal  by  determination
    promulgated on 22 October 2014.  The panel was  satisfied  by  evidence
    from witnesses  of  the  appellant's  "history  of  residence  and  his
    activities" that he had the permanent right of  residence.   The  panel
    found the contents of the social work  report  to  have  been  "largely
    contradicted by the persuasive evidence of the appellant's  ex-partner"
    and that there were not serious grounds of public policy for  deporting
    him.

 5.  The  SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal  questioned  whether  part   of   the
    determination was missing.  It has now  been  ascertained  that  it  is
    complete as  intended.   There  is  misnumbering,  paragraph  23  being
    followed in error by paragraph 34.  The remaining criticism by the SSHD
    is that the determination is inadequately  reasoned,  and  speculative.
    The grounds do not  attack  the  finding  on  the  right  of  permanent
    residence.

 6. Mrs O'Brien pointed out that the panel had preferred a risk  assessment
    which came from a lay and partial witness  to  a  professional  report.
    That required considerable justification.  The reasons  given  did  not
    follow the relevant aspects of regulation 21 and speculated as  to  the
    future.   She  submitted  that  the  reasoning  in  the   determination
    (contained at paragraphs 21 and 22) is inadequate to  explain  why  the
    appeal succeeded and that the determination should be set aside.

 7. In a rule 24 response, the appellant argues  that  the  panel  did  not
    minimise but recognised the  appellant's  offending,  was  entitled  to
    prefer evidence from the appellant's partner to the social work report,
    gave reasons for doing so, and did not err in law.

 8. I prefer that line  of  submission.   The  panel  had  the  significant
    advantage of hearing the oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his
    witnesses.  They were entitled to find that credible.  They did not too
    readily accept all they were told, sensibly rejecting  the  appellant's
    version about his crime.  They were entitled to find that  "although  a
    brutal incident it can be categorised as a one off  event".   They  did
    not have to  give  any  lengthier  reasons  to  justify  their  overall
    judgement that serious grounds of public policy were not established.

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



                [pic]


                8 April 2015
                Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


