

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01743/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision promulgated         |
|on 4 May 2016                                 |On 17 May 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     B M
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Miss Wilkin instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background


          1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision
             of a panel of the First-tier Tribunal who allowed BM's  appeal
             against the order for his deportation from the United Kingdom.
          2. BM was born in April 1977 and is a national  of  Zimbabwe.  He
             entered the United Kingdom on  28  October  2002  and  claimed
             asylum.  His  claim  was  refused  but  allowed   on   appeal.
             Accordingly he was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a
             refugee on 9 June 2003. On 25 February 2010 BM  was  convicted
             at  Leicester  Crown  Court  of   sexual   assault,   one   by
             penetration,  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to   six   years
             imprisonment concurrent and required to sign the Sex Offenders
             Register.
          3. The Secretary of State served BM with a notice of liability to
             deportation on  the  28  November  2011  and  notification  of
             liability to cessation of refugee status on  2  December  2012
             which was reiterated on the 5 March 2013. Such a step being of
             importance as an exception to the deportation regime  provided
             by the UK Borders Act applies if deportation will  breach  the
             subject's rights under the Refugee Convention (Section  33  UK
             Borders Act 2007 - Exception 1. (Section  32(2)  which  arises
             where deportation would breach the Refugee Convention  or  the
             ECHR).
          4. The panel correctly recognised that it was for  the  Secretary
             of State to justify the cessation decision under Article 1C of
             the Refugee Convention.
          5. The Qualification Directive is not applicable to this case  in
             light of the date of the application for  refugee  status  and
             date of the original grant.
          6. Article 1C provides:


             C. This Convention shall cease to apply to any person  falling
             under the terms of section A if:

             (1) He has voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of
             the country of his nationality; or
             (2) Having  lost  his  nationality,  he  has  voluntarily  re-
         acquired it; or
             (3)  He  has  acquired  a  new  nationality,  and  enjoys  the
             protection of the country of his new nationality; or
             (4) He has voluntarily re-established himself in  the  country
             which he left or outside which he remained owing  to  fear  of
             persecution; or
             (5) He can no longer, because the circumstances  in  connexion
             with which he has been recognized as a refugee have ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of his nationality;
             Provided that this paragraph shall  not  apply  to  a  refugee
             falling under section A(1) of this  article  who  is  able  to
             invoke compelling reasons arising out of previous  persecution
             for refusing to avail himself of the protection of the country
             of nationality;
             (6) Being a person who has no nationality he  is,  because  of
             the  circumstances  in  connexion  with  which  he  has   been
             recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist, able  to  return
             to the country of his former habitual residence; Provided that
             this paragraph shall not apply  to  a  refugee  falling  under
             section A (1) of this article who is able to invoke compelling
             reasons arising out of previous persecution  for  refusing  to
             return to the country of his former habitual residence.


          7. In paragraph 27 of their decision  the  panel  note  that  the
             question they were required to consider was whether it is safe
             enough for BM to go home so as to strip  him  of  his  refugee
             status. The core of the  case  was  said  to  be  the  current
             country situation [30] and at [33] that BM's continuing asylum
             status was objected to only because there are pockets  of  the
             country where he could safely go. At paragraph  34  the  panel
             write:


             "34. The appellant has two uncles by marriage, the brothers, A
             and E M.  The former was politically active but not well known
             and has found it necessary to obtain asylum here.  The  latter
             was politically active and well known as  well.  He  has  been
             able to remain in Zimbabwe whilst the appellant says  all  his
             relatives of his own age have had  to  go  to  work  in  South
             Africa.  That could indicate that the real reason for  leaving
             is economic.  However that inference does not amount  to  good
             reason to depart from CM (see Januzi (HL)  [2006],  R  v  SSHD
             (2005), TM (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 916  (paragraph  5)  and
             Presidents Practice Direction 18.2  (April  2005)).   In  this
             case the key factors are the correct  application  of  Article
             1C(5) with reference to  the  country  guidance  case  of  CM.
             Nobody would actually chose to have the appellant as a citizen
             of  their  country.  However,  on  the  above  analysis,   the
             respondent is not entitled to revoke his asylum status."


          8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on three
             grounds but only granted in the following terms:

             "It is nonetheless arguable, as asserted in the third  ground,
             that the respondent had discharged  the  burden  of  proof  by
             demonstrating that there  had  been  a  significant  and  non-
             transitory change  in  the  circumstances  now  prevailing  in
             Zimbabwe, as demonstrated by the applicable  Country  Guidance
             cases at the time when the appellant was  granted  asylum  and
             when, some ten years later, the instant appeal  was  heard  by
             the Tribunal.  It is further arguable that it was  unnecessary
             for the respondent to prove that it  would  be  safe  for  the
             appellant to return to all  areas  of  Zimbabwe  in  order  to
             invoke  the  cessation  clauses  of  the  Refugee  Convention.
             Permission to appeal on the third ground accordingly  granted.
             If the First-tier Tribunal's decision is  set  aside  on  this
             ground, then the Upper Tribunal may  consider  re-opening  the
             purely factual arguments that are contained within  the  first
             two grounds in respect of which permission to appeal has, as a
             matter of law, been refused."



Discussion



          9. BM was previously found to  have  (a)  been  a  prominent  MDC
             activist before he left  Zimbabwe;  (b)  been  harassed  at  a
             meeting and at  home;  (c)  been  detained;  (d)  genuine  MDC
             (Zimbabwe) support by letter as to risk of his return; (e)  an
             uncle who a retired MDC  MP;  (f)  another  uncle  who  has  a
             prominent position in the Welshman Ncube wing in the UK.
         10. The panel refer to the country guidance case of CM (EM country
             guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013]  UKUT  00059(IAC)  in
             which the Tribunal held that the evidence does not show  that,
             as a general matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker from
             the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,  would
             result in  that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
             demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.  In  this  appeal  it  was
             noted  by  the  panel  that  BM  has  been  found  to  have  a
             significant MDC profile.
         11. It was also noted in  headnote  2  of  CM  "The  position  is,
             however, likely to be  otherwise  in  the  case  of  a  person
             without ZANU-PF connections, returning from the United Kingdom
             after a significant absence to a rural area of Zimbabwe, other
             than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such  a  person
             may  well  find  it  difficult  to  avoid  adverse  attention,
             amounting to serious  ill-treatment,  from  ZANU-PF  authority
             figures and those they control. The adverse attention may well
             involve a requirement to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF,  with
             the prospect of serious harm in the event of failure.  Persons
             who have shown themselves not to  be  favourably  disposed  to
             ZANU-PF are entitled to international protection,  whether  or
             not they could and would do whatever  might  be  necessary  to
             demonstrate such loyalty (RT (Zimbabwe))". The panel find that
             BM falls within a recognised risk factor as he has been in the
             United Kingdom for a long time and has no Zanu-PF  connection.
             It  is  recognised  that  there  are  safe   areas   such   as
             Matabeleland North and South but that the expert report showed
             an abundance of Zanu-PF roadblocks in the way [32].
         12. The panel also refer  at  [17]  to  the  UNHCR  'Guidelines  n
             International Protection: Cessation of  refugee  Status  under
             Article 1C(5) and (6) of the 1951 Convention relating  to  the
             Status of refugees (the 'Ceased Circumstances"  Clauses")  (10
             February 2003)  and  to  paragraph  17  thereof  where  it  is
             written:


                  "17. The  1951  Convention  does  not  preclude  cessation
                  declarations for distinct sub groups of a general  refugee
                  population from a  specific  country,  for  instance,  for
                  refugees fleeing a particular regime  but  not  for  those
                  fleeing after  that  regime  was  deposed.   In  contrast,
                  changes in the refugees country of origin  affecting  only
                  part of the territory should not, in  principle,  lead  to
                  cessation of refugee status.  Refugee status can only come
                  to an end if the basis for persecution is removed  without
                  precondition that the refugee has to  return  to  specific
                  safe parts of the country in  order  to  be  free  of  the
                  persecution.  Also, not being able to move or to establish
                  oneself freely in the country  of  origin  would  indicate
                  that the changes had not been fundamental."


         13. The panel's rejection of the Secretary of States position that
             BM's continuing asylum claim is objected to because there  are
             pockets of  the  country  where  he  could  safely  go  is  in
             accordance with the UNHCR position and the  terms  of  Article
             1C(5) itself, which are that circumstances in  connexion  with
             which he has been recognized  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of his nationality. In this  case  it  had  not
             been established before the panel that such circumstances  had
             ceased to exist in Zimbabwe in light of the findings  made  in
             relation to BM's profile.
         14. The assertion in the grounds that the statement by  the  panel
             that the burden is upon the Secretary of State  to  prove  the
             entire country is safe is misguided is contrary to  the  UNHCR
             position  and  wording  of  the  cessation   provisions.   The
             situation in Zimbabwe may have changed since  BM  was  granted
             refugee status but that is not the test. A country can  change
             yet the real risk remain. It is the nature and duration of the
             changes which are the important issues.  The  finding  of  the
             panel is that the changes are not sufficient for BM which  has
             not been shown to be  a  finding  not  open  to  them  on  the
             available evidence. Similarly, the assertion  of  misdirection
             in the finding members of the family moving  to  South  Africa
             for economic reasons was not found to warrant  departing  from
             the country guidance cases has not been shown to have arguable
             merit.  Why other family  members  choose  to  move  to  South
             Africa is noted by the panel but this has been  a  feature  of
             Zimbabwe society for a number of years and  especially  during
             the severe recession that affected that country  a  number  of
             years ago. Such economic migration by others  does  not  prove
             the required degree of change necessary in relation to BM.
         15. Mr McVeety  has  failed  to  establish  arguable  legal  error
             material to the decision to allow  the  appeal.  As  such  the
             panel's decision must stand.


Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


             I make  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
             Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 May 2016












