
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01860/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision and Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 2 November 2015                    |                   On 24 November 2015  |
|                                      |                                        |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Karim Sohna
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Mr Sohna is a citizen of Gambia who was born on 3  March  1969.  The
       Secretary of State has appealed against the decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Seelhoff promulgated on 9 December 2014  allowing  Mr
       Sohna's  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  For  the  sake  of
       continuity I shall refer to Mr Sohna as the appellant as he  was  in
       the First-tier Tribunal.


    2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 24  January  2001  as  a
       spouse and was granted indefinite leave to remain on 16 July 2002.


    3. According to the decision letter, in a  pattern  of  offending  that
       commenced in 2003 and continued for the next decade,  the  appellant
       acquired 11 convictions for 17 offences. When  last  sentenced,  the
       appellant asked for two further matters both concerning an  incident
       on 24 July  2013  to  be  taken  into  account.  The  appellant  was
       sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.


    4. The pattern of offending covered a spectrum of offences:  disorderly
       behaviour; threatening words;  assault;  battery;  being  drunk  and
       disorderly. His conduct also caused him to be  banned  from  driving
       and  thereafter  other   offences   occurred   of   driving   whilst
       disqualified. However, the last of these  offences  was  an  assault
       occasioning grievous bodily harm. The Judge, when sentencing him  on
       4 April 2014, said:


         'You had 9 convictions for 15 offences between 2003 and 2013,  you
         are now 45, and, when sober, you  are,  as  Mr  Clare  has  rightly
         emphasised  on  your  behalf,  a  hard-working  man  with  positive
         qualities. However, you do have an unhealthy attitude  to  violence
         when you feel it would suit you, and you have a number of  previous
         convictions for threatening behaviour and also  assault,  often  in
         the context of drink. For example,  in  August  2012,  battery,  an
         assault on St Vedast Street, Norwich.  This  index,  of  course,  6
         April 2013 and then threatening behaviour to the same victim on  31
         May 2013.
         The pre-sentence report by Lisa Nixon, dated 2 April [2014],  sets
         out  very  fully  and  thoroughly  your  background  and   personal
         circumstances. I don't repeat those but she  does  indicate  during
         interview you demonstrated  attitudes  which  condone  the  use  of
         violence, you are prepared to arm yourself with weapons if you feel
         threatened, and who still regard yourself as unjustly convicted  of
         the index offence. I must, nevertheless, honour the verdict of  the
         jury.
         This offence does  deserve  immediate  custody,  in  my  judgment.
         Having regard to the guidelines, this was a nasty incident,  a  jaw
         fracture to this mature gentlemen of mature years, going about  his
         lawful business on Prince of Wales Road  late  at  night,  was  one
         that, in my judgment, can properly be  regarded  as  coming  within
         Category 2 once one factors in your previous convictions.
         In addition, I do not regard the recommendation  within  the  pre-
         sentence report for supervision related work  as  appropriate,  not
         because it is not realistically advanced, but because I don't think
         you would actually keep to it given your current attitude."


    5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge described the victim as a 62  year-old
       gentleman who was the owner of the bar where the appellant was  said
       to have run up  significant  credit.  The  punch  delivered  by  the
       appellant broke his jaw.


    6. On the basis of this conviction and the appellant's  past  offending
       it is not surprising that the respondent  initiated  proceedings  to
       deport him. In doing so, she sought information from  the  appellant
       as to his circumstances in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  set  out,  in
       response, that he was married to  his  second  wife,  S,  a  British
       national by whom he has had two sons: J was born on 13 January  2006
       and is now 9 years old and T who was born on 8 October 2010, now  5.
       The appellant also claimed to be  in  a  relationship  with  another
       British citizen, Ms K P, by whom he has had a daughter, A,  born  on
       22 January 2012, aged 2.


    7. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that Norwich  Social
       Services would have serious concerns about his returning to the home
       of J and T given the risk  of  domestic  violence;  the  quality  of
       contact was poor.


    8. This effectively determined any realistic prospect of a  claim  that
       the two boys would suffer a  violation  of  their  rights  were  the
       appellant to be removed.


    9. A has visited her father whilst in prison on a number  of  occasions
       (albeit when she must have been a 1-year old) but he is not named on
       the birth certificate and had moved out of the home in 2012  shortly
       after A's birth.  In the pre-sentence report of 2  April  2014,  the
       appellant stated he was living with a friend and had no permanent or
       stable address. He did not say he was living with Ms K  P.  Ms  K  P
       informed Norwich Children's Services in July 2014 that the appellant
       did not reside in the family home but visited approximately twice  a
       week, sleeping on the sofa. This contradicted a  later  letter  that
       the couple had been living as a family for over 2 �  years.  A  bail
       application  lodged  on  22  September  2014  proposed  a  place  of
       residence other than with Ms K P.

   10. When dealing with the risk posed to the community by the appellant's
       conduct, Ms Lisa Nixon stated:


         "Mr Sohna acknowledges that he was under the influence of  alcohol
         in both offences, but failed to recognise the disinhibiting effects
         of alcohol  on  his  behaviour.  Mr  Sohna  has  committed  violent
         offences both whilst under  the  influence  of  alcohol  and  while
         sober;  however  the  current  offences  mark  an   escalation   in
         seriousness in offence type. Therefore, it is  my  assessment  that
         alcohol is not a necessary factor in the commission of violence  by
         Mr Sohna,  but  when  present  escalates  the  seriousness  of  his
         behaviour.  Throughout  the  course  of  the  interview,  Mr  Sohna
         acknowledged that at times he consumed large quantities of  alcohol
         (binge drinking) and started to question whether this  might  be  a
         problem for him.


         During interview, Mr Sohna demonstrated  attitudes  which  condone
         the use of violence as a means of resolving  conflict;  telling  me
         that his preferred method is 'mano a mano'... was keen  to  explain
         to me how the victim [in 2012] deserved  the  assault...  continued
         denial [in relation to GBH]...his attitudes contribute to the  risk
         of serious harm."


   11. All this resulted in an evaluation of a medium risk of serious harm.


   12. It is important to note structure of  the  decision  making  process
       adopted by the respondent in the decision letter of 3  October  2014
       because it represented the approach then required.

   13. First, this is a deportation under s. 32 (5) of the UK  Borders  Act
       2007. The Secretary of State is required to make a deportation order
       in respect of a foreign  national  who  has  been  convicted  of  an
       offence and sentenced to a term  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  12
       months unless removal would result  in  a  violation  of  the  human
       rights of the appellant or members of his family.   This  is  not  a
       discretionary element providing either the decision maker within the
       Home Office or the Judge on appeal with power to dispense  with  the
       requirement if, for example, the claimant only just comes within its
       provisions. Parliament itself has determined that 12 months  is  the
       point  at  which  removal  must  take  place  unless  the  statutory
       exception comes into play.

   14.  Second,  the  respondent  went  on  to  consider  the   appellant's
       immigration history. Although the appellant's arrival in the  United
       Kingdom on 16 February 2001 was lawful as  it  was  based  upon  the
       applicant's  marriage  to  a  British  citizen,  the  marriage   was
       dissolved in June 2004. Family life based on a relationship with the
       appellant's former wife was never a viable claim.

   15. The respondent's refusal letter went on to consider the  appellant's
       offending and his attitude towards it including his  claim  to  have
       been wrongly convicted.

   16. Although the decision letter spends a  significant  amount  of  time
       dealing with the relationship with the children of  the  appellant's
       second marriage, given the concern expressed by  Norwich  Children's
       Services as a result of the allegations  of  domestic  violence  and
       abuse and their professional opinion that  the  children  would  not
       suffer undue stress were the appellant to be deported, the appellant
       had no viable claim to remain on the basis of the  relationships  he
       had formed with his second wife and children.

   17. The respondent naturally focused upon the  appellant's  relationship
       with Ms K P (about which Norwich Children's  Services  had  received
       contradictory information) and the effect upon A, then aged two. The
       Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  she  was  not  satisfied  the
       appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms K  P.
       This led to  the  respondent's  rejection  of  the  claim  that  the
       appellant enjoyed a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
       with A. On the basis of these findings, the respondent concluded  it
       would not be unduly harsh for Ms K P and her daughter to  remain  in
       the United Kingdom even though the appellant  was  to  be  deported.
       Inevitably,  notwithstanding  the  period  of  time  spent  by   the
       appellant in the United Kingdom, the pattern of offending which  had
       commenced in 2003 belied any assertion by the appellant that he  was
       socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom. Since he
       had frequently returned to Ghana, he had plainly maintained  contact
       with  family  and  friends,   thereby   establishing   a   continued
       familiarity with  the  country  enabling  him  to  re-establish  his
       private life if returned there.


   18. Importantly, the Secretary of State went on to consider, as she  was
       required to do, whether there  were  very  compelling  circumstances
       such that the appellant should not be deported.  However,  as  there
       was a significant public interest in removing him on  the  basis  of
       the pattern of criminal offending, there were no such  circumstances
       which might outweigh the public interest in deportation.

   19. However, I am satisfied that it was open to the First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge on appeal to re-examine the  evidence  about  the  appellant's
       relationship with Ms K P and A.

   20. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, Ms K P gave  evidence
       such that the Judge was entitled to find she was  committed  to  the
       appellant and that they were in a relationship which she  considered
       to be genuine and durable. However, the Judge  did  not  ignore  the
       appellant's admissions that he "sleeps around" and that "Ms K P  was
       something of a second choice as he had been attempting to  reconcile
       with his wife even after he had had A with Ms  K  P".  He  concluded
       that the relationship between the appellant  and  Ms  K  P  was  not
       nearly as strong as that of a marriage and that  the  appellant  had
       failed to  prove  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
       partner. He also accepted that the relationship was formed at a time
       when the appellant had indefinite leave to remain and that it  would
       be unduly harsh for Ms K P to live in Gambia.

   21. Inevitably, the success of any  Article  8  claim  turned  upon  the
       Judge's finding in relation to A. He noted that, in  the  course  of
       the hearing, A, not yet 3, ran to him spontaneously and then sat  on
       his lap. Whilst  a  degree  of  caution  should  be  exercised  when
       assessing these glimpses of a relationship, the Judge accepted Ms  K
       P told a social worker that A  had  a  good  relationship  with  her
       father whom she would see about twice  a  week  when  the  appellant
       stayed overnight, sleeping on the sofa. He concluded that there was

         "...nothing in the evidence that would give me reason to  question
         the assertion that there is a genuine and subsist  in  relationship
         between the appellant and A."


   22. This conclusion which was properly open to the  Judge  having  heard
       from the appellant and Ms K P and  reading  the  material  from  the
       social worker. This marks a distinction between the approach adopted
       by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter and the Judge at the
       hearing.


   23. On the basis of this material, the Judge went on to consider whether
       this relationship determined the appeal in favour of the  appellant.
       In doing so the Judge made reference to  MC  (deportation  -  public
       interest - basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT00046 (IAC)  having
       previously referred to paragraphs 398 and  399  of  the  Immigration
       Rules  and  mentioned  ss.  117B  and  117C  of   the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002, as amended. In paragraph 75 of the
       determination  the  Judge  turned  to  s.  117C,  noting  that   the
       appellant's sentence was "as short as it could be yet  still  engage
       mandatory deportation". This comment on its face neglects to mention
       the fact that this was not a lone offence for which a sentence of 12
       months imprisonment  was  imposed  but  the  culmination  of  serial
       offending which had been committed over the past 10  years.   It  is
       true that the Secretary of State did  not  refer  to  the  conducive
       grounds found in paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules  but  she
       did not need to because the 12-month threshold was met.   The  Judge
       considered whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to  be
       expected to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  a  father.  He
       concluded that this provision "may" be engaged.


   24. In paragraph 76 he went on to consider the prospect of  A  having  a
       significant relationship with her father, should he be deported.  He
       reached two conclusions. The first was that she was not  yet  of  an
       age  when  electronic  means  of  communication  could   provide   a
       substitute for time spent with her father.  Bearing in mind her  age
       of 2, that was self-evident.  Secondly, he concluded  there  was  no
       credible evidence to support a finding that he had not been  a  good
       father. In paragraph 78 he stated that the exceptions built into the
       Immigration Rules  and  into  the  2002  Act  permitted  the  public
       interest in deportation to be outweighed in the case  of  a  genuine
       relationship with a British citizen.

   25. He then determined that the appeal turned on the rights of a British
       citizen who was not at fault and  with  whom  the  appellant  had  a
       genuine and loving  relationship  and  concluded  it  would  be  and
       usually harsh to expect A to live without him given the offence  was
       at the "bottom end of the scale" envisaged in paragraph 399  (b)  of
       the Rules.  Once again, by concentrating on the last  offence  only,
       the Judge overlooked the cumulative effect of past offending and the
       impact this must have on the appellant's attitude to  offending  and
       the risk to the public.

   26. In the course of argument I was referred to SSHD v MKO (section  117
       - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC) in which  the  Upper
       Tribunal noted that it  was  necessary  to  take  into  account  the
       appellant's criminal conduct in deciding whether it was unduly harsh
       for a separation to occur between an appellant and his daughter.  In
       doing so, the Upper Tribunal considered the earlier decision in  MAB
       (paragraph 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) in which
       a different division of  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  that  the
       evaluation of unduly harsh focused solely upon an evaluation of  the
       impact upon the child. For the reasons given by the  Upper  Tribunal
       in KMO, I have no hesitation in concluding  that  a  proportionality
       exercise  cannot  properly  operate  where  the  decision  maker  is
       precluded from relying upon material considerations.  The  level  of
       criminal offending is clearly material in  deciding  whether  it  is
       unduly harsh to separate a child from his parent  and  its  omission
       inevitably skews the proportionality balance. Were the consideration
       to be directed exclusively towards the child, the public interest in
       removing those who commit criminal offences would be emasculated  to
       the extent that  no  distinction  could  be  made  between  a  minor
       offender and a serious offender.


   27. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge misunderstood  and
       misapplied the provisions which relate, on  the  one  hand,  to  the
       limitations upon the Secretary of State's power  to  deport  a  non-
       national with no substantive right to remain in the  United  Kingdom
       who has committed a series of offences of escalating gravity, one of
       which statute has determined should trigger his deportation and,  on
       the other hand, the presence of his British child. It  goes  without
       saying  that,  in  normal  circumstances,  children  should  not  be
       separated from their parents with whom they are engaged in a  normal
       and  loving  relationship.  However,  were  this  to  be  the   sole
       consideration, the presence of a British or settled child within the
       United Kingdom would prevent the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
       The scheme of the legislation simply does not produce  this  result.
       It is not achieved by classifying  as  'unduly  harsh',  the  normal
       consequences of deportation where there is a relevant  minor  child.
       In each case, the  deportation  of  the  father  will  result  in  a
       significant diminution in his relationship with that child. However,
       that is what deportation does, as Sedley  LJ  said  in  Lee  v  SSHD
       [2011] EWCA Civ 348:

          The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it has
         been, will be broken up for ever because of the appellant's bad
         behaviour. That is what deportation does. Sometimes the balance
         between its justification and its consequences falls the other way,
         but whether it does so is a question for an Immigration Judge.


   28. The separation of a child from his father is undoubtedly  harsh  but
       this  does  not  prevent  a  court  from  imposing   a   period   of
       imprisonment, sometimes a long period of  imprisonment.  The  issue,
       however, is not whether the effect  is  harsh  upon  the  child  but
       whether  it  is  unduly  harsh.   The  word  'unduly'  implies  that
       something  is  done  which  is  out  of  proportion  with  what   is
       reasonable, justified or fair in the circumstances of the case.   It
       has echoes of the proportionality test which is the bed-rock of  the
       Article 8 assessment.


   29. It is not unduly harsh to separate a child from his  father  if  the
       father's conduct merits deportation unless there is something in the
       circumstances which identify something more that  distinguishes  the
       case from the normal effect of deportation.   This  distinction  was
       identified both in MKO and in MAB as  identified  and  confirmed  in
       paragraph 26 of MKO.

   30. The decision cannot be based just  upon  the  fact  that  the  index
       offence was only just serious enough to trigger deportation  because
       that would have the effect of undermining the mandatory nature of s.
       32 when the threshold has  been  reached.   In  any  event,  in  the
       circumstances of this case, it disregards the significant effect  of
       the totality of 11 convictions and 17 offences.

   31.  The distinguishing features identified by the Judge were  two-fold.
       First, the  effectiveness  of  modern  means  of  communication  was
       undermined in the case of a 2-year old by what he described as  poor
       infrastructure in a country like Gambia.   Whatever  material  there
       was  before  the  Judge  to  reach  the  conclusion  that   Gambia's
       telecommunications network is ineffective (and it is not set out  in
       the determination), this is not a distinguishing mark.  The Tribunal
       does not claim that communication between a parent and child is  the
       same if the two are separated by Continents as it is when they share
       a household.  It will always be a poor substitute in  a  case  where
       the pair currently enjoys a normal and loving parental  relationship
       in a home they share.  Furthermore, there  is  no  warrant  in  such
       cases for a distinction being made by looking at the  capability  of
       the infrastructure in the country to which  the  appellant  will  be
       returned.  It is inconceivable that a  different  result  will  flow
       between an appellant who establishes  access  to  wireless  internet
       access with 6G technology and a  person  who  has  to  rely  upon  a
       landline.


   32. Second, he relied on the fact that there was  no  credible  evidence
       that the appellant had not been a good father. Were the evidence  to
       establish the appellant was a bad father, that would undoubtedly  be
       a material factor in assessing the strength of the Article  8  claim
       but it should be taken as uncontroversial that the father is a  good
       father unless there is evidence to the contrary. As it is  a  factor
       likely to be common to almost all such cases, there was no basis for
       a finding that the effect  in  the  specific  circumstances  of  the
       appellant's case was unduly harsh, where the circumstances were  not
       at all unusual and merited no distinction being made.

   33.  Neither of these reasons establishes anything that is unusual in  a
       deportation  appeal.   Neither  renders  the  consequences  of   the
       decision unduly harsh.

   34. Reliance upon these factors as  elevating  the  case  to  one  which
       fulfils the requirement of being unduly harsh amounts to an error on
       a point of law.  In essence it marginalises the role played  by  the
       public interest in removal cases where  removal  has  an  inevitable
       effect upon the life of a child, provided there  is  a  relationship
       between the child and his parent.

   35. This is highlighted by the circumstances of the present  appeal.  It
       was unnecessary, according to the Judge,  for  the  father  and  the
       child to be living together. It was sufficient if the father  is  no
       longer part of the child's household as long as he is in  a  genuine
       and subsisting relationship with his child. Nor did it  matter  that
       the mother and father were  separated.  It  was  sufficient  if  the
       father had contact with his child to the extent of seeing her  twice
       a week. Inevitably, the weight attached by the Judge to the interest
       in maintaining the appellant's relationship with his daughter A  (as
       the Judge found it to  be)  overrode  any  public  interest  in  his
       removal. The public interest in removing a foreign criminal  is,  in
       part, assessed by reference to the risk he poses to  the  community.
       This was not a case of a single offence which resulted in a term  of
       imprisonment of 12 months. Rather  it  was  a  history  of  criminal
       offending. Although the Judge recorded  in  his  determination  that
       there was a 57% chance of reoffending in the next two years which he
       described  as  "a  very  significant  factor  to  which   I   attach
       considerable weight", the  Judge  then  permitted  the  presence  of
       British child to outweigh it with only the slightest of  reasons  to
       justify it.


   36. The Upper Tribunal must always caution itself against  finding  that
       there is an error of law in circumstances where, in truth, the  real
       criticism of the First-tier Tribunal is a difference  of  view  over
       the outcome.  The Upper Tribunal must always uphold  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge, even in the case of  such  a  disagreement,  if  the
       First-tier Tribunal was properly entitled to  reach  the  conclusion
       that it did. I am, however, satisfied that in  the  instant  appeal,
       the Judge was in error in his finding that A's relationship with her
       father and his relationship with her were capable of outweighing the
       public interest in  deportation  on  the  strength  of  the  reasons
       provided by the  Judge.   I  set  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal aside.

   37. In re-making the decision, it is unnecessary to me to  rehearse  the
       provisions of ss. 117B and C of the 2002  Act  as  inserted  by  the
       Immigration Act 2014. The new Part 5 of the 2002 Act as  it  applies
       to  the  Tribunal  requires  me  to  have   regard   to   both   the
       considerations listed in s. 117B and, in the case of this  appellant
       as a foreign criminal, to the  considerations  listed  in  s.  117C.
       Inevitably, whilst the deportation of a foreign criminal is  in  the
       public interest, the more  serious  the  offence,  the  greater  the
       public interest in deportation. In the case of  a  foreign  criminal
       who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 12  months  or
       more and who has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
       a British child, consideration has to be given to whether the effect
       of his deportation on the child would be unduly harsh.

   38. Whilst the scheme of ss. 117 A-D is directed  towards  the  Tribunal
       having particular regard to a number  of  statutory  considerations,
       whether an individual falls within  the  categories  of  persons  so
       defined is not determinative. The Immigration Rules provide  a  code
       which, since 28 July 2014, replicates the provisions of s.  117C  in
       the case of a person who  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
       relationship with a  British  child.  The  'unduly  harsh'  test  is
       replicated both in relation to the question  of  whether  the  child
       might live in the country to which the appellant is to  be  deported
       as well as in assessing whether  the  child  should  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom without the person to be deported.


   39. If it is not unduly  harsh  it  will  only  be  if  there  are  very
       compelling circumstances over and  above  those  already  considered
       that  those  factors  will  outweigh  the  pressure  in  favour   of
       deportation.  This is a hurdle no-one has suggested could be met  in
       this appeal.

   40. For the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that it is  not  unduly
       harsh for the appellant to be separated from A.   In  reaching  this
       conclusion, I do not seek to diminish the effect such  a  separation
       will inevitably cause to her.  The Judge's  findings  of  fact  were
       clear; the appellant was not living with A's mother but he spent two
       occasions a week in A's presence staying overnight at  her  home  in
       order to  do  so.   The  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with his daughter in  the  context  of  the  restraints
       imposed by this regime.  The factors  identified  by  the  Judge  as
       establishing that deportation would be unduly harsh are not tenable.
         Neither  the  fact  that  other  means  of  communication  are  no
       substitute for face-to-face contact nor the  fact  that  father  and
       daughter enjoy a relationship  with  each  other  is  sufficient  to
       establish that the effect of  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh.
       Absent these reasons, no other reason has been advanced which  might
       affect the balance in favour  of  the  appellant  remaining  in  the
       United Kingdom.

DECISION

 1. The Judge made an error on a point of law and I set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.
 2. I re-make the decision in the following terms:
        a. the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           allowed;
        b. the appeal of Mr Sohna to the Tribunal against the  decision  of
           the Secretary of State to make a deportation order  against  him
           is dismissed on all the grounds advanced.

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            18 November 2015
