
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01228/2014
     DA/01229/2014
     DA/01230/2014
       DA/01231/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 June 2016                           |On 5 October 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   LORD TURNBULL, OF THE COURT OF SESSION
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|                |O C U                                     |First Appellant |
|                |C C U                                     |Second Appellant|
|                |D E N O                                   |Third Appellant |
|                |D O C U                                   |Fourth Appellant|


                          (anonymity direction made)

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by JCWI
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       Appellants. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. We make this order because the appeal turns on the welfare of
       children who are entitled to privacy.

    2. This appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on  22  December
       2015.  On 28 January 2016 he promulgated a "Decision and Directions"
       explaining his reasons for finding an error of law in  the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal  and  setting  aside  that  decision  and
       giving directions for a further hearing of the appeal.

    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey's decision  has  been  notified  to  the
       parties. For the purposes of any appeal  against  that  decision  we
       append it hereto.

    4. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey had indicated that the appeal should not
       be heard until we had the benefit of the  decision  of  the  Supreme
       Court in a case known as HA Iraq v SSHD UKSC 2015/012.  Both parties
       before us confirmed that the judgments would be likely to assist  us
       in determining some of the issues that were before us.  Mr Bandegani
       asked us to adjourn the hearing.  We  declined.   Judge  Storey  was
       concerned by the delay  in  these  proceedings.   He  adjourned  the
       appeal on 14 March 2016 in the anticipation of the decision  of  the
       Supreme Court being available soon.  That has not proved to  be  the
       case.  We decided that it was best to continue with the hearing  and
       to make our decision.

    5. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  Their personal  history  is
       complex but the First and Second Appellants  have  been  married  to
       each other.  The Third and Fourth  Appellants  are  their  children.
       The Third Appellant was born on 21 June 2004 and so is now 12  years
       old.  The Fourth Appellant was born on 19 February 2006  and  so  is
       now 10 years old.  The First and Second Appellants have another son,
       who we identify simply as "D" who was born on 22 November  2002  and
       so is now 13 years old.

    6. In February 2005 the First Appellant was sentenced  to  a  community
       punishment order requiring him to do 220 hours of unpaid work and to
       pay costs following his conviction for obtaining a money transfer by
       deception.

    7. In April 2008 the First and Second appellants were arrested from  an
       address they shared.  Forged documents relating to  30  applications
       for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under  European  law  were
       recovered.

    8. In November 2009 at the Crown Court sitting at  Croydon,  the  First
       and Second Appellants were convicted of a conspiracy  involving  the
       forged documents.  The First Appellant was sentenced to seven years'
       imprisonment reduced to five and a half  years  on  appeal  and  the
       second appellant to 30  months'  imprisonment  reduced  to  eighteen
       months on appeal.

    9. The First and Second Appellants were  made  subject  to  deportation
       orders as foreign criminals and the Third and Fourth  Appellants  as
       the dependants of foreign criminals.

   10.  The  Appellants  appealed.   The  Appellants  contended  that   the
       decisions were contrary to the Immigration Rules and  to  the  human
       rights of the Appellants  and  on  the  grounds  that  the  decision
       breaches their rights as the family member of an EEA national,  that
       it is not in accordance with the law and that it is contrary to  the
       United Kingdom's obligations under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act
       1998.

   11. The Respondent had prepared a skeleton argument served  on  3  March
       2016 and signed by Mr  S  Staunton,  a  Senior  Presenting  Officer.
       Subject to the qualification below Mr Walker adopted  that  argument
       before us.

   12. We consider  this  in  outline  now  because  it  explains  how  the
       Respondent puts her case.

   13. This shows that it is the  Respondent's  contention  that  all  four
       Appellants can be removed to Nigeria and that the First  and  Second
       Appellants can decide to take the fourth child, D, to  Nigeria  with
       them.  Point three of the Respondent's skeleton argument continues:

  "It is further submitted that if the appellants are removed as  a  family
  unit and  D  accompanies  them  the  SSHD's  removal  decision  will  not
  interfere with their Article 8 rights."

   14. The skeleton argument  then  considers  the  First  Appellant.   The
       Respondent's main contention is that paragraph 398 of HC 395  states
       that when the Secretary of State is considering a claim involving  a
       person who has been sentenced to at least four years'  imprisonment,
       the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by  other
       factors where there are  "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
       above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

   15. A similar point is made in Section 117C(6) which  provides  that  in
       the case of a person sentenced to at least four years'  imprisonment
       "the public interest requires  deportation  unless  there  are  very
       compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those   described   in
       Exceptions (1) and (2).

   16. The Respondent's position is extremely simple.  There  are  no  very
       compelling circumstances and the appeal should be dismissed.

   17. The case of the Second Appellant is different.  She  is  a  "foreign
       criminal"  for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but she  has  not  been
       sentenced to four years' imprisonment or more.  Paragraph 398(b)  of
       HC 395 provides that the deportation of such a person  is  conducive
       to the public good and in the public interest unless  paragraph  399
       applies.  Paragraph 399(a) might apply because the Second  Appellant
       has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child  (in
       fact three children, one of whom is a British citizen and the  other
       two have lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least  seven  years
       immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision) but,  in
       the contention of the Respondent, it would not be unduly  harsh  for
       the child to live in the country  to  which  the  parent  is  to  be
       deported or to remain in the United Kingdom without that parent.

   18. In the case of the Third and Fourth Appellants, their right to be in
       the United Kingdom  depends  on  their  parents  and,  following  EV
       (Philippines) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874  they  should  be
       deported with their parents.

   19. The skeleton argument then considers the case of D.  The  respondent
       recognises that D is a "qualifying child" within the  rules  because
       he is a British citizen and further recognises that if it is  unduly
       harsh for D to live in Nigeria with his parents then:

  " ... it is accepted that [the Second Appellant's]  appeal  falls  to  be
  allowed (and, consequentially, that the appeals of [the Third and  Fourth
  Appellants] should be allowed), but it is submitted  that  there  are  no
  very compelling circumstances such that [the  First  Appellant's]  appeal
  should be allowed".

   20. This is clearly written with regard to paragraphs 399 and 399A of HC
       395.

   21. If is the Respondent's case that it would not be unduly harsh for  D
       to live in Nigeria with his parents and brothers.

   22. The grounds then deal with the evidence likely to be relied upon  to
       assert that it would be unduly harsh  to  require  D  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom.  The Respondent recognises  that  there  is  medical
       evidence from a Dr Yates at Great Ormond Street Children's  Hospital
       dated 16 February 2016 suggesting that D requires further surgery at
       some undisclosed point in the future.  The Respondent contends  that
       he would be able to return as a British citizen to have the  benefit
       of surgery if it could not be  obtained  in  Nigeria  and  therefore
       there is no question of it being unduly  harsh  to  require  him  to
       leave.

   23. The grounds then turn to the effect of case  C-34/09  Ruiz  Zambrano
       which was considered particularly  by  this  Tribunal  in  Sanade  &
       Others (British children - Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048
       (IAC) and Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC).   The
       Secretary of State does not agree that the case  of  Zambrano  makes
       clear that a British citizen (and therefore European Union  citizen)
       child or spouse cannot, as a matter of European law, be required  to
       relocate outside the European Union or that the Secretary  of  State
       cannot submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so.

   24. The Appellants served a skeleton argument prepared by Mr Bandegani.

   25. The Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  were
       amended in July 2012 with the  insertion  of  Regulation  21A  which
       provides that a person who would otherwise have a  derivative  right
       of residence following Zambrano  can  be  denied  that  right  where
       deportation would be conducive to the public good.   Mr  Bandegani's
       skeleton argument was dated 2 June 2016.  This sets out the law in a
       way  that  substantially  agrees  with  the  Secretary  of   State's
       submissions and also refers to the decision in MM (Uganda) & Another
       v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450.  Here the Court of Appeal looked at  the
       proper approach to deciding if something is "unduly  harsh"  and  we
       set out below an  extract  from  Mr  Bandegani's  skeleton  argument
       which, we find, is a very helpful summary of the decision in MM:
  "Under s.117C(2),  it  was  clear  that  the  more  serious  the  offence
  committed by a foreign criminal,  the  greater  the  public  interest  in
  deportation.   That  steered  the   court   towards   a   proportionality
  assessment.  Accordingly,  the  more  pressing  the  public  interest  in
  removal, the harder it was to show its effects  would  be  unduly  harsh.
  The  relevant  circumstances  included  the   deportee's   criminal   and
  immigration history."

   26. Clearly this is a decision that binds us.

   27. The skeleton argument  then  reminds  us  that  Section  55  of  the
       Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  makes  the  best
       interests of the child  a  primary  consideration  when  determining
       whether  removal  of  the  parent  would   be   a   disproportionate
       interference with the child's right to private and family life.

   28. The argument continued that the starting point  in  considering  the
       welfare and best interests of a young child is that  it  is  in  the
       best interests of a child to live with and be brought up by both his
       parents unless there is a strong contrary indication.  We were  then
       reminded of JO & Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT  00517
       where the President of the Upper Tribunal emphasised  the  need  for
       decision-makers to be properly informed and to conduct a "scrupulous
       analysis" of the relevant factors.

   29. Put simply, it was the Appellants' case  that  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh to expect the children to live in Nigeria.

   30. The skeleton argument then asserts that it is necessary in order  to
       have proper regard to the complexities of Article 8 of the  European
       Convention on Human Rights to make an assessment  that  incorporates
       all relevant factors and that nodding towards  the  Rules  will  not
       necessarily ensure that.

   31. Additional factors that were  relevant  included  the  risk  of  re-
       offending, which it was suggested was very low,  and  conditions  on
       return  which,  even  if  not  sufficiently  severe  to  invoke  the
       protection of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights,
       could be sufficiently uncomfortable to be a significant factor in an
       Article 8 balancing  exercise.   Mr  Bandegani  submitted  that  the
       summary of Ruiz Zambrano in Sanade &  Others  was  correct  and  the
       Secretary of State was barred from submitting it was  reasonable  to
       expect an EU national child to leave the European Union.

   32. There were then submissions relating specifically to points  in  the
       case and particularly the children.

   33. This reminds us that the First Appellant has a son  and  a  daughter
       from different relationships who do not feature very  much  in  this
       appeal.  One was born in 2005 and the other  in  2007.   It  is  not
       suggested that theirs is a particularly close relationship  or  that
       they are living together  in  a  nuclear  family  and  although  any
       disturbance to a relationship is of  some  significance  we  do  not
       regard the relationship with these children as something that  ought
       to feature in any great detail in our decision.

   34. We did not hear any  oral  evidence.  Witness  statements  had  been
       disclosed some time before  the  hearing  and  Mr  Walker  indicated
       formally that he did not wish to cross-examine  the  witnesses.   In
       the circumstances there was no point in their  being  tendered.   We
       accept that nothing of profound significance has happened  in  their
       lives since the statements were made but  another  eighteen  months'
       residence has added a  little  to  their  private  and  family  life
       claims.

   35. Both the First and Second appellants have complex personal histories
       and their statements do not lend themselves  to  easy  summary.   We
       have read them.

   36. The First Appellant  still  has  family  links  with  Nigeria.   His
       parents continue to live in Lagos and his three sisters and  one  of
       his two brothers remain in Nigeria.  The other brother  has  removed
       to Ireland.

   37. He met the Second Appellant in 1992 and married her at a traditional
       ceremony in 1995.   They  lived  together  until  1997.   The  First
       Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 1998 and  the  marriage  was
       dissolved in Lagos after he had arrived.

   38. In 1998 whilst in the United Kingdom he formed a  relationship  with
       someone else and they married in 1999.  He was given  permission  to
       remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his marriage (it  seems
       his wife was an EEA national) and their  relationship  lasted  until
       2008.

   39. Notwithstanding the above the Second Appellant  gave  birth  to  the
       First Appellant's son in November 2002 in the United Kingdom.  Their
       second child was born in 2004.  During this time the First Appellant
       continued to live with his wife who allowed the  children  to  visit
       every week.

   40. In February 2005 he was convicted of an offence of dishonesty at the
       Crown Court sitting  at  Kingston-on-Thames.   He  was  involved  in
       dishonesty transferring money from Nigeria and was ordered to do 220
       hours of unpaid work and pay �3,750 costs.

   41. His  wife  gave  birth  to  their  daughter  in  November  2005.  He
       subsequently lost contact  with  his  wife  and  daughter  from  his
       marriage.

   42. In 2007 his "girlfriend" (not the Second Appellant)  gave  birth  to
       their son.  His wife was not prepared to  tolerate  this  additional
       relationship and asked him to leave the matrimonial home.

   43. He has lost contact with his former "girlfriend" and their son.   He
       believes them to be in Nigeria.

   44. He resumed cohabitation with his former wife, the Second  Appellant,
       in January 2008. The Appellants live together as a family unit.

   45. He  then  explained  something  of  the  offence  that  led  to  his
       deportation.  We do not regard the details as  important.   He  said
       that he ran a legitimate business and most of his employees were EEA
       nationals working for the minimum wage.  He provided proof of  their
       employment  for  immigration  purposes  and  then  supplemented  his
       legitimate business  activities  by  dishonestly  providing  letters
       supporting false claims.   Part  of  his  prison  sentence  included
       fifteen months for failing to pay  �33,500  being  the  proceeds  of
       crime assessed by the Crown Court.  He said he could not pay because
       he had received less than a tenth of that amount.

   46. He expressed his regret about what had happened in emphatic terms.

   47. The sentence for his criminal activity was reduced on appeal to five
       years and six months.

   48. He insisted he will not be in trouble again and prayed in  aid  that
       this claim was supported by the probation service  which,  he  said,
       had assessed him as being of "no risk of re-offending".

   49. While he was in prison their children were the subject of a personal
       fostering arrangement.  The couple taking care of the children moved
       into the accommodation where the Appellants had lived and the  First
       and Second Appellants continued to be involved in their lives.

   50. The First Appellant explained how D and  the  Third  Appellant  were
       settled at school and doing well. The  First  Appellant  appreciated
       the support from their school.

   51. He explained that D has a significant health problem.   It  was  not
       immediately apparent, but when he was about  3  months  old  it  was
       clear that his blood was not absorbing oxygen properly and he needed
       significant medical help.

   52. He explained why he did not think that  the  children  could  manage
       without him in the United Kingdom. He said:
  "I could never allow D to stay in the United Kingdom without his  family.
  He is a British citizen so he has the right to stay here.   There  is  no
  one he can stay with in the United Kingdom.  [The Second Appellant] has a
  younger brother in the  United  Kingdom  who  is  British.   He  has  two
  children of his own.  He has already said to us that he would not be able
  to care for D if we were deported due to his family commitments.  We  are
  however close to him and our children play together.  We have friends  in
  the United Kingdom but they are not reliable enough to care for D.  K....
  and J..... who looked after the children when we were in prison could not
  assist again.  We were concerned when we were reunited with the  children
  as they had drastically lost weight.  They looked unkempt, they  had  not
  been fed properly, or had their hair cut or been bought new  clothes.   I
  could not subject D to this again."

   53. He then explained why they could not relocate in Nigeria.   He  said
       that his siblings were all married with children.  Neither they  nor
       his parents had room for them.  They were already  assisting  people
       "from the village".  Further, D could not get the medical care  that
       he needed.  Even if it were available in Nigeria they would  not  be
       able to afford it.   They  would  not  be  able  to  pay  for  their
       education in Nigeria.

   54. The Third and Fourth Appellants would lose all their contacts in the
       United Kingdom and had no knowledge of life in Nigeria.

   55. He had also found the delay to be frustrating.

   56. In her statement the Second Appellant explained that she was one  of
       eight children.   Her  mother  was  now  widowed  and  five  of  her
       siblings, like her mother, lived in Nigeria.  Her  older  sister  is
       divorced.  Her other siblings are married with their own families.

   57. She confirmed that she married the First Appellant in 1995  and  the
       marriage was dissolved in 1997.  She came to the United  Kingdom  in
       December  2000  and  re-kindled  her  relationship  with  the  First
       Appellant in 2001.

   58. About the same time that she was  re-establishing  her  relationship
       with  her  former  husband,  the  First  Appellant,  she  married  a
       Portuguese  national  in  circumstances  that  really  can  only  be
       described as creating a marriage of convenience.

   59. It transpired that her  husband  had  produced  a  false  Portuguese
       identity document and so she was not  allowed  leave  to  remain  on
       account of the marriage.  Notwithstanding that her  marriage  was  a
       lawful and subsisting she married someone else.

   60. The First Appellant supplied her with a supporting letter  to  which
       she was not entitled to help legitimise her immigration  status.   A
       further application for leave to  remain  based  on  her  third  (?)
       marriage was unsuccessful and thus the Secretary of  State  was  not
       satisfied that she was legally married to an EEA national.  In  that
       point at least the Secretary of State was clearly right.

   61. In paragraph 23 of her statement the Second Appellant explained  how
       she had made a dishonest assertion to have relinquished all  "rights
       to the custody of the children" to improve their chances of  getting
       better  council  accommodation.   She  was  living  with  the  First
       Appellant when they were subject  to  investigation  by  immigration
       officers who came to the house.  She lied and pretended  to  be  the
       First Appellant's wife whose passport she produced.

   62. She was  prosecuted  for  various  offences  including,  apparently,
       entering into a bigamous marriage, obtaining a  driving  licence  in
       someone else's name by deception, using another person's  Portuguese
       passport and making a false statement by claiming to be single  when
       she was in fact married.

   63. Additionally she pleaded "not guilty" to an offence of conspiracy to
       defraud which was assisting the  first  appellant  in  his  criminal
       endeavours.  She was found guilty after a trial.

   64. The sentence for her criminal acts was reduced to  eighteen  month's
       imprisonment on appeal.

   65. It is a feature of the case that it is not entirely clear  for  what
       offences the Second Appellant was convicted and punished  but  after
       the hearing the second appellant's solicitors  sent  documents  from
       the Court of Appeal confirming beyond doubt that she was a  "foreign
       criminal" because the longest set  of  sentences  was  for  eighteen
       months.

   66. She explained how her son D was "born with  pulmonary  artesia  with
       septal defect".  The child D is "under  the  permanent  care  of  Dr
       Robert Yates, a Consultant at Great Ormond Street".  We consider his
       evidence later.

   67. She did not believe that proper medical care would exist  for  D  in
       Nigeria.  She said, by way of example, that  the  power  supply  was
       unreliable and given their child  had  nearly  died  in  the  United
       Kingdom she had no confidence whatsoever that his needs could be met
       in the medical system in Nigeria even if she could afford  it  which
       she could not.

   68. She was very concerned about the care extended to her children while
       she was in custody.  She said that a Nigerian born  family  who  had
       been evicted from their own accommodation were looking for somewhere
       to stay and they moved in to live with the children.  She said  that
       when she came out of prison the children were malnourished and their
       clothes ill-fitting.   She did not want to be  separated  from  them
       and did not want them to be separated from each other.

   69. She said that D's behaviour was causing concern at school,  but  the
       problem was resolved after she returned to the family.

   70. She understood that the Secretary of State had contacted her brother
       with a view to his looking after the children but  her  brother  did
       not reply.  Hr view was that "uncles are for visits".

   71. She then explained how the children were  settled  into  school  and
       doing well.

   72. She insisted that her experiences had put her off offending and  she
       would not re-offend.

   73. She pointed out that the children had only had experience of life in
       the United Kingdom which is very different from the life they  would
       face in Nigeria.  She described their "mentality" as British.   They
       do not speak languages other than English.  She could not  see  them
       settling into a country where water has to be  drawn  from  a  well,
       where food was expensive and there were  no  jobs.   Her  family  in
       Nigeria did not have enough money for their own needs.   They  could
       not take on someone else.

   74. There are supporting letters from D and the Third  Appellant.   They
       express  themselves  in  ways  appropriate  for  their   youth   but
       essentially say they are in a happy family and want to stay together
       in the United Kingdom.

   75. The letter justifying the decision to deport contains extracts  from
       the sentencing remarks of the judge.

   76. The judge was quite satisfied that the First Appellant was  involved
       in about 30 cases of "organising a conspiracy to confirm immigration
       status through residence documents and other documents  in  relation
       to different levels of status".

   77. In the case of the Second Appellant the judge was clear to  put  her
       in a different category from the First Appellant.  Whereas the First
       Appellant was "the pivotal figure and organiser of this  conspiracy"
       the  Second  Appellant  had  "benefited  and  participated  in   the
       conspiracy".  Additionally she had stolen the identity of the  First
       Appellant's Portuguese wife she "in many respects  pretended  to  be
       her".

   78. We have considered the earlier medical reports but of most relevance
       is the further report from Dr Yates  dated  16  February  2016.   Dr
       Yates is described as a Consultant Paediatric  Cardiologist  at  the
       Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children.  This is a case where the
       prognosis is of more concern than the history but we do note that  D
       has undergone  three  open  heart  operations.   We  understand  the
       essential procedure to be well-established if  not  commonplace  and
       involves placing a tube between the right  ventricle  and  the  lung
       arteries.  However, the tube, obviously,  will  not  grow  with  the
       patient and will deteriorate.  It is not possible  to  predict  when
       problems will manifest themselves but there is a strong  expectation
       that "at some point in the reasonably near future,  D  will  require
       further open heart surgery for replacement of this tube".

   79. Dr Yates suggested that some point in the next three to  four  years
       is likely to be the best time but he could not be more precise.   He
       was also clearly of the view that the  appropriate  follow-up  would
       not be available in Nigeria.   He  said  unequivocally,  "therefore,
       sending him home to Nigeria would have a significant impact  on  his
       long-term future".

   80. Dr Yates' assertion that the treatment would  not  be  available  in
       Nigeria has not been challenged even though the report was disclosed
       before the hearing.  Further,  there  are  academic  papers  in  the
       Appellant's bundle which generally support the contention that heart
       treatment is not generally available in  Nigeria  and  further  that
       necessary follow-up nursing is not available.

   81. The reports also indicate that patients travel out  of  Nigeria  for
       treatment and return which suggests some that some sort of follow-up
       medication must be available but we accept it is  not  the  standard
       that would be found at Great Ormond Street Hospital.

   82. We have an independent social worker report  prepared  by  one  Azra
       Jabbar dated 31 May 2016.  Ms Jabbar qualified as a social worker in
       2003  and  has  worked  in  senior  positions  for   several   local
       authorities as well as working as an independent social worker since
       January  2015.   The  report  shows  that  the  First  Appellant  is
       presently unemployed as a consequence  of  his  immigration  status.
       The Second Appellant spends her time caring for the  children.   All
       four Appellants and the child D all live in a two bedroomed flat  in
       Newham.

   83. We do not wish  to  disparage  the  report  when  we  say  that  its
       observations and conclusions are wholly predictable.   The  children
       were disturbed when their parents were in prison.  This has caused a
       degree of anxiety in the children's lives possibly  particularly  in
       the light of the older child D.  The children are settled and  doing
       well at school and have social lives largely around the  school  and
       church.

   84. Ms Jabbar did not feel confident to  say  how  they  would  live  in
       Nigeria but was concerned about the effect of wellbeing if they  had
       to relocate at all.  Education is not freely  available  in  Nigeria
       and the family insisted that their funds were limited.

   85. We note and appreciate a statement from  Nicola  Burgess  who  is  a
       solicitor with JCWI.  The essence of her statement is that,  mindful
       of the express directions of Upper Tribunal Judge Storey  in  March,
       she tried to find a copy of the OASys Report concerning  the  second
       appellant.  In short she cannot find a copy.

   86. We remind ourselves that this is an  appeal  under  the  Immigration
       Rules and we consider the relevant Rules.   We  will  then  consider
       Section 117 of the Immigration,  Nationality  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       because that is a statutory requirement.

   87. We begin by  considering  the  case  from  the  perspective  of  the
       children.  They have been in the United Kingdom  for  all  of  their
       lives.  One of them is a British citizen  and  the  other  two,  the
       Third and Fourth  appellants,  appear  to  be  entitled  to  British
       citizenship if an appropriate application is made.

   88.  The  evidence  about  their  condition  in  Nigeria  is  uncertain.
       However, we note that the First and Second appellants chose to  live
       together in a two-bedroom flat with the three children in East  Ham.
       This is, no doubt, a respectable address but  we  find  it  unlikely
       that that they would choose to live in such small  accommodation  if
       they could afford better. We do not know but  we  find  it  unlikely
       that they have access to much money. They are  not  rich  people  by
       United Kingdom standards.

   89. Although neither the First nor the Second  Appellant  has  given  us
       much reason to believe anything that they say we accept that even if
       some family support is available to them in Nigeria, no relative  is
       in a position to easily provide a home for this family.

   90. Clearly the First and Second Appellants, possibly  particularly  the
       First Appellant, have marketable skills and their experience of life
       in the United Kingdom which no doubt has improved their  command  of
       the English language, would be valuable but they would be  competing
       for jobs in the difficult economy and, doing the best we can on  the
       limited information before us, we think  their  prospects  would  be
       rather hard in Nigeria.

   91. Family life there would present a very  sharp  contrast  with  their
       lives in the United Kingdom.  Clearly  the  children  do  not  enjoy
       particularly comfortable or spacious accommodation but they do enjoy
       access to good education and, crucially in the case of D, access  to
       the health service as well as having established  their  own  social
       lives to some extent.

   92. We have no hesitation in saying  that  the  best  interests  of  the
       children are for them to remain in the United Kingdom with  both  of
       their parents.

   93. We say with both  of  their  parents  because,  notwithstanding  the
       criminal activities of the First and  Second  appellant,  they  have
       clearly managed to produce well-adjusted children who  are  to  take
       advantage of life's opportunities and it would be facile to  pretend
       that the First Appellant, notwithstanding his many  deficiencies  in
       other respects, has not contributed to this success.

   94. Of course it does not follow from this that any  of  the  Appellants
       should be allowed to remain.  The fact that something is  a  primary
       consideration does not make it determinative.

   95. We consider first the case of D.  He is a British  citizen.   He  is
       entitled to live in the United Kingdom and entitled to the  benefits
       that come from living there including access to the  health  service
       which in his case is very important.  It  is  absolutely  plain  for
       reasons that are explained carefully in  an  uncontroversial  expert
       report that he is going to need major surgery on  his  heart  as  he
       grows up.  Clearly these are all factors of importance that have  to
       be considered.

   96. According to the respondent's skeleton argument the  guidance  given
       by this Tribunal in Sanade & Others (British children -  Zambrano  -
       Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) and associated cases is  unreliable.
       In Sanade & Others the Tribunal (the President Mr Justice Blake  and
       Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan) decided that,  following  Case  C-34/09
       Ruiz Zambrano it was now clear that it was not possible to require a
       family to relocate outside the European Union or for  the  Secretary
       of State to submit that it would be reasonable to  relocate  outside
       the European Union where the child of the person to be deported is a
       British citizen.  According to  paragraph  25  of  the  Respondent's
       skeleton argument:
  "The Upper Tribunal recorded at paragraph 95 of its  judgment  that  this
  was a concession made by the Secretary of State.  However, this does  not
  accurately reflect the position set out in a letter to the Upper Tribunal
  from the Head of  European  Operational  Policy  in  the  then-UK  Border
  Agency...".

   97. We found this a surprising proposition that caused us to re-read the
       decision in Sanade.  At paragraph 94 of its  decision  the  Tribunal
       set out a submission  of  law  from  the  Secretary  of  State.   At
       paragraph 95 it said:
  "We shall take this helpful submission into account when we consider  the
  application of Article 8 to each appellant's case.   We  agree  with  it.
  This means that where the child or  indeed  the  remaining  spouse  is  a
  British citizen and therefore a citizen of the European Union, it is  not
  possible to require them to relocate outside of the European Union or  to
  submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so.  The case serves to
  emphasise  the  importance  of  nationality  already  identified  in  the
  decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania).  If interference with the
  family life is to be justified, it can only be  on  the  basis  that  the
  conduct of the person to be removed gives rise to consideration  of  such
  weight as to justify separation."

   98. We do not agree that the Upper Tribunal  based  its  decision  on  a
       concession made by the Secretary of  State.   Indeed  we  find  this
       submission such a distortion of the Tribunal's  decision  in  Sanade
       that it is close to being misleading and it is a submission that  we
       reject.

   99. As is perfectly plain from a proper  reading  of  Sanade  the  Upper
       Tribunal did not base anything on a concession.  Rather it  happened
       to find a submission made by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  written
       submissions to be attractive and adopted it not  because  it  was  a
       concession but because it put rather  well  the  law  as  the  Upper
       Tribunal understood it.  It was the view of  that  division  of  the
       Tribunal in a reported decision that, following Zambrano, it is  not
       reasonable to expect a British citizen to relocate.

  100. Mr Walker, who was not the author of the skeleton  argument,  agreed
       with us that we cannot approach the  case  on  the  basis  that  the
       British citizen child can be required to leave.  Rather we  have  to
       approach it on the basis that  the  deportation  of  the  Appellants
       would leave the British citizen without either parent or sibling  in
       the United  Kingdom  and  we  would  have  to  decide  if  that  was
       proportionate.

  101. We find it quite remarkable that the Secretary of State for the Home
       Department wants to argue that a British citizen, and particularly a
       British citizen who is a child, should  be  expected  to  leave  his
       country of nationality and the rights of residence that go with it.

  102. There is nothing exceptional about the child D's  relationship  with
       his mother that warrants particular comment.  His relationship  with
       his  mother  has  already  been  disrupted  because  of  her   being
       imprisoned  as  a  result  of  her  criminal   behaviour   and   his
       relationship with his father has been  similarly  disturbed.   These
       are big jolts.  He has also lived in less than ideal conditions with
       foster parents of uncertain  skills.   It  is  simply  a  matter  of
       informed commonsense that  a  period  of  stability  would  be  very
       desirable for him.

  103. Further, absent evidence that the relationship with  his  mother  is
       fundamentally unsuitable in some way, and there is none,  he  should
       be with his mother if that can be arranged  when  other  things  are
       considered.

  104. His need for stability and parental support is enhanced by his  need
       for surgery.  There is nothing unacceptably vague about the  medical
       evidence.  It is absolutely plain that at some time in  the  future,
       as he grows, he will need further heart  surgery.   There  is  clear
       evidence that this is not available to him in Nigeria.  This was the
       opinion of his own  consultant  supported  to  some  extent  by  the
       background material about medical treatment in Nigeria.

  105. However that is perhaps slightly missing the point.  He is a British
       citizen and entitled to use the health service if he  is  living  in
       the United Kingdom.  Removing him from that  advantage  would  be  a
       very serious step given his known health conditions.  Further, again
       as a matter of informed commonsense, it would be  good  for  him  to
       have the support of his mother at that time just as it would be good
       for the mother to be able to be near him.

  106. We reject entirely the suggestion that the child D could somehow  go
       to Nigeria and come back for his medical treatment.  It is trite law
       that entitlement to medical  treatment  under  the  national  health
       service is residence-based.  He would lose that if he were  removed.
       He would not be going anyway but  that  is  a  further  factor  that
       points us in favour of saying he cannot leave.

  107. We remind ourselves of the  aggravating  features  of  his  mother's
       case.  She has been to prison  for  her  part  in  a  conspiracy  to
       frustrate immigration control.  That matters.  We must remember that
       although she is not in the  very  difficult  position  of  a  person
       sentenced to more than four  years'  imprisonment,  there  is  clear
       regulatory and statutory authority that the public  interest  is  in
       her being removed and this is something  we  must  reflect  on.   We
       have.  We are persuaded that on the facts of this  case  her  appeal
       must be allowed for the sake of her son.

  108. In parallel with this is the cases of the other two children who are
       appellants, the Third and Fourth Appellants.  Happily  they  do  not
       have the serious medical condition of their brother D but all  their
       social life has been in  the  United  Kingdom.   We  understand  the
       prohibition against giving much weight to private  life  established
       when their circumstances are precarious but it  is  all  they  have.
       They have no experience of life in Nigeria.  We believe the evidence
       that they would not be going back to good circumstances in Nigeria.

  109. The First and Second appellants have made it very  hard  to  believe
       anything they say but it is quite plain that they are  very  anxious
       to  continue  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  where  their  living
       conditions are at best modest.  These are not people who  are  well-
       connected in Nigeria and can  expect  a  transfer  into  the  higher
       echelons of Nigerian society.

  110. We do believe their evidence  that  they  would  get  little  family
       support because the family members who would be inclined to help had
       big obligations on them already and obtaining any sort of work would
       be difficult.  We would not  suggest  there  would  be  destitution.
       That is going too far.  Both parents do have marketable skills,  not
       least being their facility with the English language  although  that
       is not uncommon in Nigeria.

  111. Nevertheless, we have to look at the evidence in the  round.   These
       boys have strong links in the United Kingdom.  Further their brother
       cannot leave.  It is undesirable  to  split  siblings  living  as  a
       nuclear family although sometimes necessary.  It  is  not  necessary
       here.  We find that the appeals of  the  minor  children  and  their
       mother must also be allowed.  We make it clear that this is  because
       it is allowable under the Rules and with reference to Article  8  of
       the European Convention on Human Rights. With reference  to  Section
       117C we find that the effect of deporting the Second Appellant would
       be unduly harsh on the Third and Fourth Appellants and on the  child
       D. Clearly any change in a child's life that requires the  child  to
       leave the country where he or she has lived all of his life  and  to
       settle in a country where his material circumstances are  diminished
       is likely to be harsh but deportation is  a  stern  measure  and  is
       likely to involve some harshness. The same can be said of a decision
       that separates parents from their children.

  112. Here the family is recovering from being broken up  by  imprisonment
       (which observation does not mean to imply that imprisonment was  not
       deserved) removes young children from their parents. We find that it
       would be unduly harsh on the Third and Fourth Appellants  to  remove
       them or separate them but it would be  especially  unduly  harsh  to
       remove or separate D.

  113. We cannot allow the appeal of the father.  Arguments  in  favour  of
       his remaining for the sake of the children are  in  some  cases  the
       same as the case of the Second Appellant.  The wife  needs  him  and
       she is staying.  The boys need him.

  114. However, Parliament  has  imposed  requirements  on  the  Article  8
       balancing exercise which we have to follow.  Paragraph 398 of  HC395
       requires that in a case where a person  has  been  sentenced  to  at
       least four years' imprisonment (as has the First Appellant) then the
       public interest in deportation will outweigh  other  factors  unless
       there are  "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
       described in paragraph 399 and 399A".

  115. These are Rules that deal with  people  in  genuine  and  subsisting
       parental relationships with children and who have been in the United
       Kingdom for a long time themselves.  We are quite satisfied there is
       a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the children but
       there are no "very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
       described at paragraphs 399 and 399A."

  116. We raised this point with Counsel at the beginning of  the  hearing.
       It is no discredit to him that he was not really able  to  point  to
       anything that would satisfy the  requirements  of  this  Rule.   The
       point is echoed in Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002  which  requires  that  in  the  case  of  a  person
       sentenced to at least four years' imprisonment "the public  interest
       requires deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances,
       over and above those described in Sections 1 and 2".

  117. For similar reasons there are no such very compelling  circumstances
       here.

Decision

  118. It follows therefore that we allow the appeals of the Second,  Third
       and Fourth Appellants under the rules and with reference to  Article
       8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  and  we  dismiss  the
       appeal of the First Appellant.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 September 2016              |

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01228/2014
                                                               DA/01229/2014
                                                               DA/01230/2014
                                                               DA/01231/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 December 2015                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    [O U]
                                    [CU]
                                    [D E]
                                    [D O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms V Easty of Counsel instructed by JCWI
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


An anonymity order made in respect of second and third  appellants  and  the
child D only

   1. The first and second appellants, both citizens of Nigeria, are husband
      and wife. The third and fourth  appellants  are  their  children.  The
      first two appellants have a further child, D, who was registered as  a
      British citizen on 11 June 2013. The first  two  appellants  are  both
      foreign  criminals.  On  27  November  2009  both  were  convicted  of
      conspiracy in respect of forged documents relating to 30  applications
      for leave to remain in the UK. For these offences, the first appellant
      was sentenced to 7 years imprisonment and the second appellant  to  30
      months imprisonment. In view of these offences the respondent  decided
      on 2 June 2014 to make a deportation order against both of them  under
      s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act. Their two  children  were  also  served
      with decisions to deport as  members  of  the  family  of  the  second
      appellant.

   2. In the decision letter sent to the  first  appellant  the  respondent,
      having noted that he had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
      at least 4 years, considered that he could only succeed under para 398
      of  the  Immigration  Rules  if  able  to  show,  pursuant  to  398(a)
      exceptional  circumstances  outweighing  the  public   interest.   The
      respondent concluded that the first  appellant  could  not  show  such
      circumstances.  In the decision letter sent to the  second  appellant,
      having noted that she had been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
      of more than 12 months but less than four years, considered  her  case
      first under paras 399(a) and then under para 398. She  concluded  that
      the appellant could not succeed under either rule.

   3. In the appellants' grounds of appeal it was argued, inter  alia,  that
      (1) the judge was wrong to treat the four appeals as a  single  appeal
      because the second appellant was entitled to succeed under para 399(a)
      as it was unreasonable to expect the three children, including  D  who
      is a British citizen, to leave the United Kingdom; (2)  the first  and
      second appellants were parents of a British citizen child and as  such
      they and the other two appellants stood to benefit from the  Court  of
      Justice judgment in Ruiz Zambrano [2001] EUECJ C'34/09.

   4. The  grounds  also  contended  that:  "[t]he  decision  to  deport  is
      therefore in breach of the Community Treaty and associated rights".

   5. The appellants' appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla  on
      2 February 2015.  On his way to dismissing all four appeals he  stated
      at [34]:

         "Mr Cooray [counsel for the appellants] at  the  beginning  of  the
         hearing said that there was only one appeal, by the Appellant  with
         the other three appellants being his dependents.  It  was  conceded
         that the second  Appellant  could  not  succeed  if  the  Appellant
         himself did not succeed. The second Appellant's appeal could not be
         considered separately from  that  of  the  Appellant.  Furthermore,
         contrary to what was stated in the grounds of appeal, that  as  the
         [deportation order] was made after 8 July 2012, the  provisions  of
         HC395, as amended.... applied to this appeal.   Lastly,  Mr  Cooray
         further agreed that since  the  Appellant  was  given  a  custodial
         sentence of more than four years, this appeal fell within paragraph
         398(a) of the Immigration Rules  which  meant  that  the  Appellant
         could succeed only if he could establish exceptional  circumstances
         which outweighed the public interest in deportation".


   6. At [58] the judge said that as the first appellant was given more than
      four years imprisonment, his case was covered by paragraph 398(a)  and
      in that regard "I have considered the personal  circumstances  of  the
      Appellant and his family, in particular those of  his  three  children
      who were all born in the UK and one of whom, [D] was naturalised as  a
      British citizen in 2013...". At  [54]  he  said  that  he  noted  that
      section 117C of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
      applied different criteria depending on whether an appellant had  been
      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less or more than four  years
      (the former  scenario  (assuming  at  least  12  months  imprisonment)
      provided for two exceptions (Exceptions 1 and 2); the latter  scenario
      required there to be "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
      those described in Exceptions 1 and 2". In [61] he stated that even if
      the children's circumstances did amount to exceptional circumstances:

         "I would have to be satisfied that, in addition to one or  both  of
         the exceptions set out in section 117C being present, there had  to
         be "very compelling circumstances over and above those described in
         Exceptions  1  and  2.  Having  considered  the  totality  of   the
         circumstances in this case, I am left in no doubt that  there  were
         no  compelling  circumstances  which  could  outweigh  the   public
         interest considerations in deporting the Appellant  on  account  of
         his serious criminality."

   7. In [62] he concluded that "[t]his appeal  is  therefore  dismissed  on
      human rights grounds with reference to article 8. There is  no  appeal
      before me on any other grounds". At [63] he stated  that  "[a]ll  four
      appeals are dismissed  on  human  rights  grounds  with  reference  to
      article 8".

   8. It is unnecessary to set out the helpful submissions of Ms  Easty  and
      Mr Staunton because it is clear to me that  the  First  tier  tribunal
      judge materially erred  in  law.  Leaving  aside  that  he  failed  to
      appreciate that para 398 of the new Immigration Rules had been amended
      in July 2014 so as to refer to "very compelling circumstances"  rather
      than "exceptional circumstances", he clearly failed  to  consider  the
      second appellant under para 399(a) and failed to appreciate  that  the
      third and fourth appellants had been served  decisions  which  treated
      them  as  her  dependants.  Throughout  the  determination  the  judge
      proceeded on the basis that all four appellants stood to be considered
      under para 398(a) alone. He wrongly considered in this regard that  he
      was dealing with a single appeal. This error  was  compounded  by  the
      fact that  despite  also  considering  whether  the  appellants  could
      succeed under s.117C of the 2002 Act, he wrongly  concluded  that  all
      four appellants could only succeed if able to  show  "very  compelling
      circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2".
      That was only true of the  first  appellant.  So  far  as  the  second
      appellant was concerned, she stood to be considered under Exceptions 1
      and 2 as defined in s.117C(4)  and  (5),  as  did  her  two  appellant
      children.

   9. A further error is that despite recording the fact that the respondent
      had addressed the Zambrano point in her decision  letters,  the  judge
      failed to note that the appellants' grounds  of  appeal  continued  to
      pursue the Zambrano point (arguing that the respondent  was  wrong  to
      dismiss it). The judge wrongly considered that he was  only  concerned
      with a human rights appeal based on Article 8 and stated that "[t]here
      is no appeal before me on  any  other  grounds".  The  Zambrano  point
      concerns a decision made under EU law with reference to primary EU law
      as well as secondary EU law mediated through the Immigration (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006. It is not a decision  concerned  with
      human rights.

  10. In arriving at my above conclusions I have had regard to  the  judge's
      recording at [34] that Mr Cooray (then  representing  the  appellants)
      had "accepted" at the beginning of the hearing that there was only one
      appeal and that it was "conceded that the second Appellant  could  not
      succeed if the Appellant himself did not succeed". In my judgment.  it
      is not arguable that because a concession was made by Mr  Cooray  that
      there was only a single appeal that should be treated as  the  correct
      position in law. It was not for Mr Cooray or the judge to choose which
      law to apply. Concessions can bind on matters of fact and policy,  not
      of law and as a matter of law the second appellant and the  two  child
      appellants fell to be considered under para 399(a) and  s.117C(4)-(5).
      It is not clear whether the judge also decided to ignore the  Zambrano
      point for the same reason (namely that he considered it  was  conceded
      by Mr Cooray), but in any event the same considerations apply. It  was
      a ground of appeal which should have been determined but was not.

  11. Mr Staunton sought to argue that  even  if  the  judge  had  erred  as
      described above. this was not a material error because  it  was  clear
      from his assessment of the relevant factors that the second  appellant
      and the child appellants could not show that they met the requirements
      of para 399(a). I cannot accept that submission. First, to the  extent
      that the judge considered the children's circumstances, he treated the
      relevant criterion as being whether their situation amounted  to  "...
      exceptional circumstances so as to outweigh the need to  deport  their
      parents on account of their serious criminality  and  the  despite  to
      keep  the  family  together"  [57].   The  judge  gave   no   distinct
      consideration to the two criteria set out in para 399(a) (ii) (a)  and
      (b) namely: whether:

         "It would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the  country  to
         which the person is to be deported; and
         It would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK  without
         the person who is to be deported".


  12. Second, in respect of the two child appellants, the judge did refer at
      one point in his assessment to it not being "hard" for the children to
      assimilate into society in Nigeria, but assimilation is  only  one  of
      the factors that must be  taken  into  account  when  assessing  undue
      hardship and it simply cannot be assumed that the judge had this  test
      in mind when considering the other  factors  he  looked  at  in  [57],
      particularly since he portrayed his assessment as being one  concerned
      with whether there were "exceptional circumstances so as  to  outweigh
      the  need  to  deport  their  parents  on  account  of  their  serious
      criminality". The judge has hopelessly muddled distinct legal tests.


  13. Further, Mr Staunton's submission does not address the  fact  that  in
      respect of the second appellant and  the  two  child  appellants  (and
      indeed the child D) the judge also applied the wrong legal test  under
      s. 117C (4)-(5). In the context of this provision it would  have  been
      necessary for the judge either (a) to have no  regard  to  the  public
      interest in curbing serious criminality); or (b) to  consider  whether
      it was relevant that the second appellant's level of  criminality  was
      less than that of the first appellant's and did not engage  s.117C(6).
      I note these  two  alternatives  because  existing  case  law  of  the
      Tribunal is divided as between (a) and (b). In  this  case  the  judge
      failed to deal with s.117C correctly, whichever view is taken.

  14. As regards the Zambrano point, if that had been the only matter I  may
      have considered the judge's error was not material, since  he  devoted
      considerable space in his determination to assessing whether the child
      D would be forced to leave the UK, even if not doing so in the context
      of deciding the express Zambrano  point.  But  it  was  not  the  only
      matter.

  15. For the above reasons the First tier Tribunal judge's decision must be
      set aside.

  16. I sought submissions from the parties regarding how I  should  proceed
      in relation to the re-making of the decision. Ms Easty  on  behalf  of
      the appellants submitted that I should remit the appeals to the  First
      tier Tribunal. I am not persuaded that that  would  be  in  accordance
      with the Senior President's Practice Statement. In the first place, in
      response to Upper  Tribunal  directions  inviting  the  appellants  to
      submit any further evidence on which they would wish to rely  in  case
      the Upper Tribunal decided to find an error of law and proceed to  re-
      make the decision, the appellants made  no  response.  In  the  second
      place, the appellants' grounds of appeal raise  no  challenge  to  the
      judge's primary findings of fact regarding the appellants' history and
      family circumstances; they take issue only with the  judge's  approach
      to the relevant legal criteria for evaluating those facts.  (Ms  Easty
      properly abandoned ground 6). The only possible exceptions concern the
      contention in the grounds  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  all
      relevant factors when assessing the prospects  of  rehabilitation  and
      the medical evidence concerning D. In respect of  the  former,  it  is
      clear from Court of Appeal authority that in a foreign  criminal  case
      no substantial weight can be placed on that factor alone in any event;
      and hence any lawful assessment made in his case  could  not  lead  to
      very significant weight being given to such a factor. In  relation  to
      the latter, however, I accept that Ms Easty has a point  in  that  the
      medical evidence was not as clear-cut one way as the judge appears  to
      have assumed in [58];  it  is  at  least  arguable  that  the  medical
      evidence established that D would need surgery as soon as  he  stopped
      growing at around the age of 18. The letter of 16 April 2014, on which
      the respondent relies, only  observes  that  "his  cardiac  status  is
      stable and does not require further intervention at present".


  17. However, this area of factual dispute or uncertainty is  very  limited
      and can best be addressed in the way outlined next.

  18. Having decided that the case should remain in the  Upper  Tribunal,  I
      have next given consideration to how best  to  achieve  that.  I  have
      decided to follow the normal default position  and  direct  a  further
      hearing to be heard by me. In addition to  standard  directions  which
      will follow, the parties are directed as follows:

         Directions


         1. Within 28 days from this decision being sent to the parties, the
         appellants' representatives are to submit a short letter from Great
         Ormond Street Hospital or other relevant specialist setting out (a)
         what was the  latest  surgical  procedure  that  D  underwent;  (b)
         whether it is still considered he will need further surgery when he
         has fully grown; (c) assuming the answer to (b) is yes, when it  is
         considered that this likely to be.


         2. If the respondent  continues  to  dispute  that  D  can  receive
         adequate medical treatment in Nigeria, she has  liberty  to  submit
         further evidence in support within time limits set out in  standard
         directions (allowance being made by her to give the  appellants  an
         opportunity to adduce evidence in rebuttal) but with  this  advance
         warning.


         3. Both parties are to furnish a skeleton argument to be  submitted
         to the Tribunal and the other party at least 7 days before the date
         fixed for hearing.


For the above reasons:

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and its decision is set aside.

The case will be listed to be heard as soon as possible.  It  is  already  a
year since the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  is  in  the
interests of justice that there is no further delay.

                               Signed                                  Date


                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
