
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01822/2013
                                                               IA/35730/2013
                                                               IA/35733/2013
                                                               IA/35741/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 February 2016                  |On 19 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR B P
                                  MRS R B P
                                 MISS Y B P
                                 MISS V B P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Jones, Counsel


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  in  the
interests of protecting the identity of  the  two  minor  children  in  this
case, I make an anonymity direction.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the  First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in  this  particular  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
         appeals against a decision of a Tribunal of the First-Tier Tribunal
         consisting of  the  President,  Mr  M  A  Clements  and  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Froom promulgated on 6 July  2015  ("the  Decision")
         allowing the Appellants' appeals.  I note at  the  outset  a  point
         made by Mr Jones that the Secretary of  State's  challenge  to  the
         Decision relates only to the First Appellant's appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision dated 13 May 2013 that section  32(5)
         of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies to him.  There is  no  challenge
         to [103] of the Decision allowing the appeals  of  the  Second  and
         Third Appellants refusing to vary their leave and  directing  their
         removal under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
         Act  2006  or  to  the  finding  at  [108]   that   it   would   be
         disproportionate to remove the Fourth Appellant on the  basis  that
         her mother is entitled to remain which led to the allowing  of  her
         appeal on human rights grounds. The fact that the Decision is  only
         appealed in relation  to  the  First  Appellant  appears  from  the
         Secretary of State's grounds seeking permission to appeal  to  this
         Tribunal and was not challenged in those grounds or by Mr Norton at
         the hearing.  Indeed, it is the case that the Second Appellant  has
         now  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  the   Third
         Appellant's  case  remains  under  consideration  in  relation   to
         settlement.  An application for British citizenship has  been  made
         in  respect  of  the  Fourth  Appellant  following  the  grant   of
         indefinite leave to her mother.

      2. Permission to appeal the Decision was granted on 9 October 2015  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Storey in the following terms:-
             "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Tribunal erred in
             its approach to  the  issue  of  the  best  interests  of  the
             children and the issue of whether  return  to  India  for  the
             family would be unduly harsh and that in both  contexts  undue
             weight was given to the putative British  citizenship  of  the
             third and fourth appellants even though neither  had  made  an
             application for such: see in this regard  Oladeij  (s3(1)  BNA
             1981) [2015] UKUT 326 (IAC) (21 May 2015) para 29"

         The matter comes before me  to  determine  whether  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal Decision involved the making of an error of law.

      3. The background facts so far as it is necessary to recite  them  are
         that the First Appellant who is a national of India arrived in  the
         UK on 13 June 2004 as a student.  The Second Appellant is his  wife
         and the Third Appellant his eldest minor  daughter.   They  entered
         the UK on 31 December 2004 as his dependents.  The Third Appellant,
         Y B, was at that date  aged  about  eighteen  months.   The  Fourth
         Appellant, V B, is the First and Second Appellants' youngest  minor
         daughter who was born in the UK on 10 April 2008.   The  First  and
         Second Appellants also have a son, J B, who was born in the  UK  on
         22 October 2012.  No immigration decision has  yet  been  taken  in
         relation to him and he is not an Appellant  in  this  appeal.   The
         Appellants' leave was subsequently extended first as a student  and
         then as a Highly Skilled Migration/Tier 1 migrant  and  dependents.
         The Appellants' last leave expired on 23 January 2013.

      4. On 22 October 2010, the First Appellant was  convicted  of  violent
         disorder and sentenced to three years' imprisonment.   His  appeals
         against conviction and sentence failed in the Court of Appeal.  The
         circumstances of the offence are set out in the sentencing  Judge's
         remarks cited at [6] of the Decision and I do not  need  to  repeat
         those save to note that the Tribunal regarded the offence  as  very
         serious and was highly critical of the First  Appellant's  attempts
         to minimise his involvement in or responsibility for it  ([110]  to
         [113]).   The  Tribunal  also  rejected   the   First   Appellant's
         contention that he was not the ringleader as he was described to be
         by the sentencing Judge.

      5. As a result of the  offence,  the  Respondent  notified  the  First
         Appellant of his liability to deportation and thereafter  made  the
         decision to which I refer at [1] above and which  is  at  issue  in
         this appeal.  The  Respondent  also  made  decisions  refusing  the
         Second to Fourth Appellants further leave to remain  as  the  First
         Appellant's dependents in a Tier 1 application which he had made on
         16 January 2013.

      6. Prior to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the Second and
         Third Appellants also made applications  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on 10  December  2014.   Although  those  applications  were
         voided by  reason  of  section  3C(4)  Immigration  Act  1971,  the
         Tribunal considered the issue  of  whether  the  Second  and  Third
         Appellants were entitled to indefinite leave to remain at  [90]  to
         [103] and determined that they were.  The Tribunal  also  found  at
         [108]  that  the  removal  of  the  Fourth   Appellant   would   be
         disproportionate.  As I note at [1] above, those findings  are  not
         challenged.

    Submissions

      7. Although Mr Norton relied in his oral submissions on  four  grounds
         as set out in the application for permission to appeal,  there  are
         in essence two grounds which are more fully particularised  in  the
         application for permission to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         The first of those is a widely drafted  ground  that  the  Tribunal
         materially misdirected itself in relation to the meaning of "unduly
         harsh" and conflated that with the  best  interests  of  the  minor
         children, that the Tribunal misdirected itself in relation  to  the
         requisite threshold for what is unduly harsh and failed  to  reason
         its assessment that deportation of the  First  Appellant  would  be
         unduly harsh.  The second ground is  more  narrowly  confined.   It
         asserts that the Tribunal placed significant  weight  on  the  fact
         that  the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  are  entitled  to   make
         applications for British citizenship following the conclusion  that
         the Second Appellant satisfies paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.  It is submitted that since no such  applications  had  been
         made, this was not a relevant factor. At  the  hearing,  Mr  Norton
         adopted those grounds and elaborated upon them.

      8. Mr Jones in response submitted that  there  was  no  error  in  the
         Decision which was particularly carefully and  thoroughly  crafted.
         He noted that the factor which tipped the balance was the  position
         of the Third  Appellant  and  there  was  no  undue  focus  on  the
         possibility of applications for citizenship by the Third and Fourth
         Appellants.  In fact, he noted, the Third Appellant was entitled to
         settlement in her own right due to  length  of  residence  (as  the
         Tribunal found).  The Tribunal's did not rely on the potential  for
         her to acquire citizenship in  light  of  its  findings  about  the
         Second Appellant's entitlement  to  indefinite  leave  but  on  the
         potential for the Fourth Appellant and J B to do so.   Applications
         for citizenship have now  been  made  in  relation  to  the  Fourth
         Appellant and J B.  Now that the Second Appellant has been  granted
         indefinite leave to remain, those fall to be decided under  section
         1(3) of the British Nationality Act  1981  which  is  in  mandatory
         terms and requires the Respondent to grant citizenship  unless  she
         refuses to do so in the exercise of her discretion in  relation  to
         good character.

      9. In relation to ground  one,  Mr  Jones  again  submitted  that  the
         position of the Third Appellant was crucial and the findings of the
         Tribunal were supported by evidence not only  from  an  independent
         social worker but also a comment by the Office  of  the  Children's
         Champion.  Although the bulk of consideration of that evidence  was
         in the context of the children's best  interests  (necessitated  by
         the Respondent's failure to deal adequately with that  issue),  the
         Tribunal  recognised  that  those  were  not  a  trump  card   when
         considering whether deportation of the  First  Appellant  would  be
         unduly harsh, in particular for the Third Appellant and went on  to
         consider that issue separately.  The Tribunal  properly  considered
         the seriousness of offending and did not accept all of the evidence
         of the Appellants, particularly in relation to their ties to India.
          The Tribunal had, he submitted, noted the threshold to be  applied
         in relation to what  is  unduly  harsh  but  was  entitled  on  the
         evidence to reach the conclusion it had.  He also  noted  that  the
         Decision pre-dated the decisions of this Tribunal in MAB (para 399;
         "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC) and KMO  (section  117  -
         unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC).

    Discussion and conclusions

     10. I can deal shortly with ground two.  At [107] of the Decision,  the
         Tribunal notes that, having allowed the Second  Appellant's  appeal
         on the basis that she was entitled to indefinite leave to remain on
         grounds of long residence, this had  implications  for  the  Fourth
         Appellant and J B.  Notably, the Tribunal said nothing there  about
         the Third Appellant.  That then feeds into the Tribunal's reasoning
         in relation to the Third Appellant on the basis that "the impending
         registration of her siblings as British citizen is  also  a  factor
         militating against deportation". Firstly, it cannot  be  said  that
         the Tribunal is  there  placing  any  significant  weight  on  that
         factor. In any event, as I now turn to note, the First  Appellant's
         appeal was allowed because of the Third  Appellant's  position  and
         not that of the Fourth Appellant or J  B.   The  reference  to  the
         potential entitlement of the Third Appellant's siblings as being "a
         factor" is something to which the Tribunal could have  regard.  The
         Tribunal placed no significant weight  on  that  factor.   It  most
         certainly cannot be described as a decisive factor in  relation  to
         the position of the Third Appellant.

     11. In order to understand the Tribunal's conclusions on ground one, it
         is necessary to set out the basis on which  the  First  Appellant's
         appeal was allowed.  The  Tribunal  expressly  rejected  paragraphs
         399(b) and 399A of the Rules as a basis for  the  allowing  of  the
         appeal [126].  The Appellants did not submit that  those  would  be
         reason to allow the appeal.  The appeal was allowed on the basis of
         the  First  Appellant's  relationship   with   his   children   and
         particularly with the Third Appellant.  There  is  a  typographical
         error at [139] where reference is made to paragraph 399(b)  instead
         of paragraph 399(a) but nothing turns on that given  the  reasoning
         which follows:-
             "[137]    We now apply the law to the facts as  found  by  us,
             always bearing in mind that the best interests of the children
             are a primary consideration but not the only one.
             [138]     No question of liability to deportation arises.   We
             move on to consideration of whether the appellant  can  resist
             his deportation by showing he falls within Exception 1.
             [139]     The presumption that the  public  interest  requires
             the appellant's deportation can be rebutted if  the  appellant
             can show that he falls within the circumstances  described  in
             paragraph 399(b) [sic] of the  rules.   The  rules  have  been
             amended to bring them into line with section 117C of the  2002
             Act.
             [140]     There is no dispute over the fact that the appellant
             has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  children,
             who are under the age of 18 years.  The  third  appellant  had
             resided in the UK for more than seven years prior to the  date
             of decision.  For the purposes of the appellant's appeal under
             this rule the determinative question is whether, on the  basis
             of the facts found by us, it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             third appellant to live in India and it would be unduly  harsh
             for her to remain in the UK without the appellant.
             [141]     After  giving  very  careful  consideration  to  the
             entirety of the evidence and the competing arguments ably  put
             forward by the representatives, we  have  concluded  that  the
             appellant does meet the  requirements  of  the  rule  and  the
             appellant's appeal should be  allowed.   Our  reasons  are  as
             follows.
             [142]     We do not propose to repeat the matters which led us
             to   conclude   that   the   third   appellant's    particular
             circumstances meant her best interests require her  to  remain
             in the UK with both parents.  This point is not a 'trump card'
             and we have  paid  close  attention  to  the  public  interest
             factors deployed against the appellant by the respondent.   We
             have in mind the undoubted  seriousness  of  the  offence,  as
             reflected in the sentence, and the need to deter others,  even
             though the appellant only poses a low  risk  of  re-offending.
             However, we find that, in the particular circumstances of this
             case,  similar  considerations  to  those  which  led  to  our
             conclusion on best interests lead to  a  finding  that  family
             displacement or separation would be unduly harsh as far as the
             third appellant is concerned.
             [143]     In a sense, any enforced separation or  displacement
             could be said to be harsh and clearly the test  requires  much
             more.  In our judgment, the test of "unduly harsh" connotes  a
             serious degree  of  harshness  when  the  particular  family's
             circumstances are considered.  The circumstances required  are
             somewhere below the degree of harshness required by  paragraph
             398, which uses the words very compelling  circumstances  over
             and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
             [144]     We remind ourselves  that  the  third  appellant  is
             blameless as  regards  the  circumstances  which  led  to  the
             current proceedings, although that is almost always  going  to
             be the case  when  this  particular  rule  is  applied.   More
             importantly,  we  take  into  account  the  fact   the   third
             appellant's residence in the UK has been significantly  longer
             than the seven-year period identified in the rule.  She is now
             at an age where she is starting to  build  ties  and  to  look
             outside the immediate family unit.  The evidence shows  it  is
             more probable than not the appellant is unlikely to  re-offend
             and he is capable of leading an industrious life  in  the  UK.
             The protection of the public does not demand the separation or
             displacement of this family.  Given her unusual sensitivities,
             as discussed above, we find it can properly be  said  that  it
             would be unduly harsh on the third appellant to  separate  her
             from her father or her unusually close ties  to  the  UK.   As
             said, either course would have very  deleterious  consequences
             for her identity, self-esteem and development.  The  impending
             registration of her siblings as British  citizens  is  also  a
             factor  militating  against   deportation.    We   allow   the
             appellant's appeal under the rules."
             [my emphasis]

         The above findings have to be read  also  in  the  context  of  the
         evidence of the independent social worker set out at [41]  to  [51]
         and  other  evidence  in  relation  to  the  impact  of  the  First
         Appellant's deportation on Y B and also of the Tribunal's  findings
         in relation to the best interests of the children, particularly the
         Third Appellant at [127] to [136].

     12. There is no basis for challenging the Decision on the  ground  that
         the Tribunal has conflated  best  interests  with  what  is  unduly
         harsh. Although the Tribunal refers as shorthand to its findings on
         the best interests of the Third Appellant in  particular  at  [142]
         the Tribunal very clearly distinguishes the issues  by  recognising
         that best interests are not a trump card and going on to  refer  to
         the public interest.  The fact that the Tribunal says that  similar
         considerations of the Third Appellant's position have  led  to  its
         conclusions about whether family displacement or  separation  would
         be unduly harsh is not a basis for suggesting that the Tribunal has
         erroneously conflated the two issues.

     13. Neither is there a basis  for  contending  that  the  Tribunal  has
         misunderstood that the threshold for what is unduly harsh is a high
         one.  As I note at [9] above, the Decision pre-dates MAB where  the
         threshold is explained in the way in which the Respondent describes
         it in her grounds.  That is not to say though that a  failure    to
         refer to it in this way is a  material  error  of  law  (and  there
         obviously cannot be a failure to refer to the decision in MAB which
         was not in existence at  the  relevant  time).   The  Tribunal  has
         referred itself at [143] to the test as  requiring  something  more
         than simply harsh.  It  recognises  that  the  test  cannot  be  as
         extreme as requiring something over and above  paragraphs  399  and
         399A as would be the case if the sentence were  of  four  years  or
         more.  The Tribunal describes the test as requiring something of "a
         serious degree of harshness".  I am satisfied that  this  does  not
         show any failure to recognise the level of  interference  which  is
         required in order to outweigh what the Tribunal notes is a  heavily
         weighted  scale  in  favour  of  deportation  [39].   I  have  paid
         particularly close attention to the  evidence  which  the  Tribunal
         received in relation to the position of the Third Appellant  and  I
         have read the reports of the  independent  social  worker  and  the
         comment of the Office of Children's Champion which are relied upon.
          The  recitation  of  that  evidence  in  the  Decision  is  fairly
         summarised and I note that the Respondent does not take  any  issue
         with that.  Worthy of particular note is the comment by the  Office
         of Children's Champion when deportation action  was  authorised  as
         cited at [79] that:-
             "Mr [P's] two daughters, aged nine and  four,  are  likely  to
             experience his detention  and  deportation  as  a  significant
             loss.  The deportation is likely to have a long term impact on
             their emotional development and on the family's finances."

         I am satisfied that there is no error  by  the  Tribunal  in  their
         analysis  of  the  appropriate  test  or  in  relation   to   their
         application of that test to the facts of this case.  The conclusion
         may not have been one I would have reached but I am satisfied  that
         the Tribunal cannot be said to have reached a conclusion which  was
         not open to it.

     14. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no material
         error of law in the Decision and I uphold it.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 6 July 2015 with the consequence  that  the  appeals  of  the
Appellants are allowed on the basis set out at the  end  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Decision.

Signed      [pic]      Date 17 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
