
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01510/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2015                             |On 14 January 2015            |
|Extempore Judgment                            |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                      Mr Carlos Miguel Cuianda Correia
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr  Carlos  Miguel  Cuianda  Correia,  who  is  a
    Portuguese national.   He  appealed  a  decision  to  deport  taken  in
    accordance  with  Regulation  19(3)(b)   of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 on 10 July 2013 and following a hearing  on  6  August
    2014 the determination of which was promulgated on 19 August 2014,  the
    appeal was dismissed.  It was conceded at that hearing by the appellant
    that he had not shown five years' continuous residence and that he  was
    entitled to the lowest level of protection only.

2.   The determination was, according to the grounds seeking  permission  to
    appeal, not received by the solicitors until 23 September as opposed to
    20 August 2014.  They asserted that the time limit should run from then
    in which case given  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    submitted within five days of that date it would be in time.

3.   In granting permission  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  ruling  on
    whether the application for permission to appeal was in time and it was
    therefore  a  provisional  decision  only.   Correspondence  that   was
    attached to the application for permission to  appeal  does  appear  to
    indicate support to the position put  forward  by  the  solicitors  and
    given that this is something that was  said  by  the  solicitors  I  am
    prepared in this case to accept that they did not receive the  decision
    until 23 September and insofar as an extension of time  is  required  I
    will extend time.  Thus the provisional grant of permission  becomes  a
    grant of permission.

4.   Permission was sought and granted on the basis of an  asserted  failure
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to take  account  of  abstinence  from
    drug abuse since his release from prison when  the  report  had  stated
    that reversion  to  drug  use  would  indicate  an  increased  risk  of
    offending; that  the  Immigration  Judge  does  not  dispute  that  the
    appellant had completed his  RAPt  course  nor  had  she  disputed  the
    witness statement and the psychiatric report; that  the  oral  evidence
    indicated continued abstinence from drug use and that she had failed to
    take account of this when making her own assessment of risk.

5.   The grounds also submitted that  there  had  been  a  failure  to  take
    account of the lack of  drug  use  in  assessing  the  risk  of  future
    offending when he is drug-use free, that there had been  a  failure  to
    take account of progress in rehabilitation as per  the  case  of  Essa,
    that the judge had failed to give due weight to supportive family  life
    and that the Immigration Judge's reassessment  of  the  risk  was  ill-
    founded as she had failed to consider all of the  relevant  factors  in
    reassessing the expert report.

6.   There is no objection in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  to
    the summary of the background to this appellant's residence in  the  UK
    as set out in the determination, in particular that he came to  the  UK
    in March  2005.   He  first  came  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities in October of that year when he was cautioned on  suspicion
    of committing shoplifting and from 3 November 2006 to 14  January  2013
    he had 34 offences leading to fifteen convictions.  He  had  previously
    been sent a warning letter about deportation following  an  offence  of
    theft in 2008 or 2009 and he had been convicted on 9 November  2012  at
    Woolwich  Crown  Court  for  burglary  and  sentenced  to  two   years'
    imprisonment.  His licence expired in November 2014 and he was released
    from immigration detention on 21 May 2014.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  sets  out  her  findings  of  fact  and
    considerations from paragraph 28 onwards.  In paragraph 28 she sets out
    the appellant's history and in 29 she sets out the correct  legal  test
    to be applied.  She summarises again the evidence  and  identifies  the
    shortcomings in the OASys Report and the NOMS report and gives  details
    of the report by the expert, in particular dealing with the reoffending
    risk.  She makes the point that this report  was  prepared  whilst  the
    appellant was in prison but specifically says that the appellant  would
    benefit from developing social networks to  support  him  in  obtaining
    protective factors and that he had reported that his sources of support
    included his partner, his sister and family members in the UK.

8.   The judge records  the  expert's  opinion  that  there  was  a  low  to
    moderate risk and also the confirmation  from  the  probation  officers
    that since his release in May 2014  he  has  remained  drug-free.   She
    places weight on that report even though it is different to the limited
    evidence in the OASys and the NOMS report and finds the  report  to  be
    substantial and independent.  In assessing the value and the weight  to
    be placed on that report she also looks at the other information before
    her.  She sets out her assessment of the appellant's  integration  into
    the UK, his  claimed  relationship  with  his  partner  and  issues  of
    rehabilitation.  She is entitled to reach a different view  as  to  the
    risk assessment of reoffending.  On the basis of  the  evidence  before
    her her assessment that the risk of reoffending is more  likely  to  be
    medium than low to medium is a decision and a conclusion that  she  was
    entitled to come to on the basis of the evidence  and  the  information
    that was before her.  It is worth  noting  that  she  reaches  a  lower
    assessment than the NOMS report  although  higher  than  in  the  OASys
    Report although again noting that both of those she criticises as being
    incomplete.

9.   In determining the level of integration  that  the  appellant  has  she
    acknowledges the role of family and economic relationships.   She  sets
    out in detail the evidence before  her  in  connection  with  that  and
    reaches sustainable findings that the appellant is not  well-integrated
    into the UK.  She refers specifically to the lack of integration by way
    of work or educational studies, the relationship  with  a  partner  and
    lack of evidence of supportive friendships.  She  refers  to  his  only
    family members being his sister and her children  and  the  significant
    amount of time that he spent in prison since he came to the UK in 2005.

10.  The judge accepts that the  appellant's  rehabilitation  is  likely  to
    have started when he was in prison and that he is on  licence  and  has
    the support of a probation officer.  She acknowledges his evidence that
    he has no further contact with his old peer group but she looks at that
    in the light of all the other evidence and states, as  the  independent
    report  does,  that  an  important  aspect  of  rehabilitation  is  the
    supportive relationships that are in  place  to  provide  a  protective
    factor.  The judge on the basis of the information before her concludes
    that it is really only his sister that he can depend upon and makes the
    point that on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  her  this  has  not
    assisted him in the past.  She makes a finding that as at the  date  of
    that appeal he had only been in  the  community  for  two  and  a  half
    months, which made it difficult to  assess  whether  the  changes  were
    durable.  She considers all of those factors in the light of  the  case
    law and reaches a conclusion that although it is not  possible  to  say
    that there are no reasonable prospects of rehabilitation it  could  not
    be said that his prospects were  significantly  improved  by  continued
    residence in the UK.

11.    The   judge   also   considers   everything   in   connection    with
    proportionality.  She sets out again the correct test and plainly takes
    account of all the evidence before her.  In  a  determination  that  is
    reasoned and sustainable the judge  reaches  the  conclusion  that  the
    appeal against deportation should be dismissed.  There is no  error  of
    law in her conclusions and I dismiss the appellant's appeal against the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination.

CONCLUSION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 13 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
