
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01700/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 PAUL OKEKE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Manning, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. This decision refers to the appellant in this case as the SSHD  and
         the respondent as the appellant, as he was  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT').

      2. The origins of this appeal are traceable  to  a  decision  made  on
         behalf of the SSHD, dated 21 August 2014, to deport the  appellant,
         a national of Belgium, from the United Kingdom ('UK')  pursuant  to
         regulation  21  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006 ('the 2006 Regulations').

Appeal Proceedings

      3. On 25 August  2015,  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  SSHD's
         decision was allowed by the FTT.  The  SSHD  has  appealed  on  the
         basis,  inter  alia,  that  the  FTT's  decision  is   inadequately
         reasoned.

      4. At the hearing before me Ms  Johnstone  maintained  the  submission
         that the key conclusions are  inadequately  reasoned.   Ms  Manning
         relied upon a rule 24 notice and asked me to  find  that  when  the
         decision is read as a whole the relevant  findings  are  adequately
         reasoned.

      5. After hearing submissions I  reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

      6. The FTT came to the clear conclusion that the  appellant  does  not
         present a genuine present and serious threat affecting one  of  the
         fundamental interests in  society  [21].   This  is  a  finding  of
         pivotal importance.  As pointed out in MC (Essa principles  recast)
         Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC) at [23] in a case such as this,  the
         decision-maker must be satisfied  that  the  individual  needs  "to
         represent a present threat by reason of a propensity  to  re-offend
         or an unacceptably high risk of re-offending".

      7. The FTT accepted the  conclusion  of  the  OASYS  report  that  the
         appellant  posed  a  low  risk  of  offending  and   accepted   the
         credibility of his evidence.  Whilst the FTT's reasons  are  brief.
         In addition, the FTT did not set out in terms  that  the  appellant
         does not present a present threat by reason of a propensity to  re-
         offend or an unacceptably high risk of re-offending.   However  the
         FTT's findings are nonetheless adequate.  The FTT's conclusion that
         the appellant is a  low  risk  to  the  public  together  with  its
         acceptance that  the  appellant  "has  shown  genuine  remorse,  an
         acceptance of responsibility for his offence, a genuine  desire  to
         improve his life, a strong aspiration to  work  and  strong  family
         support" is sufficient to demonstrate that the FTT did  not  regard
         the appellant as presenting an unacceptably high risk of  offending
         or a propensity to re-offend.

      8. The grounds of appeal criticise the FTT for failing to explain  why
         the appellant is a credible witness.  It would have been preferable
         for the  FTT  to  have  given  more  detailed  reasons  but  it  is
         sufficiently  clear  from  the  decision  that  having  heard   the
         appellant give oral evidence and having considered all the relevant
         detailed documentary evidence from a variety of sources  (including
         the probation service and social services)  the  FTT  accepted  his
         evidence.  The decision must be read as a whole.  The FTT  set  out
         in some detail the ambit of the evidence  considered  at  [16]  and
         emphasised that regard was had to  all  the  evidence  [17]  before
         concluding that the appellant was  credible  [18]  in  relation  to
         specific matters [19 and 20].  It is implicit from these paragraphs
         read together that the FTT considered the appellant's  evidence  to
         be consistent with  the  documentary  evidence  and  the  views  of
         professionals involved  in  assessing  risk,  and  preferred  their
         conclusions to the submissions on behalf of the SSHD.  The FTT  was
         clearly well aware of the SSHD's position having summarised  it  at
         [4].

      9. The grounds of appeal also submit that a 'low  risk'  of  offending
         still amounts to a 'real risk' and the FTT failed to direct  itself
         accordingly.  No authority is cited  to  support  this  submission.
         For the reasons I have set out at paragraphs 6 and 7 above, the FTT
         has applied the correct test having  properly  directed  itself  to
         Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC).  MC
         of course post-dates the FTT decision.

     10. The SSHD also submits that inadequate reasons are  provided  as  to
         why rehabilitation could not continue in Belgium.  In so far as the
         issue of rehabilitation is relevant to the issue of risk  I  accept
         that it would have been  preferable  for  the  FTT  to  have  given
         clearer reasons.  It is sufficiently clear that the FTT  considered
         that the appellant now had a genuine desire to improve his life and
         this was evidenced by his employment and commitment to family  life
         since leaving prison.  It is obvious that that if the appellant  is
         deported to Belgium, there would  be  insuperable  difficulties  in
         maintaining the important developing relationship with his children
         and  this  would  adversely  impact   upon   rehabilitation.    The
         circumstances of the  children  and  the  appellant's  increasingly
         important role with them is summarised by the FTT at [16i)-n)]  and
         expressly accepted at [20].

     11. The grounds of appeal submit that the FTT did not take into account
         the seriousness of the appellant's offending.  The FTT was  clearly
         aware of the detailed OASYS report and accepted its  conclusion  as
         to risk.  That report set out the circumstances of the offence -  a
         clearly  serious  offence  regarding  the  misuse  of  drugs  which
         resulted in a lengthy sentence of 54 months.

     12. In MC the Upper Tribunal accepted that it is only if  the  personal
         conduct of the person is found to represent a genuine, present  and
         sufficiently serious threat that it becomes  relevant  to  consider
         whether the decision is proportionate taking into account  all  the
         considerations identified  in  regulation  21(5)-(6)  of  the  2006
         Regulations.  In these circumstances, Ms Johnstone accepted that if
         the FTT was entitled to find that the appellant did  not  represent
         the requisite threat there was no need to consider grounds 2 and 3.
          It follows that having found that the FTT did not err  in  law  in
         its finding that the appellant does  not  represent  the  requisite
         threat that I do not need to go to consider the findings  regarding
         proportionality and human rights.

Decision

     13. The decision of the FTT does not contain a material  error  of  law
         and is not set aside.

     14. I dismiss the SSHD's appeal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
15 January 2016
