
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01896/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 10 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ADELEKE ADEKUNLE OMOLOLU ONILEYAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Bazini, Counsel instructed by MKM Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity we shall refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 16 January  1985
    (and is now 30 years old). He entered the UK  in  1991  with  leave  to
    enter as the dependent child of his father when he was six  years  old.
    He was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain on 19 December 1995.

3.    On 17 February 2000 the appellant was convicted  of  indecent  assault
    on a female and was sentenced to  three  years  detention  in  a  young
    offender institution and was placed on the Sex Offenders  Register.  He
    was 14 years old at the time of the offence. Despite the fact that  the
    respondent relies on this conviction as the sole reason for seeking  to
    deport the appellant (it being his only  conviction)  no  evidence  has
    been produced to show the circumstances of the offence.  No  sentencing
    remarks, pre-sentence reports or other kindred documents were produced.
    The respondent relies solely on the mere fact of  conviction.  However,
    we take into account the fact that the offence attracted a sentence  of
    three years detention. Following his release it is uncontested that the
    appellant  has  no  further  convictions  and  has  gone  on  to   gain
    qualifications and work experience and has established  a  relationship
    with his partner who is  a  British  citizen.  The  appellant  produced
    evidence from the Metropolitan Police to show that  he  was  no  longer
    subject to the notification requirements of  the  Sexual  Offences  Act
    2003 as of 18 February 2014.

4.    After he was notified that he could  apply  to  be  removed  from  the
    register the appellant decided that  he  could,  for  the  first  time,
    travel abroad with his partner. He obtained a new passport. In  October
    2013 he applied to  the  Home  Office  for  a  No  Time  Limit  ("NTL")
    endorsement and a new biometric identity  document.  He  disclosed  his
    conviction in the application form. It appears that the respondent  did
    not reply to the application until 26 August 2014, when  she  wrote  to
    the appellant to say that she was considering  his  immigration  status
    and liability to deportation.

5.    On  05  October  2014  the  respondent  made  a  Decision  to  Make  a
    Deportation Order under  section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    pursuant to section 3(5)(a) on the  ground  that  his  deportation  was
    conducive to the public good. The respondent exercised  discretion  not
    to  certify  the  decision  under  section  94B  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") and as such the appellant
    could remain in the UK while he exercised  his  right  of  appeal.  The
    First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on  26
    May 2015.

6.    The  respondent  seeks  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    decision on the following grounds:

    (i)    The FtT erred in finding that the appellant met the requirements
         of the exception to deportation contained in  paragraph  399(b)  of
         the immigration rules because the evidence did  not  show  that  it
         would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant's partner to relocate
         to Nigeria or that it would be unduly harsh for her  to  remain  in
         the UK without the appellant.

    (ii)   The FtT erred in finding that the appellant met the requirements
         of the exception contained in paragraph  399A  of  the  immigration
         rules because the evidence did not show that there would  be  "very
         significant obstacles" to the appellant being able to  re-integrate
         in Nigeria.

    (iii)  The FtT Judge erred in his approach to his assessment of whether
         there were very compelling circumstances that outweighed the public
         interest in deportation under  paragraph  398  (with  reference  to
         section 117A-D NIAA 2002). The alleged error  is  somewhat  unclear
         from the grounds, which assert that the FtT wrongly "conflated" the
         test under the immigration rules and section 117A-D.

Decision and reasons

7.    Having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  we  are
    satisfied that the FtT decision did not involve the making of an  error
    on a point of law for the following reasons.

8.    The FtT Judge wrote a detailed and well-balanced decision in which  he
    set out the background  to  the  case  as  well  as  the  evidence  and
    submissions at the hearing  [1-41].  He  noted  that  the  respondent's
    representative chose not to cross-examine the  witnesses  and  made  no
    submissions other than to argue that the case should be remitted to the
    Home Office for further consideration [36]. He then went on to  take  a
    methodical and structured approach to his  assessment  of  the  complex
    provisions relating to deportation and at each stage properly  directed
    himself to the relevant rules, statutory provisions and pertinent  case
    law.

9.    The appellant was sentenced to a period  of  detention  of  less  than
    four years but at least 12 months. The FtT Judge  correctly  began  his
    assessment  by  considering  whether  the  appellant  met  one  of  the
    exceptions to deportation contained in the immigration rules (echoed in
    section 117C NIAA 2002). In considering whether the appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 399(b) of the immigration rules  and  section
    117C(5) of the NIAA 2002 he gave detailed  reasons  why  he  considered
    that it would be unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant's  partner  to
    continue her family life with him in Nigeria [59-60].  He  went  on  to
    give detailed reasons why he found it would be unduly harsh  to  expect
    her to remain in the UK without the appellant and quite  properly  took
    into account the fact that the couple were expecting their first  child
    [61-65]. Without hesitation we conclude that those findings  were  open
    to him on the facts and evidence.  The  first  and  second  grounds  of
    appeal amount to no more than disagreements with the FtT's findings and
    evaluative assessments and fall far short of identifying  any  material
    errors of law.

10.   The FtT also considered whether the appellant met the requirements  of
    the exception contained in paragraph 339A  and  section  117C(4).  Once
    again  the  FtT  Judge  gave  detailed  and  sustainable  reasons   for
    concluding that there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant being able to re-integrate in Nigeria [67-71]. He  took  into
    account the age the appellant entered the UK, his length of  residence,
    the fact that he had  not  returned  to  Nigeria  and  had  no  broader
    knowledge of the context or culture there. Those were all matters  that
    he was entitled to take into account. The challenge on this  ground  is
    also phrased in terms of a disagreement with the FtT's conclusions  and
    discloses no material errors of law.

11.   Adopting an alternative approach, the FtT Judge went  on  to  consider
    whether there were very compelling circumstances  that  outweighed  the
    public interest in deportation under paragraph 398 of  the  immigration
    rules. He directed himself to  the  relevant  case  law  and  statutory
    provisions [73-78]. He explained in some detail the importance  of  the
    public interest and gave appropriate weight to those matters [82-87 and
    95-101]. He  went  on  to  balance  the  public  interest  against  the
    individual circumstances of this particular appellant. In doing  so  he
    took into account the factors outlined in section 117B of the NIAA 2002
    and referred back to his findings relating to the exceptions  contained
    in sections 117C(4) and (5) [91-93].

12.   Far from erring in "conflating" his  assessment  under  paragraph  398
    with sections 117A-D of the NIAA 2002 we find that it was entirely  the
    correct approach. It was consistent with the decision in Chege (section
    117D - Article 8 approach) [2015] UKUT 00165.

13.   Section 117A(2)  makes  clear  that  where  a  court  or  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  under  the  Immigration  Acts
    breaches a person's right to private and family  life,  in  considering
    the public interest question, the court  of  Tribunal  must  take  into
    account the factors set out in section 117B as well as 117C if the case
    involves deportation proceedings. The provisions set  out  in  sections
    117A-D focus on one part of the  proportionality  assessment  i.e.  the
    public interest question but Part 5A of the NIAA 2002 does not set  out
    a complete code  regulating  Article  8  decisions.  In  contrast,  the
    wording of paragraph 398 of the immigration rules clearly provides  for
    a full balancing exercise wherein significant weight is accorded to the
    public interest question. The rule states that the public interest will
    only be outweighed by other factors where  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A.

14.   In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and SSHD  v  AQ  (Nigeria)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 250 the Court of Appeal made clear that in  deportation
    cases an Article 8 assessment must be carried out "through the lens" of
    the immigration rules. In this case the "public interest question"  the
    FtT Judge was required to consider fell within the full proportionality
    assessment he conducted under paragraph 398, which by virtue of section
    117A(2) of the NIAA 2002 must  include  an  assessment  of  the  public
    interest considerations set out in section 117B-C.  We  find  that  the
    FtT's findings were consistent with this approach.

15.   In conducting the balancing exercise the FtT Judge gave due weight  to
    "the  public  interest  question"  and  in  doing  so  considered   the
    seriousness of the offence, the public interest in deterrence  and  the
    significant weight to be given to the public interest  in  deportation.
    He also took into account the risk of reoffending. Given the length  of
    time since his sole conviction, the fact that the appellant incurred no
    further convictions, and is no longer required  to  register  with  the
    police, it was open to the FtT Judge  to  conclude  that  the  risk  of
    reoffending was low. After having heard evidence from the appellant and
    his partner he  found  that  it  was  "very  likely  indeed  that  this
    appellant is a reformed person who has paid for his crime and poses  no
    risk whatsoever to the public now" [98]. After having weighed  all  the
    circumstances of the case the FtT concluded:

         "105.  Given the significant passage of time since the offence  and
         the fact that the appellant was only 14 years of age at  the  time,
         given the complete lack of propensity  to  reoffend  and  that  the
         appellant has led a blameless life since the offence,  as  well  as
         the fact of his particularly deep and rich private and family life,
         the failure of the respondent to take any action against him for 16
         years, his impeccable immigration history  and  that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh to separate him from his partner or to require her  to
         abandon her life and move to Nigeria,  I  conclude  deportation  in
         this case would be wholly disproportionate."

16.   On the facts of  this  case  we  conclude  that  those  findings  were
    entirely open to the FtT Judge to make and  his  findings  disclose  no
    material errors of law. Accordingly, the Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    cannot succeed.

Abuse of statutory powers?

17.   One of the arguments advanced to the FtT was that,  if  the  case  had
    been considered under the automatic deportation provisions contained in
    the UK Borders Act 2007, the appellant would have come  within  one  of
    the exceptions to deportation. If a person is sentenced to a period  of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months section 33(3) provides an  exception
    to deportation if the  Secretary  of  State  thinks  that  the  foreign
    criminal was under the age of 18 at the date of  conviction.  The  only
    reason  the  case  did  not  fall  within  the  automatic   deportation
    provisions was because the appellant's conviction pre-dated the  coming
    into  force  of  the  Act.  The  legislation  scheme   provides   clear
    circumstances in which it  is  stated  that  deportation  will  not  be
    enforced albeit that section 33(7) makes clear that the application  of
    an exception results it being assumed neither that deportation  of  the
    person concerned is conducive to the public good nor  that  it  is  not
    conducive to the public good.

18.   Without doubt the respondent had power to make a  decision  to  deport
    under section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 on the  ground  that  it
    was conducive to the public good. However, a deportation decision  must
    be rational and proportionate and reflect  a  proper  exercise  of  the
    legal power. In cases such as this where it is  quite  clear  that  the
    appellant would have fallen within one  of  the  stated  exceptions  to
    automatic deportation, but because of  the  historical  nature  of  the
    offence the UK Borders Act 2007 did not apply, it is difficult  to  see
    how a decision to deport  him  under  the  1971  Act  could  have  been
    assessed as anything other than disproportionate.

19.   It is trite law that the public interest  in  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is a matter that should be given significant weight and  that
    there must be very compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest. The scheme set out in the relevant rules and statutes is said
    to  constitute  a  complete  code  to  the  assessment  of  Article  8.
    Underpinning the scheme is the basic principle  that  deportation  must
    necessary in a democratic society and should be justified by a pressing
    social need that is proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  pursued.  In
    this case it is difficult to see how the conviction of a  14  year  old
    boy, which was not sufficiently pressing to justify deportation at  the
    time of conviction, could justify a decision to  deport  made  some  14
    years later. Decision makers should  still  conduct  an  assessment  of
    whether there is in fact a pressing social need to deport on the  facts
    of each case. In this case the mere fact of a conviction was  taken  to
    be sufficient in the absence of any consideration of the details of the
    offence or any meaningful consideration of  the  public  interest.  The
    decision appears to have been  taken  on  an  entirely  reactive  basis
    following the appellant's application for an  NTL  endorsement  in  his
    passport without any adequate consideration of the merit  and  was  the
    antithesis of a properly exercised statutory discretion.

Conclusion

20.   For the reasons given above we conclude the grounds of  appeal  amount
    to no more than disagreements  with  the  decision  and  that  the  FtT
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  The
    First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed       [pic]     Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
