
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01058/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2015                               |On 11 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                VALDO ARAUJO
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hooper, instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 24 November  2014
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls which allowed the appeal  against
    the respondent's decision of 20 September 2013 to deport the appellant.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal we refer to Mr Araujo as the  appellant
    and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal and he was  born  on  19  August
    1991.

 4.  The  ground  of  appeal  before  us  was  narrow  and  turned  on  the
    respondent's approach in the First-tier Tribunal  to  the  "imperative"
    threat  test  which  was  applied  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   when
    considering the deportation of the appellant.

 5. The respondent's reasons for refusal letter dated 20 September 2013 set
    out her case for deporting the appellant. At paragraphs 4 - 7 and 26  -
    30 the respondent  listed  the  steps  taken  to  obtain  and  consider
    evidence on the appellant's claim to have been resident in the UK since
    2000.

 6. At paragraphs 9 - 13  the  respondent  set  out  the  legal  tests  for
    expulsion of an EEA national, noting at paragraph  10  that,  following
    Regulation  21  (4)  of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") where someone has resided  for
    a continuous period of 10  years,  deportation  is  only  justified  on
    "imperative" grounds of public security.

 7. At paragraph 31, the respondent indicated that it was her case that the
    appellant had shown that he had  been  living  in  the  UK  as  an  EEA
    national for 10 years and that "[a]s  a  result,  it  is  necessary  to
    establish that your client's deportation  is  warranted  on  imperative
    grounds  of  public  security".  It  was  also  her  case   that   such
    "imperative" grounds were made out here.

 8. At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent's
    representative confirmed that it was "accepted that the  Appellant  had
    been resident in the UK for more than 10 years and that to  remove  him
    from the UK it must be shown that  there  were  imperative  grounds  of
    public security in accordance with Regulation 21  (4)";  see  [2].  The
    same paragraph of the determination indicates that where that  was  so,
    it was not necessary to hear evidence and the appeal proceeded  on  the
    basis of submissions as to whether "imperative" grounds existed.  Judge
    Nicholls did not find that  they  were  and  allowed  the  appeal.  His
    reasoning in that regard is not under challenge here.

 9. Rather, the grounds of appeal maintain  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    misdirected itself in following the respondent's "concession of law" as
    to there being a requirement here to  show  "imperative"  grounds;  see
    paragraph 4 of the grounds of appeal.

10. We saw no merit in that ground for a number of reasons. Firstly, if the
    respondent's position on 10 years' residence and  "imperative"  grounds
    can be properly characterised as  a  "concession",  she  relied  on  it
    throughout the proceedings before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  only
    seeks to alter her position having lost the appeal. It is difficult  to
    see how an error of law can be made out now where that is so.

11. In addition, the case law on which the respondent relies in support  of
    being able to withdraw a concession, NR (Jamaica) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 856, is factually different as the concessions there were withdrawn
    before the conclusion  of  the  proceedings  and  promulgation  of  the
    relevant decision and does not support her being able to do so  in  the
    circumstances before us. As in FV (Italy) v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ  1199
    at [35], it appeared to us that it was not open to  the  respondent  to
    withdraw the point now, in particular where, and in light  of  what  we
    say below, "[t]here is no duty on a Tribunal to take a point on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State which the Secretary of State has not taken in
    the particular case"; see [35(f)] of FV.

12. Secondly, Mr Tarlow accepted at the hearing that this was a  concession
    of fact not law. The respondent could not be said to have put forward a
    concession which could or should not,  in  law,  have  been  made.  The
    relevant EEA and domestic legislation and case law commenting  thereon,
    summarised  in  MG  (prison-Article  28(3)(a)  of  Citizens  Directive)
    Portugal [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC) allowed the respondent to  accept  as  a
    matter of fact in her refusal letter and  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that this appellant had "resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
    period of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision."

13. As put by Ms Hooper at paragraph 3 of her skeleton argument:


        "It is therefore clear that whilst periods of imprisonment in
        principle interrupt the continuity of residence for the purpose of
        meeting the 10 year requirement this only means that such periods
        must have a negative impact when considering whether the
        integrative links required to benefit from the enhanced protection
        provisions.  It does not mean that as a matter of law a person
        sentenced to a term of imprisonment which in principle breaks
        continuity of residence cannot so benefit."


  14. Nothing in the CJEU case of C-378/12 Onuekwere provides to the
      contrary.

  15. For these reasons, we did not find that the grounds of appeal
      disclosed an error on a point of law.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                               Date 9 March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt








