
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/ 01530/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Royal Courts of Justice           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12.10.2015                        |On 1 March 2016                      |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                           Tashinga Alvin MUSANDU
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Mrs Usha Sood (counsel by direct access)
For the respondent: Mr Paul Duffy


                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Monica Pirotta and a lay member), sitting at Birmingham
    Magistrates' Court on 19 November 2014, to  a deportation appeal  by  a
    citizen of Zimbabwe, born 8 May 1992, who  had  been  in  this  country
    since  1999,  but  on  30  May  2012  was  sentenced  to  eight  years'
    imprisonment for robbery and attempted robbery.

 2. The grounds of appeal raise various complaints about what happened; but
    there is only one I need  deal  with.  The  appellant  was  represented
    before the First-tier Tribunal by counsel instructed through the  Trent
    Centre for Human Rights, though appearing, like  Mrs  Sood,  by  direct
    access. It was clear to everyone that she needed to have access to  the
    appellant in the cells before the hearing.

 3. The judge mentions what actually happened at paragraphs 12 -13: counsel
    wasn't allowed to see the appellant in the cells,  because  "...  their
    security arrangements demanded that Counsel have proper  identification
    papers to prove her role and identity, and she had not come prepared to
    present any ID. The escort officers, who are not prison officers, would
    not permit a consultation to take  place  in  the  Courtroom,  and  the
    representative was at a disadvantage. She was able to consult with  the
    Appellant's witnesses."

 4. Further information was given to counsel by the presenting  officer  at
    the hearing, which naturally she wanted to discuss with the  appellant,
    but couldn't, because of what had happened. The panel went on  to  hear
    evidence from the appellant and his witnesses, and reached  a  decision
    on the merits of the case, with which I am not concerned at present.

 5. The grounds of appeal mention that, though counsel had  an  opportunity
    to read the Home Office papers during the lunch adjournment,  this  was
    of limited use without access to her client. A foot-note  to  ground  4
    adds that the requirement for ID to be  produced  for  cell  visits  at
    Birmingham Magistrates' Court was not a  national  requirement:  I  can
    only add that, in quite a few years'  practice  at  the  criminal  bar,
    admittedly some time ago, I was never asked for such  a  thing  myself.
    While a wig and gown might have provided some assurance  in  the  Crown
    Court, there was no difficulty in any magistrates' court either.

 6. The judge, who as it happened had long experience at the Birmingham bar
    herself, was obviously taken aback by what had happened.  In  my  view,
    the panel should never have been put in such a situation:  though  they
    did their best to put it right, by trying to arrange for  a  conference
    with counsel in the court-room, what counsel  understandably  described
    as the intransigence of the custody officers made that impossible.

 7. I take the view that the hearing should have stopped right there.  Then
    the judge, with the help of her resident judge,  could  have  taken  up
    these wholly unsatisfactory  arrangements  with  those  who  had  given
    custody officers such instructions, without any consultation  with,  or
    even notice to the Tribunal  before  which  the  appellant  was  to  be
    produced. I am well aware of the  pressures  on  first-tier  judges  to
    avoid adjournments, but sometimes that cannot fairly be achieved.

 8. In my view this is one of the relatively rare cases in which it is  not
    only possible, but necessary to apply the principles set out in Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  418  (IAC),  without  going  any
    further into the merits of the case. These  will  be  considered  at  a
    fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, before another  judge,  Judge
    Pirotta having since retired.

 9. If there should be any further difficulties caused by custody  officers
    refusing to let counsel or other authorized  representatives  speak  to
    detained appellants, then judges may wish to take the following steps:

    (a)      point out to  custody  officers  that  the  representative  is
         authorized to be in the court and precincts in that  capacity,  and
         request  that  they  be  allowed  to  speak  to  the  appellant  in
         detention;

    (b)      if that cannot be arranged, then require custody  officers  to
         bring the appellant into court, and allow them to  have  a  private
         discussion with the representative there.

10. There is expected to be a Practice Direction by the  President  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, making clear that,  while  judges  cannot  control
    access to places of detention, they can and, subject to any  overriding
    considerations of security in individual  cases,  must  be  allowed  to
    control what goes on in their courts, on this as on other points.
                      [pic] (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


