
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/01387/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision signed:   23.11.2015        |
|on    23.11.2015                     |sent out:                13.01.2016  |

                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judges
                        John FREEMAN and Susan KEBEDE


                                  Between:

                                     an
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Gordon Lee (counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Harrow)
For the respondent: Mr Keith Norton


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Kevin Moore), sitting at Hendon  on  22  April,  to   a
    deportation appeal by a citizen of Iran, born  2  December  1976,  here
    since 2000 and sentenced in 2007 to 27 months' imprisonment for what on
    the sentencing judge's view was the industrial-scale forgery of  asylum
    registration cards. He has a son, P, born here on 19 September 2003 and
    a British citizen.

 2. This was the statutory framework, so far as relevant, for the  decision
    under appeal, under s. 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002:

    (1)       The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

    (2)      The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

    (3)      In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

    (4)      Exception 1 [is not relied on in this case]

    (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has ... a genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the ... child would be unduly harsh.

 3. The judge dealt with the case under paragraphs  399  and  399A  of  the
    Rules, which are in similar terms. The legislation does not  of  course
    preclude the need to consider  the  best  interests  of  the  child  or
    children concerned, nor did the judge overlook that. Our decision turns
    on the reasons he gave for his decision  on  that  point,  and  on  the
    'unduly harsh' question.

 4. The judge had reservations (justifiably, as we shall mention later)  as
    to the way in which P's evidence had been put before him in  a  letter;
    but he accepted at paragraph 59 that this letter, giving details of the
    regular week-end contact between him and the appellant, and of his  own
    feelings,  was  "...  an  honest  and  genuine  reflection  as  to  the
    relationship between father and son". Of course this contact would stop
    with the appellant's removal; but, inexplicably on  his  own  findings,
    the judge concluded that he could not be satisfied that "...  it  would
    be in the best interests of the son for his father  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom  and not to return to Iran".

 5. That finding was wrong in law, because  it  is  not  supported  by  the
    judge's own reasoning. Of course the best interests of P were a primary
    consideration for him; but, as will be clear from the terms of s. 117C,
    set out above, it was not the deciding point,  which  was  whether  the
    effect of the appellant's deportation on  the  child  would  be  unduly
    harsh, in terms of both his interests and  the  public's.  This  rather
    obvious point was underlined in the judicial head-note to KMO  (section
    117 - unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC):

         "... the word  "unduly"  in  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"  requires
         consideration of whether, in the light of the  seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the foreign criminal and the public  interest
         considerations that come into play, the impact on the child ...  of
         the foreign criminal being deported is inordinately or  excessively
         harsh."

 6. It follows that the judge might have justified his negative finding  on
    the 'unduly harsh' point, despite his inadequate reasons on  P's  'best
    interests', by referring to those of the public. However, this was  not
    what he did: his conclusion on it, at paragraph 65, was this:

         "For reasons that I have found earlier in this detention I  do  not
         find that it would be unduly harsh  for  [P]  since  [P]  would  be
         remaining in the UK with his mother  who  would  continue  to  look
         after and care for the child in the family home."

 7. While the judge set out, very briefly, the  facts  of  the  appellant's
    offence at paragraph 21, as part of the respondent's case, he  did  not
    go into the full facts from the sentencing  judge's  remarks,  as  best
    practice would require in anything but a very straightforward case. Nor
    did he say anything else, as he  might  have  done  in  this  case,  to
    justify his decision on the 'unduly harsh' point in terms of the public
    interest.

 8. The result is that the judge's decision cannot be upheld on the reasons
    he gave for it, and the decision will have to be re-made. This will not
    be an easy business, and it will be very much better for it to be  done
    by a judge, or  better  still  a  panel  who  have  heard  the  parties
    themselves, rather than by us on the papers. Mr  Lee  was  anxious,  if
    there were  to  be  a  re-hearing,  to  put  forward  a  report  by  an
    independent person with reference to P's interests, and we should  very
    much encourage that. Judges ought not to be left, as this judge was, to
    do the best they can to assess  not  only  the  authenticity,  but  the
    spontaneity of a document purporting to come from  the  most  important
    person in the case.

 9. We also gave encouragement, and Mr  Lee  agreed  with  us,  that  means
    should be found for P to give his own views directly to the  judge.  At
    his age this is likely to be by way of an informal conversation between
    him and the judge. In our view this should be standard  practice  in  a
    case of this kind, where the interests of a child or young person  able
    to give their own views are likely to be crucial, if not decisive. This
    would be an  ideal  case  for  listing  before  a  panel  including  an
    experienced judge and a lay member.

Appeal : decision set aside

Fresh hearing before First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Moore)




                               [pic]
                               (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


