
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01314/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2016                 |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     mm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I affirm the anonymity order already made in this case when I  ruled
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  and  set  aside  its
       decision.  Pursuant to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008 I make an order prohibiting the  disclosure  or
       publication of any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to
       identify the appellant.  Breach of this order could be punishable as
       a contempt of court.  I make this order because  the  case  concerns
       the welfare of two minors who are entitled to privacy.

    2. The appellant appeals against a decision of the Secretary  of  State
       on 21 June 2013 to make her the subject of a deportation order under
       Section 32(5) of the United Kingdom Borders Act 2007 on the  grounds
       that she  is  a  refugee  or  otherwise  entitled  to  international
       protection, and additionally and separately, on the ground that  her
       removal would interfere  disproportionately  with  the  private  and
       family life of her children.

    3. The appellant has been sentenced to 12  months'  imprisonment.  This
       sentence is too short for her to  be  disqualified  from  protection
       under the Qualification Directive.

    4. It is for the appellant to prove that she is entitled to  protection
       but the standard of proof is low. She need only show that there is a
       real risk of her being ill-treated.  The  claim  with  reference  to
       article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights is a  balancing
       exercise but any necessary precedent facts must  me  proved  on  the
       balance of probabilities.

Appellant's Evidence

    5. The appellant  made  witness  statements  on  12  May  2014  and  24
       September 2014, which appear to be  the  same  statements  and  more
       recently on 15 September 2016 which are in the bundle. She also made
       a statement entitled  "Comments  from  the  Home  Office  Notice  of
       Decision" which I think is dated 12  September  2014,  although  the
       manuscript is a little obscure.

    6. In the first statement the appellant introduces herself as a citizen
       of Gambia.  She has two daughters, BM who was then 14 years old  and
       AE, who is 8  years  old.   The  children  live  together  in  local
       authority  care.   They  cannot  return  to  Gambia.   It  has  been
       established that they risk  being  subjected  to  FGM  if  they  are
       returned there.  Their father lives in Gambia.  The  appellant  said
       she had regular contact with the children and hoped that  she  would
       regain "custody".

    7. She described herself as a Roman Catholic who is  a  member  of  the
       Manjago tribe and speaks the Manjago, Wolof and  English  languages.
       Her family come from Guinea Bissau.

    8. Her parents live in Guinea Bissau, her brother F lives in  Scotland,
       her brother A lives in Nottingham, her sister S  lives  in  Romford,
       her cousins BS and MM live in London, her aunt AG lives  in  London,
       her sister G lives in New York.  She  says  she  only  has  extended
       family in the Gambia.

    9. The appellant, as was each of her siblings, was born in Banjul.  The
       family moved to Serekunda when she was about 8  years  old  and  she
       said that Serekunda is a major town in Gambia and is about 40 to  45
       minutes drive from Banjul.  She was educated in Gambia at school and
       then at a secretarial, technical and management development college.



   10. She completed an internship at the Foreign Ministry for  six  months
       and worked for two years as an accounts clerk at the Catholic Relief
       Services.  She commuted from the family home in Serekunda to Banjul.

   11. She explained that she arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  November
       1998 aged 24 years.   She  had  lived  continuously  in  the  United
       Kingdom since then.  She came to the United Kingdom to study banking
       and finance at City  Banking  College.   She  planned  to  follow  a
       Diploma course after completing the certificate  programme  but  her
       relationship with AG began and she became pregnant soon  afterwards.
       She met AG in the United Kingdom in December 1998.   He  is  also  a
       citizen of the Gambia.  After she became pregnant  they  married  in
       October 1999 and their daughter BM was born on 19 February 2000.

   12. The relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her  husband  became
       unhappy and turbulent.  He was unfaithful to her and required her to
       spend time looking after the child at the home and he  looked  after
       other matters including their immigration affairs.

   13. The appellant said that in 2002 she decided to send her daughter  BM
       to live with her (the appellant's) sister in the Gambia  because  of
       her difficult relationship with her husband.  She had separated  and
       was left alone with BM and was having problems  with  childcare  and
       housing and became depressed.  She described the decision to send BM
       to live with her sister as the hardest she would ever have  to  make
       but said that, in a sense, she had no choice because she  could  not
       cope.

   14. She continued to work and study with the intention of  developing  a
       more stable life and providing for BM's eventual return.   She  sent
       most of the necessary finances to Gambia, although her  husband  did
       help.  She would phone Gambia every day to speak to her  cousin  and
       ask about BM.  She talked to BM when she was old enough to speak  on
       the telephone.

   15. The relationship with her husband remained unhappy.   He  petitioned
       for divorce and the decree nisi was pronounced on 4  February  2004.
       However, there were periods of reconciliation and during one of them
       she became pregnant with their second child, AE, who was born on  10
       April 2006.

   16. In 2007, about nine months after AE's birth, the appellant's husband
       returned to the Gambia and they were "split up for good".

   17. The appellant then decided to remove to  Nottingham  with  AE.   She
       said life had become costly and stressful in London and she  thought
       it would be easy for her to cope as a single  parent  in  Nottingham
       where the cost of living was less.

   18. In September 2007 she arranged for BM to be returned to her from the
       Gambia to avoid her being circumcised in accordance with  tradition.
       She regarded the procedure as  "a  horrendous  and  painful  ordeal,
       which would affect her immediate and long-term health".

   19. She found life in Nottingham as a lone parent with two children very
       difficult.  She got some help from her family during that  time  but
       she had sole responsibility for the children and her relatives  were
       some distance away.

   20. She had explained how she took BM and AE to playgroup regularly  and
       did her best to ensure they were fed properly.  She would play  with
       them, read with them  and  do  their  homework  with  them  and  all
       household duties as well as work three nights a week while a  friend
       or neighbour looked after the  children.   She  described  it  as  a
       stressful time.

   21. In 2007 she discovered that her  visa,  which  she  believed  was  a
       genuine document, was a fake.  She was so desperate to  survive  she
       did not disclose this to the authorities.

   22. She then explained that she was sorry for the offences that she  had
       committed.

   23. Particularly, she expressed her regret that she  had  used  corporal
       punishment against BM.  She said it was the norm in African  culture
       to be physically chastised and harshly punished by  parents  as  she
       had been when she was growing up and she adopted that model when she
       disciplined BM.  She now regarded that as a wrong approach and  that
       her discipline was too severe and it was a message she wanted to get
       over to other "African parents".

   24. She said she was arrested on 30 July 2011.  The children were  taken
       into care on the same date.  She was convicted on 31 July 2012, just
       over a year later, and was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.
        She said it was her only conviction and it led to  the  deportation
       order.

   25. During the period between her arrest and imprisonment she could  see
       the children three times a week.  Initially the contact  took  place
       in social workers' offices, but  then  at  a  contact  centre.   The
       sessions were supervised and would last one-and-a-half  hours.   She
       would cook special Gambian food for the children on most days.   Her
       family assisted by providing children's needs and giving them  money
       for their welfare.

   26. Care proceedings were concluded on 10 October 2012.

   27. She said that whilst she was  in  prison  she  would  write  to  and
       telephone the children frequently and received visits.

   28. She wrote to the children  six  times  whilst  in  prison  and  sent
       trinkets and bookmarks she had made in prison.  The  children  wrote
       to her and letters and cards  were  passed  on  by  the  appellant's
       sister S.  She said that social services did not facilitate  contact
       by letter with the children as they were meant to.  Neither did they
       facilitate phone calls, although they did apologise for that failure
       in proceedings.

   29. She never had a sentence plan  or  an  OASys  assessment  whilst  in
       prison. She could not explain this omission. She had enhanced status
       in prison receiving no  warnings  or  adjudications.   She  went  to
       church and sang with the choir and  worked  as  a  learning  support
       assistant, a cleaner and in the kitchen. She listed the courses that
       she completed.

   30. In February 2013 she instructed solicitors and made  an  application
       in family proceedings.   In  November  2013  she  was  granted  some
       contact with her children.  She saw her children  on  a  fortnightly
       basis during the contact proceedings.  She had seen them at an after
       school contact centre and would make food and  take  special  dishes
       for them.  She would make the best use of the time that  she  could.
       They talked about school  and  shared  a  book  and  she  showed  an
       interest in their activities.  She said  the  children  were  happy.
       They never wanted the sessions to finish and the particular  run  up
       to them.

   31. The Family Court  has  concluded  it  was  in  the  children's  best
       interest to have contact with her and she regarded it as a  positive
       feature that supervision was by her family in the  community  rather
       than by a local authority at a contact centre.

   32. She said that she was allowed to see the children on  a  fortnightly
       basis for four hours under  the  supervision  of  her  cousin  M  or
       brother-in-law D, or at a contact centre if neither  M  nor  D  were
       available.  During half-time holidays the children spent at least 24
       hours at the homes of M or the appellant's  sister  S.   During  all
       other school holidays the children spent three  to  four  nights  at
       their homes.  During these times she was allowed to spend four hours
       with the children if the contact was at M's  or  S's  home  and  six
       hours if it was activity-based.

   33. During term time she had been visiting the children every  fortnight
       without fail.  The children had also visited the appellant's  sister
       S and they had been on trips to Colchester Zoo and London, going  to
       well-known and suitable attractions.

   34. She believed that her children enjoyed their time together  and  she
       was  trying  to  bring  about  a  proper  family  reunion.   Contact
       arrangements were flexible and under constant review.  She still had
       parental responsibility for the children and hoped that  they  would
       be in her care again.

   35. Dealing with deportation and family life she said that she had  been
       enjoying regular contact  since  released  on  immigration  bail  in
       November 2013.  She had  been  working  at  building  trust  in  her
       relationship with B and focused on giving appropriate  and  maternal
       care.  She believed that her contact was growing and was substantial
       and regular.  She had broached the subject of her  deportation  very
       lightly to B to give some awareness of what  was  happening  without
       distressing her.

   36. She said that she would not be able to see the children again if she
       was deported to the Gambia.  They would lose all meaningful parental
       contact they currently enjoyed, as both of their parents would  then
       live in Gambia.  The only contact their father has is by  telephone.
       The children could not go to the Gambia while  they  were  in  local
       authority care and there would be no contact if she could  not  stay
       in the United Kingdom.  She was concerned that the  religious  needs
       of the children were not met.  Her family was Roman Catholic and the
       children were with family who were not and  the  children  will  not
       benefit from cultural links that she could pass on.

   37. She said that her sister V was forced to leave the  Gambia  in  July
       2012 because she risked persecution.  She went to the United  States
       and was given asylum there and she drew attention to proof  of  that
       in the papers.

   38. Her sister V had worked for Amadou Scattred Janneh for  many  years.
       She described Janneh as a prominent Gambian political  activist  who
       wanted democratic change.  Janneh is a dual citizen  of  the  Gambia
       and the United States of America and is one of the founders  of  the
       pro-democracy group called  Coalition  for  Change.   For  the  2011
       elections Janneh  was  involved  in  making  and  distributing  pro-
       democracy T-shirts.  He was arrested for treason  and  sentenced  to
       life imprisonment.  Other people working for him were  arrested  and
       detained.  The appellant's sister V had been  involved  in  ordering
       and paying for the T-shirts and was concerned for  her  own  safety,
       especially after the authorities went to the family home looking for
       V  and  found  some  T-shirts.   Mr  Janneh  was  released  on   the
       intervention of the Reverend Jesse Jackson, but  less  prominent  or
       well-connected people  detained  at  the  same  time  had  not  been
       released.  She said that the family's surname is not very common  in
       the Gambia and so she would easily be linked with her sister V.  She
       said that a travel document would have  to  be  issued  for  her  to
       return to the Gambia.  Embassy staff would inform the Gambian border
       officials of the  appellant's  return  and  she  was  satisfied  the
       Government would not distinguish between her and her  sister.   They
       would assume  she  shared  the  same  views  and  would  punish  her
       accordingly.

   39. She then turned to her ex-husband's family.  She said that  her  ex-
       husband is from the Mandinka tribe and  is  from  a  Muslim  family.
       They live in a town called Brikama.  She never met his family.   She
       never returned to the Gambia since arriving in the  United  Kingdom.
       Her ex-partner's family had not visited the UK.   Nevertheless,  she
       feared she would be at risk.  She said families in Africa  are  very
       different from families in the United Kingdom.  A marriage creates a
       bond with a partner's family as well as with the  partner.  Further,
       the paternal side  of  the  family  is  more  influential  than  the
       maternal, especially in matters relating to the children.  She  said
       her ex-husband's family had been intent  on  BM  being  circumcised.
       They were angry with her for having taken BM away and they are angry
       at her for having lost her children and are suspicious of  the  real
       reasons they were taken from her.

   40. Her ex-husband's parents had said that  she  would  live  to  regret
       losing the children and they had made numerous threats passed around
       the grapevine.  She was said not to be a  good  woman.   They  would
       also make her pay for not letting BM be circumcised.

   41. She said she would be attacked if she went back to the Gambia by her
       ex-husband's family.  They would see that almost as an obligation.

   42. She said society as a whole would be  unwelcoming  too.   If  people
       learned that she had lost her  children,  which  she  believed  they
       would, she would be at risk.  She said Gambia is  a  small  country.
       Her name is unusual and she would stand out by living on her own and
       being without a support network.  These are  things  that  make  her
       conspicuous.   Eventually  people  would  learn   all   about   her,
       especially with an  ex-partner's  family  spreading  stories.   They
       would not believe that the children had been taken away  because  of
       physical punishment where such behaviour  was  accepted  in  Gambia.
       Everything she does would be much worse, and particularly if  having
       sexually abused them or offered them for prostitution.  She would be
       ostracised.

   43. Internal relocation was impossible because she was at risk from  the
       authorities.  However, she said it would not be safe for her even if
       that were not the case  because  of  the  small  gossipy  nature  of
       Gambian society.  She described the community as  "closer-knit  than
       UK society".  It was certain that news of her  return  would  travel
       and come to the attention of her ex-husband's family.

   44. She emphasised that she had no family in the Gambia who could  offer
       her any help.  It was unusual for women to live on their  own,  even
       in the city, and  it  was  often  dangerous.   Her  skills  were  in
       administration and clerical and care work  and  she  could  not  use
       those skills in her normal community.  She  did  not  know  how  she
       would manage.

   45. She could not turn to the authorities for  protection  because  they
       were part of the problem.  However, even if that were not  the  case
       the police in Gambian would be unable and  unwilling  to  offer  her
       protection from her ex-partner's family.  The  Gambian  police  were
       very under-resourced and alleged threats because of  family  matters
       from quite a well-known family would not be a priority.

   46. In the  "Comments  on  the  Home  Office  Notice  of  Decision"  the
       appellant emphasises that, contrary to the view of the Home  Office,
       her daughter B was born in London and not in Gambia.   Her  marriage
       had not been dissolved.  A decree nisi had been  issued  but  not  a
       decree absolute.  She did not know  whether  visa  arrangements  had
       been made for B to return to the United Kingdom, her father had made
       those arrangements.  She did not know why  her  former  husband  had
       given an incorrect  date  of  birth  on  the  Tier  4  student  visa
       application.

   47. She agreed that when she applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  B
       had not been living in the United Kingdom for seven years.  She said
       she was assisted by an immigration advisor and  she  was  not  aware
       that wrong information had  been  given.   She  never  received  the
       passport with the appropriate vignette  endorsed.   Her  appeal  was
       successful in 2011.

   48. She said that her brother's whereabouts were not unknown.  He  lived
       in Scotland.  She had never claimed that her  husband's  family  had
       ill-treated her.  Her husband had ill-treated her.

   49.  She  denied  saying  that  her  sister's  asylum  claim  could   be
       corroborated with information  from  the  internet.   When  she  was
       dealing with the Home Office she did not have  documentary  evidence
       that her sister was a refugee.  She now provided that evidence.  She
       had never lived in Guinea Bissau.  She  did  not  speak  Portuguese.
       She feared persecution for an imputed political opinion.

   50. It was not her position that  her  ex-husband's  family  were  state
       agents.  She said they were a well-known family and the police would
       be unwilling to challenge them.

   51. She said that she  did  have  administrative  clerical  and  similar
       skills that would be of use in Banjul, but she  could  not  live  in
       Banjul because that is where the threat from the Government and  her
       ex-husband's family would be strongest.

   52. As a single woman without contacts she could not relocate  to  rural
       Gambia.  That sort of thing did not happen.  She did not  have  life
       skills to live in the village.  She emphasised  that  Gambia  should
       not be judged by United Kingdom standards.  Single women  could  not
       establish themselves in a village in Gambia.

   53. She said that her sister V had left Gambia  when  she  appealed  her
       case in 2011, but had not been given refugee  status  until  shortly
       after the appellant's appeal hearing.

   54. Although the appellant had some extended family and friends still in
       Gambia, they would not be able to support her and protect her if she
       returned.  They would be more likely to  shun  her  because  of  her
       conviction for hurting a child.

   55. In her most recent statement dated 15 September 2016  explained  the
       present relationship between herself and her children,  BM  and  AE.
       She said that arrangements with the children  had  been  reached  by
       consent and the courts were not involved.  She said at paragraph  3:
       "I would confirm that the Family Court  proceedings  are  no  longer
       subject to judicial intervention.  We resolved the matter and  there
       is a court order in place."

   56. Essentially it was agreed that BM was old enough to make up her  own
       mind about contact and that A would meet  during  the  holidays  and
       whenever else she wished but the details were for BM to decide.   As
       a minimum she saw AE at Easter and Christmas holidays and around her
       birthday.  She said the reviews were important.  She was  encouraged
       to express her views on the education and welfare of  the  children.
       The current agreement was for the children to  stay  overnight  with
       their aunt.  She said there were several reasons for that,  not  the
       least being there was no room in  her  current  accommodation.   She
       explained that BM had been visiting frequently  and  they  had  been
       doing things together.  She was becoming closer to BM  and  she  was
       very proud of her and the way she was growing up.  She believed  she
       had a close relationship than the social workers appreciated because
       the social workers never saw them interacting.  She  was  scared  at
       the thought of leaving her daughters.

   57. Additionally she said that she had been informed by a  friend  of  a
       threat from their father's family in May 2016.  Her  former  in-laws
       were saying horrible things about her and  that  they  would  "deal"
       with her and she will "live to regret it".  She believed that it was
       their belief that she caused them to lose their  children  and  also
       prevent their circumcision.  She took the threats seriously  because
       she knew how these things  were  viewed  in  Gambian  society.   She
       believed she should not return to the Gambia.

   58. She was cross-examined.   She  said  that  her  mother,  father  and
       siblings were now in Guinea  Bissau.   They  went  there  after  her
       sister went to the United States but could not be more precise.  She
       said that her siblings are named J, LJ, P and E  and  all  relocated
       with her parents.  She was in contact with  her  parents  sometimes.
       They lived in the  village  called  Paupal.   It  did  not  have  an
       address.  She was quite sure they were not in the Gambia.

   59. She insisted that all family members of suspected people  are  taken
       into custody.  She insisted that the authorities would link  her  to
       her sister.  She insisted it was not idle speculation.   Communities
       were very small, people would ask.  She insisted  that  the  Gambian
       authorities would make enquiries.  It was pointed out  to  her  that
       her claim was that she would be in trouble because she  was  related
       to somebody who made T-shirts.  She insisted that they did  see  her
       sister as important.  The Government sees any activity as offensive.
        She said that it is a society where everybody knows everybody  else
       and her husband's family would find her out.  She accepted that  she
       and her husband had been able to marry in the United Kingdom without
       family involvement.  She also insisted that the family now would not
       ignore her, they would abuse her.

   60. The children were in foster care in Nottingham.   She  had  to  stay
       with her cousin because of bail  requirements  apart  from  anything
       else.  She accepted that she was not presently allowed to live  with
       the children but insisted that as a matter  of  practicality  rather
       than danger. She insisted that BM came more than the four  times  in
       the year that were the minimum requirement.  She said she  had  seen
       her in June and July and in August.  She was now  back  in  college.
       She had seen her for two weeks in June, two weeks in July  and  over
       three weeks in August.  She had stayed with the friend  S,  but  the
       appellant saw her every day.

   61. She was shown the social worker's statement dealing with contact for
       two hours in May 2016.  She said she did not know why  the  children
       had said what they did to  social  workers.   They  had  their  last
       contact with their father  in  2015.   She  could  not  explain  why
       contact had stopped.  She agreed she told the local authorities that
       the girls could be circumcised and the  local  authorities  had  let
       them contact their father.  She could not explain that.

   62. She was not entirely happy that AE went to an Adventist Church  with
       a relative of foster carers.  She wanted her children  to  go  to  a
       Catholic church.  She  thought  it  would  be  very  harsh  for  the
       children B and A  if  she  was  not  there  for  them.   She  denied
       photographing A having a telephone conversation.

Appellant's sister SHM's evidence

   63. The appellant's sister, SHM gave evidence.  She had made a statement
       signed on 25 September 2014 and an additional statement signed on 17
       September 2016. She is a British citizen and is a  registered  nurse
       at a well-known London hospital.  She lived  with  her  husband  and
       their (then) 19 years old son.  Although careful not to  suggest  it
       was an excuse she did say that their father  had  frequently  beaten
       them severely and that the appellant, no doubt stressed as a  single
       mother looking after two daughters, was parenting in accordance with
       her own upbringing.  She said she lived in Essex  and  the  children
       were in Nottingham, but she helped if  she  could.   She  gave  some
       financial help and visited when she could.

   64. She said that it was difficult to organise contact because the girls
       had very different expectations of  their  relationship  with  their
       mother because they were different ages and  that  initially  B  was
       reluctant to see the appellant, but their relationship improved.

   65. She found the children's social workers  "quite  obstructive"  while
       the appellant was in prison and the witness found  it  difficult  to
       secure contact with the children.  She complained that she  had  not
       seen the children more than ten times.  She gave details of  contact
       she had with the children and efforts she made to facilitate further
       contact.  She was disappointed the  children  were  not  allowed  to
       visit her home for Christmas.  She  was  critical  that  the  social
       workers were not doing more to keep  the  appellant  informed.   She
       confirmed that things that had been passed on to social workers  for
       the appellant were not forwarded.  On release from prison there were
       contact proceedings.  Contact was resumed when the appellant was  on
       immigration bail.  She had seen good relationships  develop  between
       the appellant and her children.  Her attitude to  the  children  had
       changed since she had been in prison.  She also  believed  that  the
       appellant would be at risk in the Gambia because of V's  involvement
       in opposition activities.

   66. In her second witness statement she confirmed that the appellant and
       the  children  continue  to  have  regular  contact  and  that   she
       facilitated much of it.  Her niece BM hoped to stay in  London  with
       her.

   67. She believed that BM and the appellant had a good  understanding  of
       each other.  Her relationship with AE was also going well,  although
       AE did not visit as often as BM because she is younger and had  less
       say.  Nevertheless, they did go together to places and enjoyed  each
       other's company.  She was aware that when AE visited  she  was  away
       from her friends and she accepted that AE may  have  said  that  she
       wanted to spend time with her friends rather than her mother.

   68. Her niece BM was confident to travel alone to London for the  summer
       holiday visits.  She believed that the appellant  was  an  important
       part in the lives of her children.  She described the  appellant  as
       "very much mother to the girls, even if it is not of the traditional
       way".

   69. She explained in answer  to  additional  questions  that  there  was
       little accommodation for the girls at  her  home.   There  were  two
       bedrooms.  She shared one with her husband and the other was used by
       her (now) 22-year-old son.  There was really  nowhere  for  a  young
       woman to sleep.  She believed that the  appellant's  daughters  were
       always asking to have contact with their family.  There would  be  a
       big impact if the appellant was removed to  the  Gambia.   It  would
       destroy the rekindled relationship.  There were  other  people  that
       could help too and would.

   70. She was cross-examined.

   71. She believed the children wanted to live with her but  B  alone  had
       expressed that wish.  She accepted that A wanted to visit the family
       but not to live with them.  She said that A  was  impressed  by  the
       �500 gift allowance  given  to  her  foster  parents  and  also  had
       friends.  There was talk about visiting  on  Boxing  Day.   She  had
       school friends there.   She  confirmed  that  when  BM  visited  she
       visited the extended family and not just her mother.

   72. She confirmed that her parents and siblings lived in  Guinea  Bissau
       in Paupal, but the village did not have  a  specific  address.   She
       also had a sister and brother  in  the  United  States  and  another
       brother in Guinea and a brother  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
       suggested that she had not been giving  straightforward  answers  to
       straightforward questions about the  whereabouts  of  her  siblings.
       She said that she had answered precisely what she  was  asked.   She
       could not remember specifically when her relatives left  Gambia  for
       Guinea  Bissau.   Contrary  to  evidence  of  a  social  worker   in
       documentary form she insisted that B had visited her in July 2016 to
       be near the place where she was being interviewed.

Appellant's cousin BS's evidence

   73. The Appellant's cousin, BS, gave evidence and adopted her  statement
       of 29 September 2014. She too is a British citizen and she works  as
       a clinical scientist for the National Health Service.

   74. She said that between the ages of about 4 and 12 years she lived  on
       the same compound in Banjul  as  the  appellant  and  her  immediate
       family.  Consequently they spent a lot of time  together.   She  was
       the appellant's closest relative when the appellant arrived  in  the
       United Kingdom.  She supported her in various  ways  including,  for
       example, helping her plan her wedding.

   75. She said that the appellant's marriage started off being  happy  but
       there were difficulties and they sent BM back to Gambia.  They  then
       had a second daughter together, AE, and the appellant's husband went
       back to Gambia.  It was presented as a temporary thing, but then  he
       decided to remain there.  She explained the  concerns  that  BM  was
       going to be subject to FGM and arrangements were made for BM  to  be
       returned to the United Kingdom.  The appellant left  London  because
       life was too expensive there and moved to Nottingham.  The appellant
       then settled with BM and AE in the Nottingham area.

   76. She said that the appellant was  trying  hard  to  be  a  successful
       single parent and required the children to  work  hard  and  it  was
       against that background that she beat one of her children.

   77. She visited the appellant once in prison  but  was  not  encouraged.
       Her prison sentence carried a great deal  of  stigma,  embarrassment
       and humiliation for the appellant  and  the  family.   Nevertheless,
       when she did visit the appellant talked  about  her  children.   She
       talked about the appellant being anxious before contact  visits  and
       finding it difficult to adjust when she was  released  from  prison.
       She knew that  the  appellant's  weekly  telephone  calls  from  her
       children were important to  her.   She  gave  examples  of  how  the
       appellant was interested in the lives of her children and  concerned
       that they did not go to mass on Sundays.   It  was  the  appellant's
       hope that she would one day have the children living with her again.
        She also confirmed that the activities of the appellant's sister  V
       is seen as opposition to the Government and the appellant  would  be
       attributed with those views.   She  said  "This  will  have  serious
       repercussions for [the appellant]".  She understood that  a  lot  of
       people had disappeared in the Gambia.

   78. She believed that the appellant would be an object of  suspicion  if
       she was returned without her children and it would be  assumed  that
       they would be taken away because of some bad act.  People in  Gambia
       would not believe the children were taken away because of  excessive
       physical punishment and would assume that they had been involved  in
       something  much  more  serious  and  she  would  be  shunned.    The
       appellant's former husband would be angry too.

   79. The police in Gambia would  not  help.   Their  resources  are  very
       limited.  She emphasised that Gambia is a small country being  about
       250 miles long and 30 miles wide.  Most of what  happens  in  Gambia
       goes on in Banjul and she could not see what the appellant could  do
       outside Banjul to provide for herself.  The appellant did  not  know
       anything about farm work.  She would be regarded as a prostitute or,
       most favourably as a widow and would be vulnerable.

   80. In  cross-examination  she  insisted  that  she  believed  that  the
       children  saw  a  separation  from  their  mother  as  a   temporary
       arrangement and could not explain why the social worker said  things
       differently.

   81. She was not re-examined.

Appellant's sister VCM's evidence

   82. The papers included a witness statement from the appellant's  sister
       VCM.  Her statement is signed on  8  May  2014  and  she  gives  her
       address in New York in the United States of America.

   83. She said that with her family she is recognised as a refugee in  the
       United States of America.

   84. She said she had been working for Amadou Scattred Janneh as a public
       relations officer and  financial  executive  to  the  Coalition  for
       Change and had been doing that job  for  about  five  or  six  years
       before she fled Gambia.  She described Mr Janneh as a  pro-democracy
       activist and politician and a dual national of the  Gambia  and  the
       United States of America.  He has worked for the Government  of  the
       Gambia and for the United States Embassy in Banjul.

   85. Part of the witness's work for  the  Coalition  for  Change  was  to
       arrange printing and pro-democracy T-shirts, including slogans  such
       as "End to dictatorship now".

   86. In early June 2011 Mr Janneh left the opposition and did not return.
        He could not be contacted.  Initially she was not unduly  concerned
       because he was known to travel to the United States  of  America  at
       short notice, but on the second  day  after  his  disappearance  six
       special agents visited their offices to  make  investigations.   The
       witness did not go to work the next day.  She was  worried  for  her
       own  safety  and  worried  for  Mr  Janneh.   She  then   heard   an
       announcement that Mr Janneh had  been  arrested  for  treason.   She
       learned that her colleagues had been arrested and detained.  She had
       already moved to another  town  in  the  Gambia.   Her  brother  was
       released on a bond after T-shirts and other matters had  been  found
       in the family home.

   87. She  fled  to  Guinea  Bissau  where,  she  said,  her  parents  had
       originated.

   88. She introduced herself to the United States Embassy  and  was  given
       help to travel to the United States of America.

   89. She stayed  in  Senegal  on  her  way  to  the  United  States,  but
       eventually went to the United States and claimed  asylum.   It  took
       about three months to get refugee status.

   90. Mr Janneh was released after the intervention of the Reverend  Jesse
       Jackson and  others  who  were  implicated  in  the  production  and
       distribution of pro-democracy T-shirts were still in prison.

   91. Her life would be at risk in the Gambia.  Two  people  she  used  to
       work with had returned to Banjul thinking they would  now  be  safe,
       but they were not.  They were arrested.  She was  quite  clear  that
       the Government would not distinguish between the appellant and her.

   92. The bundle includes papers which show the appellant's sister  to  be
       recognised as a refugee in the United States of  America  but  which
       gives no indication of the reasons for that  status  being  granted.
       The papers do show that she  claimed  asylum  for  the  reasons  she
       indicated to this Tribunal.

Dr Pamela Kea's evidence

   93. I also have an expert report dated 11 May 2014 prepared by Dr Pamela
       Kea and an addendum dated 17 September 2016.  She gave  her  address
       as the Department of Anthropology at the University of Sussex.   Her
       doctorate was examined by the School of Oriental and African Studies
       at the University of London.

   94. She began her report by explaining that the Gambia is  the  smallest
       country in Africa, being about 500 kilometres long and 20 kilometres
       wide.  The population was only about one-and-a-half million  but  it
       was one of the most densely populated countries in Africa. About 90%
       of the population are Muslim and about 9% Christian.  It is  one  of
       the poorest countries in the world.

   95. It was her opinion that the appellant would  be  at  risk  from  the
       family of her former husband because she had not  shown  appropriate
       modesty and had defied their wishes by preventing  the  circumcision
       of the youngest child.  She  thought  it  "highly  likely  that  the
       [appellant's] husband's family would track down the [appellant] upon
       return to the Gambia in bringing shame on the family".

   96. She also considered the appellant would be at risk  because  of  her
       sister's work in support of Amadou Scattred Janneh.   She  commented
       on the poor human rights record of the current regime.

   97. She also opined that the appellant  would  be  treated  harshly  and
       excluded from society if it was known the children  would  be  taken
       from her care.  To be branded as an incompetent mother is  a  denial
       of female identity.

   98. She said it  would  be  "extremely  difficult"  to  relocate  within
       Gambia.  Gambians live in extended family  compounds  generally  and
       the compounds are the basis for social structure in the  village  or
       town.

   99. She accepted that the appellant may eventually  be  able  to  attain
       employment in Banjul or urban towns such as Serakunda or Bakau,  but
       she would find it very difficult to earn sufficient money to pay the
       costs of housing.  Outside urban areas such as those  identified  it
       would be "extremely difficult" to make a living.  Women make up less
       than 5% of  the  qualified  workforce,  although  over  60%  of  the
       unqualified workforce.  She would find  it  extremely  difficult  to
       find accommodation  as  a  single  woman  because  of  the  cultural
       acceptability of being a young woman living alone  for  an  extended
       period without a husband or family support.

  100. She did not think the authorities would offer any protection in  the
       Gambia.  The police would not  be  interested  in  what  they  would
       regard as family matters.  She might do a little  better  in  Guinea
       Bissau but the country is extremely  poor  making  relocation  there
       difficult.

Appellant's children's evidence

  101. The papers also include  evidence  about  the  relationship  of  the
       appellant with her daughters which I have considered.

  102. There are elements of the letters I find slightly  surprising.   For
       example, there is a letter from  the  child  BM  that  begins  "Dear
       Mummy" but ends "Yours faithfully", and  another  letter  apparently
       from both girls they sign themselves using their surnames as well as
       their Christian names.  However I cannot safely draw any  conclusion
       from these letters beyond finding that they support the  appellant's
       claim that she has never lost contact with her children.

  103. With permission I have been able to see the papers or  some  of  the
       papers  relating  to   Family   Court   proceedings   and   at   the
       recommendation of the children's guardian  in  June  2016  that  the
       child AE was "very settled in her foster placement".

Background Evidence

  104. I have considered the Country Information and Guidance  Home  Office
       Report dated December 2015.  This picks up on evidence, in this case
       in the United States Department of State "2014  Country  Reports  on
       Human Rights Practices - the Gambia" that refers to "a  failed  coup
       on  December  30  [2014]  resulted  in  the  arrest  of  individuals
       suspected of participating in the coup as well as family members  of
       alleged coup plotters".  At paragraph 4.1.9  there  is  a  quotation
       from the Human Rights Watch Report of May 2015 stating:-

  "Gambian authorities had detained incommunicado, depriving  them  of  all
  contact with the outside world, dozens of friends and relatives of people
  accused of involvement in the coup attempt since January 2015".

  105. The same point is made at paragraph 4.1.10 saying how the:-

  "regime has intensified the crackdown on any  form  of  dissent  and  has
  increased  human  rights  violations,  with  indiscriminate  arrests  and
  military personnel and  civilians  assumed  to  be  relatives  or  family
  members of people suspected of having  taken  part  of  the  failed  coup
  d'�tat of 30 December.  It has also driven  several  people  into  forced
  exile."

  106. I note too a  quotation  from  the  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  at
       paragraph 7.1.1 of the Home Office Country Information and  Guidance
       on the Gambia published  on  5  December  2015.   It  observes  that
       "'avoiding  arrest  is  a  necessary  preoccupation'  for   ordinary
       Gambians".

Consideration

  107. I have considered the skeleton  argument  of  Mr  Draycott  and  the
       Secretary of  State's  reasons  for  refusal  as  well  as  all  the
       submissions made.

  108. I note particularly that the respondent complained  in  the  Refusal
       Decision that the appellant did not rely on a  fear  of  persecution
       because of her sister  V's  activities  until  after  she  had  been
       threatened with deportation. This is a deficiency. Lateness tends to
       damage credibility. However the appellant was  not  threatened  with
       deportation until 28 October 2012 and the appellant's sister was not
       recognised as a refugee until January of that  year.  The  appellant
       could have claimed sooner but her late  application  does  not  mean
       that V's asylum documents or Dr Kea's opinion, or any  other  strand
       of evidence, is unreliable.

  109. I remind myself that I must make my findings on an assessment of the
       evidence in the round and that the appellant will be  successful  if
       she can establish an asylum claim on  the  low  standard  of  proof,
       namely that there is a real risk of her facing serious ill-treatment
       for a Convention reason in the event of her return.  As far  as  her
       human rights claim in relation to Article 3 is concerned,  again  it
       is a  similar  or  practically  identical  standard  of  substantial
       grounds for believing.  The Article 8  claim  involves  a  balancing
       exercise and so does not really lend itself to an  analysis  of  the
       standard of proof, but to the extent that it  does  and  I  have  to
       decide what is probable.

  110. Now I will give a more detailed consideration to the evidence  below
       in general terms.  I found the oral evidence to be broadly truthful.
        I  find  that  the  witnesses  did  slant  their  evidence  in  the
       appellant's favour at the  expense  of  social  workers  and  others
       involved in the care of the  children,  but  I  see  that  as  their
       prejudices acting in support of their family members rather than any
       attempt to be dishonest.

  111. I begin by looking at the less controversial evidence.

  112. Importantly, I am entirely satisfied that the appellant's sister  in
       the United States of America is a refugee as she alleges.  There  is
       clear evidence in support of that claim which the Secretary of State
       has done nothing to undermine.  I also accept  the  explanation  for
       being given refugee status, namely  that  she  was  associated  with
       someone who was a prominent leader detained and  ill-treated  for  a
       time and she escaped before she was in trouble.  The fact she  is  a
       refugee is beyond doubt and I see no  reason  why  she  should  have
       given an untruthful explanation because it is hard  to  imagine  any
       explanation for her being a refugee that would not permit her to say
       the appellant is at risk for a similar reason and the papers confirm
       that V based he case on the reasons given to this Tribunal.

  113. I have set out above clear  evidence  from  reputable  sources  that
       family members of perceived supporters have been  detained.   It  is
       not clear what has happened to them.  I have not found evidence that
       they have been released. It would have been helpful if this evidence
       was more detailed. I would like to know, for  example,  how  closely
       related were the known relatives and if they had been freed. However
       I can only work with what I have.

  114. I found Dr Kea to have expressed her opinions carefully and I except
       the she is qualified to give the opinions that  did.  I  have  given
       them considerable weight.

  115. Applying the low standard of proof I have to accept there is a  real
       risk that a person who came to the attention of the authorities  now
       and was identified as a relative of someone in  the  broadest  sense
       involved in the coup would be at risk.

  116. I accept the evidence that the appellant would come to the attention
       of the authorities.  Arrangements would have  to  be  made  for  her
       return and enquiries would be made, and I accept that she  would  be
       identified as the person who was a close supporter of the opposition
       leader and who was now a refugee.  Even if she was not  detected  on
       return, and I find that it what is likely to happen, matter could be
       expected to come to light as she tried to establish herself.

  117. In some ways I feel almost mischievous in allowing an appeal that is
       in some ways very complex for such  a  straightforward  reason,  but
       that is where the evidence takes me.

  118. I accept the evidence that the  appellant's  family  have  all  left
       Gambia.  There was cross-examination tending to test this  assertion
       but it made no impact on the evidence. The  evidence  that  all  the
       near relatives had left Gambia was given consistently. Further it is
       uncontroversial that  many  of  her  close  relatives  have  settled
       outside Gambia, presumably because they have the wherewithal to make
       a better life for themselves in a richer economy and a society where
       human rights are better  respect.  I  have  no  rational  basis  for
       rejecting the claim that all of the close relatives have gone.  This
       is not a case where the appellant or other witnesses  have  been  so
       completely dishonest that it makes no sense to  accept  anything  at
       all that they say.

  119. I accept too the difficulties the appellant  or  anyone  else  would
       have in establishing themselves as a single person in Gambia.  These
       are clearly explained in Dr Kea's evidence  and  it  is  evidence  I
       found particularly persuasive when I considered it.  My  inclination
       to accept that evidence is supported by it being  entirely  in  line
       with the binding country guidance given by the  Tribunal  in  K  and
       Others (FGM) the Gambia CG [2013] UKUT 00062.  As the name  implies,
       that case was primarily concerned with FGM which  is  no  longer  an
       issue in this case because the children are  in  care  and  are  not
       going to be removed, but as was clearly established in K:-

  "Cogent reasons need to be given for a finding that the individual  would
  be able to relocate safely, especially given  the  evidence  that  ethnic
  groups are thoroughly interspersed,  the  country  is  small  and  ethnic
  groups in different parts of the country are highly interconnected."

  120. The point is that it is very difficult  for  a  person  to  hide  in
       Gambia.  This is an argument  that  is  really  quite  difficult  to
       appreciate from the vantage point of life in an insular society such
       as the United Kingdom where "minding your own business" is seen as a
       virtue  and  individualism   is   possible   because   of   economic
       independence.  Much of the world does not think or work in this  way
       and I accept the evidence that the appellant  could  not  expect  to
       remain anonymous if she returned to the Gambia in a way  that  would
       be the case if she were trying to establish herself  in  the  United
       Kingdom, for example.  Gambia is a small country and it is a country
       where people talk about each other and enquiries will be made  about
       a person who is new.  I find that there is at least a real risk that
       the appellant's husband or his  family  would  find  out  about  her
       return and, as is said by the expert, would feel a  need  to  avenge
       themselves because of the shame that she has  brought  on  them.   I
       accept that state protection would be of no practical use.

  121. However the evidence  does  not  support  a  finding  that  the  ill
       treatment that the appellant risks is so severe that it comes within
       the protection of article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights. Poverty and social ostracism are not  generally  so  serious
       that the risk of being exposed  to  them  qualifies  for  protection
       under article 3. Dr Kea does not indicate the kind of ill  treatment
       that the appellant risks from her  former  husband's  family  beyond
       reference to "physical abuse". The appellant referred to "slapping".
       If there was a real risk of her husband' family members killing  her
       or subjecting her to really  serious  violence  then  I  would  have
       expected Dr Kea to have said as  much  and  to  have  explained  her
       opinion. She did not. I am not trivialising violence against  women,
       or anyone else for that matter, but not all violence is sufficiently
       severe to amount to "torture or inhuman or degrading treatment".

  122. Neither do I do not accept that  any  ill  treatment  the  appellant
       risks at the hands of husband's family is because she is a member of
       a social group. That would be going too  far  and  would  involve  a
       convoluting and unreal definition of social groups. She  risks  some
       ill treatment from her personal enemies but that does not make her a
       refugee.

  123. Similarly, whilst I accept that she would face a considerable degree
       of social ostracism as a single women and that the  ostracism  would
       increase as people came to realise that she was  a  mother  who  was
       estranged from her children I have seen nothing to support a finding
       that the ostracism and associated  ill  treatment  would  amount  to
       "torture or inhuman or degrading treatment".

  124. Nevertheless, and contrary to my expectations when I started hearing
       this appeal and in  light  of  the  evidence  I  have  come  to  the
       conclusion that this appellant needs international protection.

  125. It is clear from what I have said already that  the  appeal  against
       deportation has to succeed because removal would breach the person's
       Convention  rights  and/or  the  obligations   under   the   Refugee
       Convention.

  126. However, I wish to make it plain that were it not for this finding I
       would not have allowed the appeal. In particular I  would  not  have
       allowed the appeal against deportation. I have to apply Section 117B
       and C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The
       appellant clearly has a parental  relationship  with  the  children.
       She is their parent and has a relationship.  I do not  see  how  the
       relationship can be described as  anything  other  than  a  parental
       relationship.   However,  parental  relationships  differ,  probably
       between every parent and child that has ever been, and indeed in the
       course of a relationship, but this one is unusual in  that  although
       the relationship is between a mother and quite young daughters,  the
       relationship is not as close as it could be expected to be.  It  has
       included considerable periods of separation, initially in  the  case
       of one of the children because the appellant found it too  difficult
       to manage her, and then because  of  a  prison  sentence,  and  then
       because of court involvement.

  127. It is not that the appellant does  not  care  for  her  children.  I
       accept that she has shown genuine maternal love and  I  also  accept
       that they have affection  for  her.   The  fact  is  that  they  are
       managing quite well without her being a big part in their lives  and
       the younger child particularly is happy in her foster placement  and
       does look to her foster placement and friends in the  East  Midlands
       for most of her social life.

  128. This is not to be seen as  diminishing  the  relationship  with  her
       mother to the point of her being unimportant.  That is very far from
       my finding, but it is not the kind of relationship  that  should  be
       given the weight that the relationship between a mother and a  young
       daughter would ordinarily attract.  The appellant is  in  effect  an
       absentee parent with whom the children have a pleasant and agreeable
       and enriching relationship,  but  it  is  not  a  relationship  that
       depends on their living in a nuclear family  with  her  or  anything
       particularly close to it, and  I  would  find  that  the  effect  of
       deportation on the minor children would not be unduly harsh.  It  is
       wrong because she needs international protection.

Best interests of the children

  129. It is implicit in this that I do not regard the children living with
       their mother as being in their best interests.  Indeed  living  with
       her mother proved a very bad arrangement for the sake of  the  older
       child, and although I respectfully  accept  and  follow  the  family
       court's decision that it is appropriate for  the  children  to  have
       contact with their mother and to spend quite a lot of time with  her
       I do not accept it is in the best interests to live  together,  even
       if that could be arranged.  I am not satisfied that she is  suitable
       for that end.  The best interests for the children are to remain  in
       the United Kingdom as they are very likely entitled to do and to  be
       encouraged to have such a relationship with  their  mother  as  they
       can, which will involve being in contact and seeing her from time to
       time, if that is possible but that is all.

  130. If follow that the appeal  is  allowed  because  the  Appellant  has
       satisfied me that she is a refugee.

Decision

The appeal is allowed on refugee grounds only.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 January 2017                |



