
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01688/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3 February 2015                    |On 6 February 2015                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                              Mr Saulius Vitas
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Horvath promulgated on  19  November  2014  which  refused  the  appeal
    against deportation of the appellant, an EEA national.

 2. It was common ground before me  that  the  appellant  is  someone  with
    permanent residence  and  therefore  entitled  to  have  his  expulsion
    assessed against the  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security" protection provided by Regulation 21(3)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).

 3. Regulation 21 also provides other criteria  that  must  be  taken  into
    account when the expulsion of an EEA national is proposed, stating also
    that:



         "(2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         ...

         (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-

             (a)  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;

             (b) the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned   must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society;

             (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;




             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."

 4. It is also common ground that after he came to the UK in 2004,  records
    show that the appellant first came to the attention of  the  police  in
    2009 when he was drunk while  in  charge  of  a  child  and  cautioned.
    Between 31 August 2007 and 18 June 2014 he was convicted nineteen times
    for 28 offences.  Those offences included driving a motor vehicle  with
    excess   alcohol,   batteries,   assault   theft/shoplifting   (fifteen
    offences), breach of a conditional  discharge,  commission  of  further
    offence during the operational  period  of  suspended  sentence  order.
    Many of his offences arose in connection with the abuse of alcohol.

 5. For those offences he received fines, conditional discharges, community
    orders, supervision requirements, victim surcharge,  alcohol  treatment
    and imprisonment.  They  also  include  at  least  three  batteries  or
    assaults.

 6. On 18 June 2014 he was convicted of two counts of battery, one  against
    his wife and one against his stepdaughter, both of whom he beat.  On  2
    July 2014 he was sentenced  to  twelve  weeks'  imprisonment  for  each
    offence to be served concurrently. It was these offences which  led  to
    the notice of an intention to make a deportation  order  on  18  August
    2014.

 7.  Judge  Horvath's  decision  was  that  the  appellant  represented   a
    "serious", genuine and  present  threat  to  public  policy  or  public
    security.  She  considered  that  the  appellant's  offence  were  very
    numerous, not at a high level but serious enough to attract a custodial
    sentence, that he had shown a lack of remorse, sought to  minimise  his
    offences, had not addressed his alcohol problem  and  that  reoffending
    was likely.  She also found that she could not  weigh  the  appellant's
    relationship with his wife, stepchild and adult son as highly as he put
    forward.

 8. The grounds of appeal as set out in the written application upon  which
    permission was granted can be summarised as follows:

      a) Incorrect approach to the assessment of the evidence - there was no
         clear finding on the credibility of the appellant and his wife  and
         their material evidence as to the appellant's relationships in  the
         UK. There was little reference at all in the determination  to  the
         evidence of the wife.  Further, at [52] and [59] the judge required
         corroboration of oral evidence which was not permissible  approach.
         Further the judge took  an  irrational  approach  when  she  placed
         weight on the parents of the appellant and his wife  not  attending
         their wedding. Further, no allowance was made for the fact that the
         appellant was unrepresented.

      b)  Erroneous  application  of  the  correct  EEA  framework   -   the
         appellant's offences could  not  bring  him  within  the  "serious"
         grounds provisions. The judge further erred at [56] in  considering
         incorrect factors as part of the public interest  weighing  against
         the appellant in an EEA deportation, stating:

             "I have to balance the public interest in particular regard to
             the prevention of crime, the protection of the  public  moral,
             the economic wellbeing of the country against the personal and
             other compassionate circumstances of this appellant's case."

         This offended the specific  criterion  of  Regulation  21(2)  which
         states that "a relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic
         ends" and Regulation 21(d) which states "matters isolated from  the
         particulars of the  case  or  which  relate  to  considerations  of
         general prevention do not justify the decision".

 9. At the hearing Mr Haywood began with the ground concerning whether  the
    appellant could possibly be said to represent  a  "serious"  threat  to
    public policy or security where his offences were of a  relatively  low
    level albeit they were numerous.

10. Mr Haywood relied on the reported case of LG and CC (EEA  Regs)  [2009]
    UKAIT 00024, referring first to Appendix B of that document  which  set
    out  the  UKBA  Criminal  Casework  Directorate  Case   Owner   Process
    Instructions concerning deportation of an EEA national.  This  document
    provided guidance on  what  might  amount  to  "serious"  grounds.  The
    offences set out in the respondent's document  were  a  conviction  for
    murder, a terrorism offence, a  drug  trafficking  offence,  a  serious
    immigration offence, or a serious sexual or violent offence carrying  a
    maximum penalty of ten years or more. The guidance document states that
    these offences "might constitute serious grounds of  public  policy  or
    public security."

11. At paragraph 106 of LG and CC the Tribunal comment on the  respondent's
    guidance document thus:

         "The threat in the 'serious grounds' category (level 2) requires to
         be differentiated from that posed in a level  1  case,  bearing  in
         mind that a level 2  person  has  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
         residence in the United Kingdom.  We can see from  the  section  of
         the Instructions concerning level  2  that  a  conviction  for  any
         number of the listed offences might constitute  'serious  grounds'.
         We see merit to the list of offences as a means of  differentiating
         between level 1 and level 2, but it must be emphasised that  it  is
         the present  risk  arising  from  conviction  for  the  offence  in
         question that must be established.  As the Instructions  recognise,
         the list of offences represents guidance rather than  prescription,
         but properly represents a higher level  of  seriousness.   One  can
         imagine, for example, a serial shoplifter being properly  removable
         under level 1, but being unlikely to represent the  level  of  risk
         that is required to be posed in the case of a person with  a  right
         of permanent residence."

12. As set out at [4] above this appellant can be considered as  a  "serial
    shoplifter", having committed fifteen such offences. Mr Haywood  sought
    support from the final sentence of the Instruction  cited  above  which
    suggests that a "serial shoplifter" is  "unlikely"  to  come  with  the
    "serious" category so as to justify the expulsion of  an  EEA  national
    with permanent residence. As was  further  pointed  out,  none  of  his
    offences were more serious than the most recent  batteries  which  were
    summary offence with a maximum term of imprisonment of 6 months and for
    which the appellant had received a sentence of 12 weeks.

13. In response Mr Jarvis took me to the case of Jarusevicius (EEA Reg  21)
    [2012] UKUT 00120 (IAC) which at [65] states:

         "However, even if, contrary to our assessment,  it  were  concluded
         that he had acquired a right of  permanent  residence,  we  do  not
         regard  the  UKBA  Criminal   Casework   Directorate   Instructions
         (attached as  Appendix  B  to  LG  and  CC)  to  be  exhaustive  or
         conclusive of which convictions  will  lead  to  an  assessment  of
         serious grounds of public policy or public security. "

14. This, argued Mr Jarvis, showed that there  was  no  "bright  line"  for
    deciding whether an individual's offending came  within  the  "serious"
    category. The First-tier Tribunal  had not erred in finding  that  this
    appellant did so given  the  extent  of  his  offending,  the  risk  of
    reoffending and that his convictions went  beyond  merely  shoplifting,
    including as they did offences of violence including violence against a
    child.

15. In this appeal, it appears to me that a difficult decision  lay  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The  level  of  seriousness  of  each  of  the
    individual offences committed by the appellant is certainly not that of
    the crimes set out in the Instruction. But  the  appellant's  offending
    history is so prolific and his  propensity  to  reoffend  inevitably  a
    concern, his not having expressed credible remorse, his minimisation of
    his offences including the two batteries in 2014, his  alcohol  problem
    not having been addressed, that it is not readily apparent that  he  is
    someone who could easily be found not to pose  a  "serious"  threat  to
    public policy or security.

16. There is no question that Judge  Horvath  was  aware  of  the  need  to
    address the "serious grounds" test. She sets out at [35] the  hierarchy
    of levels that can apply to the  expulsion  of  an  EEA  national.  She
    concludes at [37] that he "has acquired permanent residence in the  UK"
    and that the "serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public  security
    provision applies to him".

17. She also refers at [37] and [38] to LG (Italy)  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2008] EWCA Civ 190, the remittal from which became LG and  CC  in  the
    Tribunal. When considering how  the  Court  of  Appeal  approached  the
    hierarchy of levels of protection, Judge Horvath states at [38]:

         "I bear in mind that Carnwath  LJ  stated  that  he  did  not  feel
         confident in attempting to lay down any definitive  guidance  until
         the Secretary of State had reached a more settled view both of  the
         legal  interpretation  of  the  provision   and   of   the   policy
         considerations governing their application in practice."

18. That principle, essentially the same principle as that expressed by the
    Tribunal in Jarusevicius, considered at [13] and [14]  above,  was  one
    she was entitled to take into account.

19. At [39], Judge Horvath correctly directed herself in terms to the other
    provisions of Regulation 21 that she had to apply to the facts  of  the
    appellant's case.

20. Over paragraphs [41] to [55], in a very detailed  consideration,  Judge
    Horvath assessed all of the material evidence before her including  the
    nature of the appellant's offences, his continued  alcohol  abuse,  the
    risk of reoffending  and  whether  these  matters  could  amount  to  a
    serious, genuine and present threat to  public  policy.   At  [47]  she
    found  that  he  minimised  the  true  extent  of  his   offences   and
    consequences of his drinking. At [48] she found that "he has  shown  no
    real remorse in court for his past conduct".  She notes  also  in  [48]
    the prevalence of alcohol behind the  appellant's  offending  behaviour
    and that:

         "whilst I note that orders have been made in the past  for  alcohol
         treatment, this did not appear to have made any  real  impact  upon
         him to stop drinking.  In addition, I note there is no evidence  to
         show that he has completed alcohol  treatment  courses  by  way  of
         rehabilitation.  There is also no credible or cogent evidence  from
         the partner to show what active steps she had taken to wean him off
         alcohol."

21. The judge further notes at [48] that the stepdaughter's father had  not
    been informed about the battery on the child in June 2014.   The  judge
    concludes at [48] that:

         "the lack of remorse shown by the appellant in  court  damages  his
         credibility to the extent  that  it  increases,  in  my  view,  the
         propensity threshold for the appellant to involve  himself  further
         with unsociable, undesirable and/or violent criminal  behaviour  in
         the future associated with  drink/alcohol  consumption,  sooner  or
         later."

22. The determination goes on at [50] to state:

         "It does appear to me that he presents a real risk of  reoffending,
         particularly in circumstances where there exists a real  risk  that
         he may well return to drinking, as he has done  since  he  met  the
         partner in January 2013."

    and concludes that "he would reoffend sooner or later."

23. As above, this was a case which required the resolution of a  difficult
    balancing exercise between the level of the appellant's  offending  and
    its nature, extent and the likelihood of reoffending in order to decide
    if his offending could justify expulsion where he had "serious grounds"
    protection provided by Regulation 21(3).

24.  Judge  Horvath,  as  set  out  above,  addressed  the  relevant  legal
    principles and material evidence. Having done so,  was  her  conclusion
    open to her? What,  in  my  view,  sustains  her  conclusion,  are  her
    comments at [51]. She states there:

         "The type of offences is an important  consideration.   I  consider
         the repeated shoplifting offences and various counts of battery and
         common assault to be serious and the gravity  of  the  offences  as
         well as the deleterious effect of that type of crimes on the  wider
         community was reflected in the sentences imposed.  There is a  need
         to protect the public generally (including the child) from  serious
         crimes and its effects such as these.  I are [sic]  also  aware  of
         the  primary  responsibility  of   the   state   for   the   public
         interest/policy and public security in that the consequence for non-
         citizens of committing serious crimes might be deportation.  I have
         borne in mind that the crimes which have been  committed  were  not
         heinous such  as  rape,  murder,  grievous  bodily  harm,  acts  of
         terrorism, or drug trafficking, however I am of the view  that  the
         appellant showed a propensity to continue with his  drinking,  that
         when under the influence  of  drink,  he  had  a  tendency  to  act
         violently.  I take the view that his repeated offences  of  battery
         and common assault, taken cumulatively, were sufficiently grave and
         serious such as to justify the  respondent's  decision  to  make  a
         deportation order against him."

25. Those comments acknowledge the level of seriousness of the  offence  is
    an "important  consideration".  The  judge  considers  the  appellant's
    offences to be "serious" whilst overtly acknowledging that they are not
    "heinous" or, to put it another way, individually the equivalent of the
    offences set out in the respondent's Instruction as the type of offence
    that might justify the deportation of an EEA  national  with  permanent
    residence. As above, neither the respondent's Instructions nor  any  of
    the case law put before me indicates that the list offences set  out  a
    definitive list and Jarusevicius confirms that there is no  "exhaustive
    or conclusive" list or type of conviction that must be present for  the
    "serious grounds" test to be met.

26. Where that is so and where Judge Horvath took into account  what  would
    more usually constitute a "serious  grounds"  level  of  offending  and
    acknowledged the low level of the offending here, it is  my  conclusion
    that even where it was not a decision that all judges would  have  come
    to, it was not irrational, perverse or unlawful but was reasonably open
    to her. I therefore did not find that the first ground  of  appeal  was
    made out.

27. I turn now to the second ground put forward by Mr Haywood,  that  Judge
    Horvath relied on incorrect and impermissible factors as  part  of  the
    public interest when making her  decision  on  deportation  of  an  EEA
    national.

28. As indicated above, Judge Horvath set out the correct legal matrix  and
    the criteria from Regulation 21 that she had  to  apply  to  the  facts
    before her. The argument that she did  not  apply  that  framework  and
    those criteria in practice arises from her comment at [56] that:

         "I have to balance the public interest in particular regard to  the
         prevention of crime,  the  protection  of  the  public  moral,  the
         economic wellbeing of the country against the  personal  and  other
         compassionate circumstances of this appellant's case."

29. This comment is made in a concluding paragraph.   As  above,  it  comes
    after the judge directed herself in terms to the correct  legal  matrix
    and  criteria  and  I  was  not  taken  to  anything  in  the  detailed
    substantive consideration  at  [36]  to  [55]  that  was  not  in  line
    therewith.

30. I also note that at [57], immediately following the  reference  to  the
    comments which the appellant maintains amount to an erroneous approach,
    Judge Horvath  again invokes references Regulation 21 as  the  relevant
    provision when addressing the issue of  rehabilitation  in  appellant's
    home country.

31. When the determination is read as a whole and fairly, it is not my view
    that Judge Horvath incorrectly  assessed  the  public  interest  to  be
    weighed against the appellant  regarding  his  deportation  as  an  EEA
    national. She set out the law correctly, considered relevant  case  law
    and the substance of her consideration is in line  with  the  framework
    set down by Regulation  21.  The  wording  of  [56]  and  reference  to
    "prevention of crime, the protection of the public moral, the  economic
    wellbeing of the country" is infelicitous but it does not appear to  me
    that, in substance, Judge Horvath materially went beyond the  need  for
    "serious grounds of public policy and security" and the  provisions  of
    Regulation 21 when deciding that the appellant could be deported.

32. There remains the  third  ground,  challenging  regarding  the  judge's
    assessment of the evidence.  I did not find that this had merit,  being
    really a disagreement  rather  than  something  capably  of  showing  a
    material error of law.

33. It was argued for the appellant that a clear finding had to be made  on
    the credibility of the appellant and his wife and  that  where  it  was
    not,  the  assessment  of  their  relationship  and   the   appellant's
    relationship with his stepdaughter and his adult son was not sound. But
    the judge set out a number of reasons why she did not find the evidence
    of the appellant and his wife to be reliable. At [48]  she  points  out
    that the appellant and his partner gave conflicting evidence about  the
    most recent offence, seeking to minimise it. Also set out at [48],  the
    appellant claimed to have stopped drinking but this was not found to be
    reliable where he had continued to offend whilst abusing alcohol. There
    were further numerous inconsistencies identified at [52] as to  whether
    the couple were living together as they claimed. The judge  also  found
    at [52] that the  appellant  had  made  unreliable  statements  to  the
    respondent about his reasons for not being able to return to Lithuania.
      Those  matters  more  than  justified  Judge  Horvath  weighing   the
    relationships that the appellant claimed to have established in the  UK
    at a lower level than put forward by the appellant and his wife.

34. Those findings  also  indicate  that  it  was  not  merely  a  lack  of
    corroborative evidence that led the First-tier Tribunal  to  find  that
    the appellant had more limited relationships in the UK than he claimed.
      Where  the  appellant  sought  to  place  weight  on   his   "strong"
    relationship with his stepdaughter, it was  not  unreasonable  for  the
    judge to seek some independent evidence of  this  beyond  that  of  the
    appellant and his wife. The same is true for the  relationship  of  the
    appellant and his adult son.

35. It is also my view that, in the  context  of  all  of  the  sustainable
    findings on the unreliable evidence provided by the appellant  and  his
    wife, even if it were an irrational point on which to place weight, the
    comment at [52] that it was of concern that  no  parents  attended  the
    wedding could not be material.  It is also my view that putting  weight
    on this point cannot be characterised as irrational so as to amount  to
    an error, in any event.  It was open to the judge to weigh this amongst
    many factors relevant to the seriousness of  the  relationship  of  the
    appellant and his wife.

36. I also  saw  nothing  inconsistent  in  the  judge  finding  a  limited
    relationship between the appellant, his  wife  and  the  stepchild  but
    indicating that it was,  in any event, not unreasonable  for  the  wife
    and to return with him to Lithuania. It is difficult to  see  how  that
    could be so where the child is 11 and has lived in the UK only for  the
    last four years of her life, the wife's period of residence here  being
    similarly limited.

37. I did not find any weight in the argument in the written  grounds  that
    the judge failed to take account of the fact that the appellant was not
    represented before her.  This does entitle him to a preferential burden
    or standard of proof.  Quite properly, Mr Haywood did not seek to  take
    that point much further at the hearing before me.

38. It is therefore my  conclusion  that  Judge  Horvath  did  not  err  in
    concluding that the appellant's deportation was justified even where he
    was an EEA national with permanent residence. Insofar  as  the  grounds
    challenge the First-tier Judge's decision under Article 8 of  the  ECHR
    on the same grounds as those rejected above they must also fail.

39. For the reasons set out above I find no error in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error on a point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]         Date: 4 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


