
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01961/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                            Ms Aleksandra Karpiuk
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, Counsel instructed by Cale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Poland  and  her  date  of  birth  is  7
    January 1985.  She appealed against the decision of the  respondent  to
    deport  her  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The decision was  made  on  16  October  2014.   The
    appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bart-Stewart
    in a determination dated 15  April  2015  following  a  hearing  on  25
    February 2015.  The judge rejected the conclusion in  the  pre-sentence
    report that there was a low risk of the appellant re-offending.

2.   The appellant was granted leave to appeal by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal R A Cox on 5 May 2015. Thus the matter came before me.

3.   At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis conceded that  there  was  force  in
    the appellant's argument in relation to the pre-sentence report and  he
    went on to accept that this  amounted  to  a  material  error.   I  was
    assisted by Mr Jarvis' pragmatism and Ms Smith's skeleton argument.   I
    agree with both parties that the judge fell into error because she  did
    not adequately reason her  decision  to  depart  from  the  conclusions
    reached by the probation  officer  and  failed  to  consider  the  pre-
    sentence report in the  context  of  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks.
    Although the appellant's defence of duress was rejected by a  jury,  it
    was accepted by  the  sentencing  judge  that  she  had  committed  the
    offences under pressure.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal misunderstood the  appellant's  involvement  in
    the  conspiracy  to  burgle  offence.  It  appears  from  the   judge's
    sentencing remarks that the appellant did not enter  the  premises  and
    the judge misunderstood this at [52] of the determination.

6.   I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  heard
    representations from both parties in relation to venue.  It was  agreed
    that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  and
    that none of them could be maintained in the light of the error.  There
    is a need for a re-hearing which will  involve  extensive  fact-finding
    and it was agreed that the matter should be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 19 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

