
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: DA/01057/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 13 April 2015                      |               On 23 April 2015       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Michael Osei Berchie
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ian Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Jacqueline Victor-Mazeli, Counsel instructed by
Victory
     At Law solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the appeal of the claimant against her decision on  2
    June 2014 to make an automatic deportation order against the  claimant,
    a citizen of Ghana,  pursuant to sections 32 and  33  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (as  amended).   The  claimant  is
    currently serving an indefinite term of imprisonment,  with  a  minimum
    term of 11 years.

Claimant's immigration history

 2. The claimant came to the United Kingdom in 1997, age 10 years, to  join
    his parents who were here.  At the age of  14,  on  15  November  2001,
    Stratford Juvenile Court convicted the claimant of theft and gave him a
    non-custodial sentence of three months, plus costs.  On 23 April  2003,
    at the same court, he was again convicted of theft, this time receiving
    a conditional discharge, plus a costs award.  On 15 May  2003,  he  was
    convicted at Stratford Juvenile Court of possessing an offensive weapon
    in a public place and sentenced to 12 months' supervision  order  in  a
    Young Offenders' Institution, plus costs.

 3. The claimant has been detained since 2003, when he was 16 years old. He
    is now 28 years old. On 2 June 2004,  the  claimant  was  convicted  of
    murder at the Central Criminal Court. He was  sentenced  to  indefinite
    imprisonment, with a minimum term of 11 years.  The  claimant  did  not
    appeal either the conviction or the sentence.

 4. In his sentencing remarks, Judge Stephens QC described a vicious attack
    by the claimant and his cousin on a young man of 19 who had  done  them
    no harm:  it seems to have been in  revenge  for  the  actions  of  the
    victim's friend, who had earlier beaten the  claimant  with  a  weapon.
    The claimant went home, fetched a knife, and stabbed the  victim  twice
    in the back and neck.  The judge considered that he  intended,  at  the
    very least, serious bodily harm and probably the  victim's  death.  The
    claimant was described as having previous convictions for possession of
    an offensive weapon, a cosh, and a knife, on different  occasions.  The
    judge considered him a 'dangerous young man who will need many years of
    discipline and training before you can  safely  be  let  out  onto  the
    streets again'.

 5. During the period 2003-2009, the  claimant  while  in  prison  was  the
    subject of 10 adjudications in respect of his continued poor behaviour,
    the final one being an assault on a prison officer in  2009,  which  he
    claimed was unintentional.

 6. On 14 November 2006 the claimant was granted indefinite leave to remain
    as his father's dependant.  He was then 19 years old.   The  claimant's
    father and grandmother died in 2010 while he was in prison.  His mother
    and two sisters are settled in the United Kingdom, but he still has  an
    aunt in Ghana.

 7. On 20 May 2009, the  claimant  was  given  an  opportunity  to  provide
    reasons why he should not be deported as a foreign criminal. On 2  June
    2014, the Secretary of State decided that the public interest  required
    his deportation and that there were no circumstances  under  Article  8
    ECHR which would outweigh that public interest.

First-tier Tribunal appeal

 8. On 15 December 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert  held  that  the
    claimant could not meet the Immigration Rules, in particular  paragraph
    398 thereof, but went on to consider and allow the appeal under Article
    8 ECHR outside the Rules.





Grounds of appeal

 9. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal. Her  grounds  of
    appeal are somewhat diffuse.  However, the principal point  which  they
    make is that the Immigration Rules are a complete code in  relation  to
    deportation, such that there is no room for a deportation appeal to  be
    allowed under Article 8 ECHR outside those Rules (see  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192) and that, applying DS (India) v SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 544, even if it could properly be said that there was no  risk
    of re-offending, in appropriate  circumstances  the  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom of a serious offender was in the public interest,  which
    extended beyond the risk of re-offending to the need for deterrence and
    prevention of serious crime and public abhorrence of such offences.

10. On 13 January 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted permission
    to appeal on the basis of all the grounds of  appeal  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State.

The hearing

11. On 10 April 2015, the claimant purported to serve  a  Rule  24  notice.
    The notice was out of time and did not comply with the requirements  of
    Rule 24(3), nor did it contain any  application  for  an  extension  of
    time.  We agreed to treat it as the claimant's skeleton  argument.   We
    also have the benefit of a skeleton  argument  from  the  Secretary  of
    State.  We have had regard to both of those documents, and to the  oral
    arguments by the parties at the hearing today. Both Mr  Jarvis  and  Ms
    Victor-Mazeli made submissions on Article 8 outside the Rules, as  well
    as within the codified scheme in the Immigration Rules themselves.

12. The arguments advanced on behalf of the claimant  by  Ms  Victor-Mazeli
    were directed at Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules:  Counsel was unaware
    of the effect of the Court of Appeal decision in MF (Nigeria)  and  her
    arguments relied on the Upper Tribunal  decision  which  that  judgment
    overturned.

Discussion

13. We remind ourselves of the conclusion reached  by  the  Master  of  the
    Rolls in MF's case, giving the judgment of the court.  After  examining
    the guidance entitled "Criminality Guidance for Article 8  ECHR  Cases"
    issued to Home Office caseworkers as  to  the  meaning  of  the  phrase
    'exceptional circumstances' at paragraph 398 of the Immigration  Rules,
    he said this:

         "14.  ...The latest version of this document was  issued  in  March
         2013 to assist caseworkers in  applying  the  new  rules.  At  this
         stage, it is sufficient to refer to what is said about  the  phrase
         "exceptional circumstances" where it appears in rule 398:

             "In determining whether a case is exceptional, decision-makers
             must consider all relevant factors that weigh  in  favour  and
             against deportation.

         "Exceptional" does not mean "unusual" or "unique". Decision  makers
         should be mindful that whilst all cases are to  an  extent  unique,
         those unique factors do not generally render them exceptional.  For
         these purposes,  exceptional  cases  should  be  numerically  rare.
         Furthermore, a case is not exceptional just because the  exceptions
         to deportation in Rule 399 or Rule 399A have been missed by a small
         margin.  Instead,  "exceptional"  means  circumstances   in   which
         deportation would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
         the individual or their family such that deportation would  not  be
         proportionate. That is likely to be the case only very rarely."

         15.  On the other hand, the document issued in March  2013  defines
         exceptional circumstances and states that, in determining whether a
         case is exceptional, all relevant factors in favour of and  against
         deportation are to be considered  under  the  new  rules.  On  this
         approach, it is difficult to  see  what  scope  there  is  for  any
         consideration outside the new rules: i.e. they provide  a  complete
         code."

14. At paragraph 104 of his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  the
    present appeal acknowledged that the claimant had not made out his case
    under the Rules.  He considered that 'although  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances as outlined above, that notwithstanding that, the  public
    interest  under  the  Immigration  Rules  would  weigh  in  favour   of
    deportation'.  At paragraph  131,  he  refused  the  application  under
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.

15. At paragraphs 105-130, the judge purported to continue to consider  the
    question of Article 8 outside the Rules,  before  allowing  the  appeal
    outside the Rules.  He erred in law in so doing and  we  therefore  set
    aside his determination and restore the decision within the Rules which
    appears at paragraph 104 and 131.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    succeeds and we substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's  appeal
    against her decision to deport him to  Ghana  as  a  foreign  criminal,
    pursuant  to  paragraphs  32-33  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 (as amended).

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. We set aside the decision. We  re-make
the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Signed



Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

