
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01416/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2015                 |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                kerrick dove
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson of Counsel instructed by Turpin &
                    Miller Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  14  April  1989.   He
    arrived in this country in December 2002 and  shortly  after  absconded
    and the Home Office's next contact  with  the  appellant  followed  his
    arrest on 2 August 2010 following an attempted robbery.   On  28  March
    2011 the appellant was convicted for the offence of  attempted  robbery
    and possessing an imitation firearm and was sentenced on 10  June  2011
    to a term of imprisonment of eight years.  On 8 July 2014 a deportation
    order was made under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant appealed and  his  appeal  came  before  a  panel  on  17
    February 2015.  The panel dismissed his  appeal.   An  application  for
    permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    permission was granted by a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal notified
    to the parties on 6  August  2015.   Directions  were  issued  and  the
    parties were notified of the hearing date on 19 August 2015.

3.   The panel considered  the  appellant's  offence  and  referred  to  the
    sentencing remarks of the  trial  judge.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had  participated  in  a  professionally  planned  commercial
    robbery although he had denied before the jury that  he  had  not  been
    present.  The judge rejected the claim made by  the  appellant  through
    his Counsel that he had taken part under duress.  The  judge  took  the
    view that it had been a planned  robbery  because  a  getaway  car  was
    positioned about a quarter of a mile down the  road.   The  judge  took
    into consideration  the  appellant's  youth  and  responsibilities  for
    children and noted  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  had
    committed any other criminal offences and that he was not carrying  the
    gun.  However the impact  on  the  victims  was  considerable  and  the
    probation reports were not much help.  The judge  found  there  was  no
    evidence that persuaded him that imprisonment for public protection was
    required and expressed the hope that at  the  end  of  the  appellant's
    period of imprisonment he would be deported  because  he  regarded  his
    presence as not being conducive to the  public  good,  a  matter  which
    would be for the Home Secretary rather than him.  The  panel  then  set
    out in full the respondent's decision  letter  of  9  July  2014.   The
    respondent considered among other things the  appellant's  relationship
    with his children.   The  concluding  paragraphs  of  the  respondent's
    decision set out in the determination read as follows:

         "You  should  know  that  there  is  an  important  distinction  in
         deportation cases as it will 'rarely be proportionate' to uphold an
         order of removal where it severs  a  genuine  relationship  with  a
         spouse  or  child  is  usually  directed  at  removal   cases   not
         deportation cases.  However, the reason for this difference is that
         serious criminal offending  may  have  an  effect  on  the  overall
         balance when considering the issue of proportionality under Article
         8(2)  as  against  the  legitimate  aim  of  preventing  crime  and
         disorder.

         The Home Office is satisfied that your conviction on 28 March  2011
         for attempted robbery and  possessing  an  imitation  firearm  when
         committing the Schedule 1 offence and for which you were  sentenced
         to 8 months imprisonment is one which may be regarded  as  serious,
         and which compels the Home Office to give significant weight to the
         question of protecting society against crime, and  the  health  and
         morals of others.

         The risk of reoffending, while a  factor  to  be  weighted  in  the
         balance is not the most important thing to consider  when  weighing
         up the public interest test under  Article  8(2),  particularly  in
         serious cases.  Other public interest  factors,  namely  deterrence
         and the expression of revulsion at  the  gravity  of  the  criminal
         behaviour, are  given  greater  weight  than  the  possible  future
         behaviour of the individual offender.

         On the evidence available there is nothing exceptional  about  your
         case and having considered your case, we  are  satisfied  that  the
         decision to remove  you  to  Jamaica  is  in  accordance  with  the
         relevant legislation and the Home Office's  published  policies  in
         the prevention of disorder and crime.

         The Secretary of State is therefore satisfied that the  nature  and
         severity of your offence is a factor which fully engages the public
         interest in securing your removal from the United  Kingdom  as  the
         subject of a Deportation Order, both in the interests of preventing
         further offending of this nature on your part  and  establishing  a
         deterrent."

4.   The panel's determination is  composed  in  a  structured  and  helpful
    manner and  having  set  out  the  respondent's  case  it  reviews  the
    appellant's case which apart from being based on the relationship  with
    his children and their mother and sister raised issues under Article  3
    because of his mental health and the effect on  that  of  his  removal.
    The panel refers to the appellant's witness statement, the  appellant's
    mother's  evidence  and  a  letter  written  from  the  mother  of  the
    appellant's children.  It was the appellant's case that there were very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A.

5.   The panel then record the respective submissions made by  the  parties.
    The respondent pointed out that Section 117C of the  2002  Act  applied
    and that there were no compelling circumstances.

6.   Counsel argued that there was a strong risk of suicide  and  emphasised
    the relationships with the appellant's children and the  appellant  now
    posed a low risk of re-offending and had taken steps to reform  and  in
    the light of the length of time he had  spent  in  the  United  Kingdom
    together with his mental ill-health were all compelling  factors  which
    made deportation disproportionate.

7.   The panel then give reasons for their decision in relation  to  Article
    3 and the appellant's mental health.  It is common ground that it  sets
    out correctly the test by reference to extracts from J v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  629.   The  panel  then
    state as follows:

         "25. We have not been provided  with  any  evidence  to  show  that
             Jamaica does not have effective mechanisms to reduce the  risk
             of suicide on arrival.  As the court made clear in J if  there
             are effective mechanisms that will weigh heavily  against  the
             appellant's claim that removal  will  violate  his  Article  3
             rights.

         26.  We have been supplied  with  the  appellant's  prison  medical
             records.  They show that when he was first at HMP  Huntercombe
             in June  2011  it  was  noted  that  he  had  no  thoughts  of
             deliberate self-harm.  In April 2012 in another review he  had
             not tried to harm himself in prison.  The  appellant  had  not
             received treatment from a psychiatrist outside of prison.  The
             appellant has displayed demanding and argumentative  behaviour
             in healthcare in prison.  He  has  walked  out  of  visits  to
             healthcare when he was told he could not be issued with  drugs
             he had  requested.   He  has  been  reprimanded  for  his  bad
             behaviour  and  failure  to   co-operate.    His   obstructive
             behaviour has led to him  being  informed  that  he  would  be
             removed if he was not willing to co-operate (22  April  2012).
             On 22 April 2012 he claimed that he had mental health problems
             but he did not  know  what  they  were  and  a  mental  health
             referral was completed.  In May 2012 he had  a  mental  health
             review claiming he was feeling depressed.  On 7  May  2012  he
             attended healthcare demanding and shouting  for  Savlon  cream
             and after being told  it  was  not  in  stock  he  called  the
             healthcare nurse a liar.  The healthcare nurse felt threatened
             by his behaviour.

         27.  The healthcare  notes  make  depressing  reading  showing  the
             appellant  as  a  disruptive  and  aggressive   man   who   is
             confrontational whenever he does not get his own way.  In June
             2012 he said he felt depressed and in July 2012 he claimed  he
             had banged his head against a cell wall and  had  been  having
             stupid thoughts about hurting himself.  This was classified as
             the appellant disclosing he  had  self-harmed.   He  had  also
             taken a higher dose of his medication.  By August  2012  there
             were no reported thoughts of suicide or self-harm.  By January
             2013 at a mental health team review  he  was  referred  for  a
             mental health assessment from education staff stating  he  was
             displaying destructive behaviour in class and mentioned he had
             voices in his head and drew a picture of himself in a  coffin.
             Shortly  thereafter  he   met   with   a   mental   healthcare
             professional and told the mental healthcare professional  that
             he does not need any mental health input  as  he  was  feeling
             fine.  He was noted as being bright and cheerful in mood.

         28.  On 19 February 2013 he was seen again by the mental healthcare
             professional who noted that the  appellant  has  been  abusing
             drugs and alcohol since the age of 11.  He has  a  generalised
             anxiety disorder feeling nervous, anxious or on edge  and  not
             being able to stop worrying.  He has trouble relaxing  and  is
             so restless that it  is  hard  to  sit  still.   He  felt  his
             antidepressant medication was not working and he  had  stopped
             taking it.

         29.  By 31 January 2014 during a mental health review the appellant
             was well presented, rational and coherent  and  there  was  no
             evidence  of  any  mental  health  illness.   He  was  forward
             thinking and engaging in prison life.

         30.  The most recent mental health review  is  dated  29  September
             2014  in  which  the  appellant  continued  to  state  he  had
             nightmares of killing himself.  His speech had  normal  rhythm
             rate and tone and conversation was  reciprocal.   He  reported
             his mood as good and his mood was  within  the  normal  range.
             Medication had helped him when he was initially  commenced  on
             it but he manages now to do well without it.   The  healthcare
             worker concluded

                  'There is no immediate risk to Kerrick but this is  likely
                  to change when he has failed his bail hearing and has been
                  issued with deportation  order.   Based  on  the  possible
                  trigger and a safeguarding in  place  (wing  staff  to  be
                  notified by UKBA of any communication with Kerrick  before
                  he has been informed) I have recommended for the  ACCT  to
                  be closed'.

         31.  In the medical report by Dr Beata Godlewska at  pages  120-135
             of the  appellant's  bundle  Dr  Godlewska  goes  through  the
             appellant's prison medical records in some detail at pages 5-8
             of her report and after assessing the appellant on 6  December
             2014 she comes to a diagnosis at paragraph 2.3.2 (page 11)  of
             her  report.   She  finds  that  the  appellant  suffers  from
             recurrent  depressive  disorder  with  a   'current   moderate
             episode'.  She refers to the definition of adjustment disorder
             at 2.3.2.3 but this does not form part  of  the  diagnosis  at
             2.3.2.  She considers  his  symptoms  may  be  linked  to  the
             stressor of removal to Jamaica and at 2.3.2.5  reiterates  she
             is more  inclined  to  a  diagnosis  of  recurrent  depressive
             disorder  over  adjustment  disorder  and  gives  her  reasons
             stating that 'Mr Dove's symptoms at the time of the assessment
             were more severe than 'mild'.'   She  notes  he  has  reported
             symptoms of panic  attacks  and  is  of  the  opinion  he  has
             elements of PTSD following witnessing another prisoner  trying
             to cut his wrists.  At 2.3.3 she assesses risk of suicide/self
             harm if he is removed to Jamaica and concludes the risk  could
             substantially increase if the appellant  knew  he  was  to  be
             removed to Jamaica.  And the risk is strongly related  to  the
             threat of his deportation and how realistic  and  imminent  it
             is.  She notes all the protective factors are  linked  to  his
             life in  the  United  Kingdom  including  family  support  and
             support of close friends and his children are  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  She notes he may have  some  traits  of  impulsivity
             which can be a risk factor when it comes to assessing  suicide
             risk.  In short the findings of Dr Godlewska are in accordance
             with the notes recorded by the healthcare staff looking  after
             the appellant in prison.  There is no disagreement between the
             various professions in charge of his care.

         32.  It is quite clear from reading the medical notes that those in
             charge of the appellant's care in prison are well aware of his
             thoughts of self-harm and suicide and have a plan in place  to
             manage the same which includes the wing staff  being  notified
             of any decision concerning the appellant before the  appellant
             himself  receives  notification.   We   are   satisfied   that
             communication  of  any  decision  that  his  appeal  has  been
             dismissed will be carefully monitored by those tasked with the
             care  of  the  appellant  in  detention.   We  are   therefore
             satisfied that a decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  does  not
             amount to a breach of the appellant's protected  rights  under
             Article 3 because the risk of  suicide  will  be  managed  and
             contained.

         33.  We now turn to whether the risk of suicide can be managed  and
             contained in Jamaica.  There is no evidence  to  suggest  that
             the appellant's medication  (which  he  refuses  to  take)  is
             unavailable  in  Jamaica.   Furthermore  following  J  if  the
             appellant's  mental  health  deteriorates  from  his   current
             diagnosed moderate depressed state then the respondent  should
             ensure the appellant is removed  with  a  medical  escort  and
             receives  medical  care  on  arrival.   Overall  we  find  the
             appellant's mental health issues do not amount to sufficiently
             serious and compelling reason  to  prevent  removal  from  the
             United Kingdom."

8.   The panel then turned to Article 8 and concluded its  determination  as
    follows:

         "34. The appellant's article 8 claim focuses  on  his  eldest  son.
             The evidence before us about the two sons and their mother  is
             very limited.  The appellant has disclosed the  bare  minimum.
             His mother has given the Tribunal more information.   What  we
             do know is that the appellant's relationship with  the  mother
             of his children was very troubled  and  blighted  by  domestic
             violence and that  when  the  eldest  child  was  born  social
             Services removed the child from his parents and placed him  in
             temporary foster care and determined that  the  appellant  was
             not suitable to care for his son.  His mother came forward  to
             keep the child within the family  and  was  able  to  persuade
             Social Services and the Family Court  she  should  be  granted
             guardianship of the child.  Guardianship was granted to her on
             condition the  application  did  not  reside  with  her.   The
             removal of his son and custody  being  given  to  the  child's
             grandmother predated the index offence.  After the  child  was
             removed the appellant conceived another child  with  the  same
             mother.  S. was born on 24  March  2011  and  Social  Services
             informed the mother that if she continued to see the appellant
             her second son would be taken into care and  placed  with  the
             appellant's mother.  If it self evidence that  she  ceased  to
             see the appellant because she has been able to keep her second
             son.  According to the appellant's mother  both  she  and  the
             appellant were allowed  supervised  contact  with  the  eldest
             child at  the  appellant's  mother's  discretion.   She  would
             really like the appellant to come and live with  her  and  his
             eldest son and help her with the care of his  son.   There  is
             some  difficulty  with  her  evidence  about  the  appellant's
             contact with the eldest child because it is  not  corroborated
             by any evidence from  Social  Services  and  no  Family  Court
             orders have been placed before us.  In  the  absence  of  that
             crucial evidence we do not accept that the appellant has  been
             permitted supervised contact with his eldest son  even  though
             we accept that such contact takes place when  the  appellant's
             mother visits her son and takes the eldest child with her  and
             when telephone calls to his mother take place.

         35.  The Article 8 assessment has been hindered by the  absence  of
             any report from social services that the appellant's  presence
             is now desirable in his children's  lives  and  would  not  be
             opposed by social services.  There is  nothing  before  us  to
             suggest that Social Services are happy for  the  appellant  to
             live with his mother and his son.  There is nothing before  us
             to support the  assertion  that  he  is  permitted  supervised
             contact.  In other words we are not  able  to  find  from  the
             evidence  before  us  that  if  this  appeal  is  allowed  the
             appellant will be able to maintain the sort  of  contact  with
             his sons and the presence  in  their  lives  he  professes  to
             desire.

         36.  In any event the appellant has only seen  his  youngest  child
             once approximately four years ago.  The youngest will have  no
             memory of him.  His mother has contact  with  the  appellant's
             mother but has not given her address  on  her  letter  to  the
             Tribunal and she has requested  all  contact  is  through  the
             appellant's mother.

         37.  As matters  stand  the  appellant  has  no  contact  with  the
             youngest child and telephone  contact  and  occasional  visits
             from his eldest son.  There is  no  evidence  before  us  from
             Social Services that ongoing contact will be permitted if  the
             appellant  is  released  from  detention  and  his  appeal  is
             allowed.  There is no credible or any evidence before us  that
             the best interests of the appellant's eldest son will  be  met
             by ongoing contact with  the  appellant  and  the  appellant's
             involvement in his life.  Such evidence from  Social  Services
             was necessary for us to find the child's best interests  would
             be harmed by removal of the appellant to Jamaica.

         38.  On the evidence  before  us  we  find  paragraph  399  of  the
             Immigration Rules does not apply: we find that  the  appellant
             does not have a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
             with the eldest child  because  Social  Services  removed  the
             eldest  child  and  in  care  proceedings   guardianship   was
             conferred  on  his  mother  not  the  appellant.   His  mother
             exercises parental responsibility for  the  eldest  son.   The
             appellant never lived with  the  youngest  child  and  has  no
             contact with the youngest or the  child's  mother.   Paragraph
             399A of the Immigration Rules is not  applicable  because  the
             appellant is not under the age of 25.

         39.  The factors in favour of the appellant are that he  has  lived
             in the United Kingdom since the age of 13 and has spent almost
             half of his life in the United Kingdom.  He has developed ties
             to the United Kingdom in the form of his mother, half  sister,
             his eldest son and his friends and  education  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  He has not lived in Jamaica for 12 years and he left
             Jamaica as a child.  He did not get on with his grandmother  -
             she was too strict.  His mother is estranged from her sisters.
               The  appellant  is  suffering  from  depression  which  will
             intensify if he is  removed  to  Jamaica.   The  appellant  is
             likely to become suicidal if removed.

         40.  The factors in favour of the respondent are that the appellant
             has never lived lawfully in the United Kingdom.  He has  never
             worked and has shown a complete disregard for the laws of  the
             United Kingdom.  He has committed a very serious offence.   He
             has previously visited violence on the mother of his two sons.
              His eldest was taken into care then permitted  to  live  with
             the appellant's mother on condition the appellant did not live
             with her.  He has no contact with the mother of  his  youngest
             child or with the child.  There is no Social Services evidence
             indicating previous objections to the  appellant  living  with
             his mother and having contact  with  his  children  have  been
             overcome.  The  appellant  has  a  grandmother  with  whom  he
             previously lived in Jamaica and she is aware of  the  proposal
             to deport him.  He has two aunts in Jamaica.  There is a  need
             to deter foreign nationals from committing crime in the United
             Kingdom.  The interests of society require the appellant to be
             removed from the United Kingdom.  His mental health care needs
             can be met in Jamaica.  The appellant's care and return can be
             medically managed to ensure he is safely returned.  His mother
             and half sister can visit him in  Jamaica.   If  permitted  by
             Social Servicers she can take his eldest  son  to  visit  him.
             The telephone contact with his mother  and  son  can  continue
             from Jamaica in the same way they continue while the appellant
             is in prison.  The Trial Judge recommended deportation.

         41.  We have considered the factors in favour of the appellant  and
             taken into account the guidance in Maslov v  Austria  1638/03.
             We have taken into account the medical evidence placed  before
             us.  We have considered the evidence of the appellant and  his
             mother.  There is no evidence about the best interests of  the
             appellant's eldest child before us save that  Social  Services
             took a decision the best interests of the child  required  his
             removal from the appellant and  his  former  partner  and  the
             placement with the appellant's mother  was  on  condition  the
             appellant  did  not  live  with  her.   We  agree   with   the
             Respondent's assessment that it is in the  best  interests  of
             the appellant's children that they  remain  respectively  with
             their mother and grandmother in the United Kingdom.   Overall,
             weighing the competing factors in  the  scales,  we  find  the
             seriousness of  his  offence  is  such  that  the  balance  on
             proportionality tips in favour of  the  respondent.   We  find
             that the appellant's removal is proportionate to the  aims  to
             be achieved.  We uphold the respondent's decision.   We  would
             add that even if the appellant did have a subsisting  parental
             relationship with his eldest son that would not  outweigh  the
             factors in favour of the respondent and it  would  not  render
             the respondent's decision disproportionate.

         42.  Overall we find there are no exceptional circumstances in  the
             appellant's family life or his mental  health  which  outweigh
             the  public  interest  in  his  deportation  from  the  United
             Kingdom."

9.    Counsel  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  referred  to   the
    psychiatrist's report to which the panel make reference in paragraph 31
    of the decision set out above.  She referred to paragraph 2.3.3.7 where
    the psychiatrist gives her opinion that the appellant's risk of suicide
    was very likely to increase if a decision  was  taken  to  deport  him.
    Counsel referred to paragraph 2.3.3.10 and the protective factors which
    all seem to be linked to the appellant's life in the UK.   One  of  the
    most important protective factors was the appellant's children.

10.  Counsel took up the point made in the grounds of appeal that the  panel
    had misdirected itself in relation  to  the  risk  of  suicide  in  the
    concluding sentence of paragraph 33 despite  setting  out  the  correct
    test in J.  The  panel  had  erred  in  not  taking  into  account  the
    protective factors mentioned by the psychiatrist.

11.  The panel had also erred in paragraph 32 in failing to appreciate  that
    the appellant was no longer in prison but was  now  detained  at  Brook
    House Immigration Removal Centre.

12.  In relation to Article 8 (ground 2) the Tribunal had erred  in  failing
    to consider that the appellant had been assessed as posing a  low  risk
    of re-conviction.  He had undertaken courses while in  prison.   Simply
    mentioning matters at the start of the decision (see paragraph 11)  was
    not sufficient.

13.  In relation to the point that the panel had erred in concluding  as  it
    did in relation to the appellant's eldest  son  (ground  3)  the  point
    relied on by the panel concerning the appellant's mother's evidence had
    not been  raised  with  her.   Counsel  acknowledged  that  no  further
    evidence had been put in dealing with the complaint that there had been
    procedural unfairness (see paragraph 17 of the grounds).  In  paragraph
    18 the point was taken that the panel had  referred  to  the  appellant
    having "previously visited violence on the mother  of  his  two  sons".
    Counsel acknowledged that violence might not  be  limited  to  physical
    abuse and it  was  acknowledged  in  the  grounds  that  the  appellant
    admitted he had been verbally aggressive with his partner but  had  not
    been physically violent.

14.  Mr Melvin relied on the response that  had  been  filed  on  11  August
    2015.  No further evidence had been provided to support the contentions
    made in the grounds despite the directions that  had  been  given.   Mr
    Melvin referred to LC (China) [2014] EWCA Civ 1310, where the appellant
    had been convicted, as in this case, of robbery.

15.  Mr Melvin submitted that  the  panel  had  considered  the  case  of  J
    correctly and had made sufficient findings  in  paragraphs  25  to  33.
    There had been  little  medical  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    situation in immigration detention.  There was sparse  family  life  in
    this case.  The appellant had been in prison for a large proportion  of
    the life of his children.  The grounds simply re-argued  the  case  and
    raised no error of  law.   There  had  moreover  been  ample  time  for
    evidence to be produced either at the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  before
    this Tribunal.

16.  In reply Counsel referred to the Rule 15A notice which had  been  given
    in at the hearing stating that the appellant was  "likely  to  seek  to
    adduce further evidence in support of his case under Rule  15A  if  the
    appeal were to be remitted or adjourned and that the following evidence
    was anticipated: "an updated witness statement from the appellant;  and
    updated medical evidence."

17.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered the points made by both sides.  As  I  have  noted
    above the determination in this case was carefully structured  and  the
    points made by both sides were summarised at various stages during  the
    course of the determination.

18.  In relation to Article 3, as I have mentioned there is no dispute  that
    the panel directed itself correctly in paragraph 24  of  the  decision.
    Reference is also made to that  case  in  paragraphs  5  to  8  of  the
    decision where the  panel  sets  out  the  appellant's  case.   It  was
    submitted  that  there  are  strong  grounds  for  believing  that  the
    appellant if returned  faced  a  real  risk  of  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment and at paragraph 24 the relevant paragraph is set out in full
    and indeed the panel sets out in full paragraphs  25  to  31  from  the
    decision.  It is quite clear that the panel had in mind what  was  said
    at paragraph 31 of J in referring to the need  for  the  respondent  to
    take  care  when  removing  the  appellant  should  his  mental  health
    deteriorate.   The  panel  further  had  in  mind  the  views  of   the
    psychiatrist  about  the  protective  factors  being  linked   to   the
    appellant's life in  the  United  Kingdom  as  it  refers  to  that  in
    paragraph 31 of the determination.  In paragraph 33 the panel refer  to
    the ability of the appellant to contact his mother  by  telephone  from
    Jamaica in the same way that he did from prison.  Again I do  not  find
    that the panel overlooked a relevant matter to which it had made recent
    reference.

19.   In  relation  to  the  claimed  mistake  of  fact  the  psychiatrist's
    assessment was made on 6 December 2014 and  the  report  was  dated  15
    December 2014.  The psychiatrist was not clear about the exact date  of
    the appellant's transfer from prison to Brook House but she was told by
    the appellant that he had been at Brook House for about two months  and
    the last medical record from the prison was made on 30 September  2014.
    The psychiatrist records in paragraph 2.3.1.8 of her  report  that  she
    had no access to any medical  documentation  covering  the  applicant's
    stay in Brook House.  It is clear from the determination that the  most
    recent mental health review was dated 29 September  2014  and  this  is
    referred to at page 8 of the psychiatrist's report.   The  appeal  came
    before the panel as I have mentioned in February 2015.  No  steps  have
    been taken to update matters.  The panel  considered  all  the  medical
    evidence made available to it.  Insofar as there  was  any  mistake  of
    fact in paragraph 32 of the decision I am not satisfied that it  was  a
    mistake amounting to an error of law.  Insofar as there  has  been  any
    change in the appellant's mental state  the  representatives  have  had
    ample time to put in evidence.

20.  In the grounds it was submitted that there was unfairness in  that  the
    panel  stated  that  the  appellant's   mother's   evidence   was   not
    corroborated by any evidence  from  social  services  or  family  court
    orders.

21.  In my view the panel did not arguably act unfairly in paragraph  34  of
    the determination given that this was a case concerning the welfare  of
    a child.  It was right to probe matters as it did  and  conclude  there
    was some difficulty with the appellant's mother's evidence.   Again  it
    would have been an easy matter for evidence to be lodged on the  issue.
    Nothing  has  been  done.   The  belated  Rule  15A  notice  gives   no
    particulars whatsoever.  Indeed it is not anticipated that  there  will
    be further evidence from the mother and nothing is  said  about  social
    services or family court orders.  The most that is promised is an up-to-
    date witness statement from the appellant and updated medical evidence.
     The directions  made  the  position  quite  clear  and  refer  to  the
    Procedure Rules at paragraph 15(2A).

22.  The panel is criticised for failing  to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant was assessed as posing a low risk of  re-conviction  although
    the panel make express  reference  to  this  in  paragraph  11  of  its
    decision.  As the respondent points out the appellant was convicted  of
    a particularly serious crime and the panel had set out the respondent's
    case on the issue on page 10 of its determination and I  have  set  out
    the relevant extract above.  The risk of re-offending was not the  most
    important thing to consider when weighing up the public  interest.   It
    is worth making the point that the panel's decision would have been the
    same in this case even if it had been satisfied that the appellant  did
    have a subsisting parental relationship  with  his  eldest  son  -  see
    paragraph 41 of the determination.

23.  A point is taken in paragraph 18 of  the  grounds  though  not  perhaps
    pressed by Ms Robinson that the panel had erred in concluding that  the
    appellant  had  previously  visited  violence  on  the  mother  of  his
    children.  The appellant admits that he had  been  verbally  aggressive
    with his partner but had not been physically violent.  It is clear that
    domestic violence is not restricted to physical violence and  this  has
    indeed been accepted for some time by the respondent - see for  example
    Ishtiaq [2007] EWCA Civ 386 at paragraph 14 where the Court  of  Appeal
    makes reference to the relevant  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
    which  define  domestic  violence  as  "any  incident  of   threatening
    behaviour,  violence  or  abuse   (psychological,   physical,   sexual,
    financial or emotional) between adults who are or  have  been  intimate
    partners or family members, regardless of gender  or  sexuality".   The
    current guidance refers to a new definition of domestic  violence  from
    31 March 2013 which includes this sentence:

         "There is no difference between psychological  (mental)  abuse  and
         physical abuse when it comes to assessing if a person has been  the
         victim of domestic violence."

    I am not satisfied that the panel misdirected itself in paragraph 40 in
    referring to the respondent's case including the  appellant  previously
    visiting violence on the mother of his children.

24.  For the reasons I have given, this challenge to  the  panel's  decision
    fails.

25.  At the hearing it was agreed that the determination should be  sent  to
    the appellant's representatives and not the appellant directly.

Notice of Decision

26.  The decision of the panel dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  stands.
    The panel made no anonymity direction and I make none.

FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed   Date 22 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
