
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01482/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 March 2014                              |On 29 April 2014             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

   THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE PARKER SITTING AS A DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER
                                  TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                               MR GERALD KATO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Adams, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  by  the  appellant,  Mr  Gerald  Kato,  against  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, comprising Judge S  J  Clarke
    and Mr Bompas, promulgated on 14 January 2014.  The  appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal is  a  national  of  Uganda.
    His date of birth was 28 September  1990.   He  actually  came  to  the
    United Kingdom on 26 May 2009 when he had  become  18  but  he  entered
    under provisions that enabled him to enter as a child, that application
    having been made before he reached his 18th birthday.

 2. At the time of the determination, he was 23 years of age.  His  parents
    are UK citizens.  The appeal was in respect of a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order on 25 June 2013, by virtue of  Section  5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and under Section 32(4)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007, the removal of the appellant being considered by  the  respondent
    to be conducive to the public good.

 3. The appellant was convicted on  19  September  2012  at  Kingston-upon-
    Thames Crown Court of a conspiracy and/or supply of a  controlled  drug
    of Class A and he received a sentence of 20 months'  imprisonment.   He
    was granted a home detention curfew  on  31  January  2013  on  licence
    conditions with an evening curfew  and  his  custodial  sentence  ended
    formally on 24 May 2013.

 4. Following  that  conviction,  he  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation on 4  January  2012,  which  also  gave  him  the
    opportunity to raise any exceptions or reasons why  he  should  not  be
    deported from the United Kingdom and the appellant raised private  life
    under Article 8.

 5. As we have already indicated, he came  here  to  join  his  mother  and
    stepfather and also there was an 18 year old sister  and  13  year  old
    brother.  They also were British citizens.

 6. The appellant's younger  brother,  Liam,  is  deaf  and  dumb  and  the
    appellant was employed as a carer to help him socialise, such as taking
    him to table tennis every Thursday night, football on weekends  and  to
    social centres and clubs.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal recited that the respondent  applied  paragraph
    398B of the Immigration Rules because the appellant was sentenced to  a
    period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at  least  twelve
    months.  The respondent then went on to  consider  the  application  of
    paragraph 399 or 399A.  Neither of those applied but the position still
    had to be considered as one of exceptionality under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR pursuant to the authority of MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

 8.  The  respondent  had  considered  whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances, particularly arising from the position of Liam, as noted
    above, but decided that the circumstances were  not  compelling  within
    the rationale of MF (Nigeria) and therefore concluded that  the  public
    interest in the removal of the appellant as having committed a  serious
    criminal offence outweighed any Article 8 aspects.

 9. The Tribunal of course was  not  bound  by  the  determination  of  the
    respondent and had to decide for itself  whether  the  deportation  was
    conducive to the public interest and  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances meaning compelling reasons why deportation should not  be
    ordered in this particular case.

10. Permission was granted by Judge Simpson of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    he said in paragraph 4 of that decision:

         "The grounds do identify an arguable material error of law in  that
         the judge failed to consider the implications of MF  (Nigeria)  and
         Kabia or to consider the guidelines in Maslov v Austria."

11. In particular, it is said in the grounds that the Tribunal did  err  in
    law because it had not dealt adequately or at all with certain matters,
    for example it had not dealt sufficiently with the nature  and  gravity
    of the offence.  However, in what we would regard as an admirably clear
    and succinct decision,  the  Tribunal  did  deal  at  some  length,  at
    paragraph 12 and then also at 24 and 25, with the very  serious  nature
    of the offence resulting in a sentence, as  we  have  recorded,  of  20
    months' imprisonment.

12. It is also said that the Tribunal did not deal adequately with the risk
    of re-offending but again the Tribunal  at  paragraph  28  specifically
    noted that the letter dated 30 July 2013 from the Probation Officer had
    assessed the appellant as only opposing a low risk of harm and low risk
    of re-offending.  Therefore, it appears to us  that  the  Tribunal  had
    firmly in mind an element that was certainly positive in favour of  the
    appellant but, notwithstanding that positive factor, which it should be
    noted is found frequently in cases of this kind, the Tribunal  did  not
    regard that as sufficiently compelling, either  standing  alone  or  in
    conjunction with other factors.

13. It is also said that the Tribunal did not have sufficient regard to the
    fact that the appellant had not offended since he had left prison on 31
    January 2013.  We should note in that connection that the period during
    which he had been at liberty following serving the prison sentence,  as
    explained, had only been one year and  therefore  cannot  intrinsically
    carry very substantial weight, although, of course, some  credit  needs
    to be given for that period where no further offences  appear  to  have
    been committed.  However, again, the Tribunal, as we  have  said  in  a
    careful and thorough decision, albeit  succinct,  at  paragraph  3  did
    recognise the position.

14. It is also said that the Tribunal did not deal  with  the  position  in
    regard to the appellant's return to Uganda.  However, this was a matter
    that was before the Tribunal and was considered by them.  At  paragraph
    23 the Tribunal noted that the appellant had not lived continuously  in
    the UK for at least half his life  but  he  had  ties  to  Uganda,  the
    country where he spent his childhood, and he holidayed  in  2010  there
    for one month.  He has extended family members there, and  there  is  a
    family home to which he  may  be  able  to  return  to  at  first  when
    deported.  The Tribunal noted that the appellant has contacts remaining
    in Uganda and would return with employable skills.  Therefore it  seems
    to us that the Tribunal did fairly direct itself to  the  evidence  and
    reach findings of fact on that matter which were open to it.

15. And then, and this is perhaps the foremost point advanced by  Mr  Adams
    of Counsel on behalf of the appellant, there was Liam's  position.   It
    is said that the Tribunal did not deal with this or deal with  this  in
    an adequate way, having regard to the evidence.  However, the  Tribunal
    did address this matter in paragraphs 26 and 27.   In  particular,  the
    Tribunal said that Liam had had at least one other carer  in  the  past
    but Mr and Mrs Gunn would also provide more care to their son and  take
    him to activities themselves  if  they  so  wished.   Whilst  the  best
    interests of  Liam  were  the  Tribunal's  primary  consideration,  the
    Tribunal  concluded  that  it  was  not  unjustifiably  harsh  for  the
    appellant not to be the person to provide the care that Liam needs  and
    they added that even if Mrs Gunn were not to find another  carer,  that
    was still not sufficient to conclude that it  was  unjustifiably  harsh
    because the two parents could care for the child  and  the  sister  was
    caring for him before she went to  university  where  she  would  enjoy
    vacations from her studies.

16. Therefore, we would make the following observations in regard to  those
    passages.  Firstly, the Tribunal plainly was directing  itself  to  the
    relevant  evidence  and  again  made  conclusions  of  fact  that  were
    reasonably open to it on that evidence and secondly it carried  out  an
    evaluation of the degree of hardship that Liam might regrettably suffer
    as a result of the deportation of the appellant, but was  weighing  the
    severity of that suffering with the public interest in the deportation,
    given the crime that had been committed  and  the  other  circumstances
    pointing towards deportation that the Tribunal had identified.  We  see
    that as a classic  case  of  the  Tribunal  exercising  judgment  on  a
    relatively sensitive matter but  properly  bearing  in  mind  the  test
    required by MF (Nigeria), namely that in circumstances of this kind  it
    is necessary to identify compelling reasons why the  public  policy  in
    deportation of those who have committed offences of this gravity should
    not be effective.

17. In short, in our judgment, this First-tier Tribunal decision is  indeed
    a model of clarity and succinctness.  It deals properly  with  all  the
    matters that were before it and the Tribunal  reached  a  determination
    that was reasonably open to it having regard to the facts  and  matters
    before it.

18. For those reasons, we conclude that the Tribunal committed no error  of
    law in reaching the  determination  that  it  did  and  the  appeal  is
    dismissed and the determination of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.



Signed                                  Date


The Honourable Mr Justice Parker sitting as a  Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal

