
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01111/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 January 2015                             |On 23 January 2015            |
|Prepared on 6 January 2015                    |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUSTAFA ERYIGIT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                                DETERMINATION

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal,  (C  H  Bennett  and  Mrs  A  J  F  Crosse  De
    Chavannes) who in a determination promulgated on 29  May  2014  allowed
    the appeal of Mustafa Eryigit against a deportation order  made  on  23
    May 2014, the notice of decision of  that  order  indicating  that  the
    Secretary of State considered that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act
    2007 applied to him.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier; similarly although Mustafa Eryigit is the
    respondent before me I will refer to him as the appellant.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born  on  10  February  1942,  who
    came to Britain in 1969 and was granted indefinite leave to  remain  in
    1976.  He and his wife, who had entered  Britain  either  with  him  or
    shortly thereafter have two children, A daughter who was born in Turkey
    in 1965 and a son who was born here in September 1977.  The appellant's
    wife is British but the appellant has been estranged from her for  many
    years.

4.   It appears that for some considerable time the  appellant  had  a  shop
    here. Since 1988, however, he has committed a  number  of  crimes,  for
    which he received either short periods of imprisonment or fines.  These
    included driving without insurance, possession  of  offensive  weapons,
    criminal damage and disorderly conduct: in total up to October 2010  he
    had been sentenced for nine offences.  Details of  those  offences  are
    set out in paragraph 6 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

5.   The index offences which led to the decision to deport included  sexual
    assaults on two women and a further assault  on  one  of  those  women,
    assaults on two further women and criminal damage.  For those  offences
    the appellant  was  sentenced  by  HH  Judge  Jacqueline  Beech  on  29
    September 2011 to a total of four years and two  months'  imprisonment.
    The judge's sentencing remarks are set out in paragraphs 3 to 6 of  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   In their determination the Tribunal referred to the  terms  of  Section
    32 of the UK Borders Act and to paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Rules and
    noted that, as the appellant had been sentenced  to  a  total  of  four
    years and two months' imprisonment, the Secretary of State was required
    to make the deportation order  unless  the  appellant's  removal  would
    involve the United Kingdom being in breach of its obligations under the
    Refugee Convention  or  the  ECHR.   They  noted  that  there  were  no
    submissions made to them that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be  in
    breach either of his rights under the Refugee Convention or  Article  3
    of the ECHR.

7.   They referred to the judgments of the Court of Appeal in  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and OH (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694 which referred
    to the guidance given in the judgment in  N  (Kenya)  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    1094.  They referred to the terms paragraph of 398 of the Rules and set
    out paragraph 33 of the judgment of Sales J in R  (Nagre)  [2013]  EWHC
    720 (Admin).

8.   In paragraph 22 the Tribunal noted that in deciding whether there  were
    "very  compelling  reasons"  outweighing   the   public   interest   in
    deportation they were not entitled to undertake "a freewheeling Article
    8 analysis unencumbered by the Rules".  In particular they  noted  that
    Article 8 was not a "general dispensing power".

9.   The Tribunal referred to the NOMS 1 report dated 18 December  2012  and
    the OASys Assessment dated 4 July 2013 and noted that the appellant had
    denied that he had committed the offences, had asserted that the claims
    made by the victims of the assaults were  "petty"  and  that  they  had
    wished to "cause trouble". The appellant  had  explained  that  he  had
    carried knives because he was afraid of "the Africans" and said that he
    had previously been the victim of  robberies  and  that  he  had  drunk
    substantial  quantities  of  alcohol  before  he  committed  the  later
    offences.  It was said that the appellant and his wife had divorced  in
    1985 and the appellant alleged that his wife had sold his business  and
    taken much of the proceeds. The writer of the  NOMS  report  considered
    that  the  appellant  "has  had  little  structured  activity  and  his
    emotional wellbeing has subsequently declined".

10.  The writer of the report had  also  said  that  the  appellant's  first
    language was Turkish and that  he  spoke  and  understood  very  little
    English and that  he  had  limited  contact  with  his  children.   The
    Tribunal noted that the respondent's solicitor had  asserted  that  the
    appellant appeared not to be able to understand what was  said  to  him
    and referred to him as lacking personal hygiene.  They had also  before
    them medical notes from HMP Maidstone dated from  April  2011  to  July
    2013 which recorded that the appellant had no history of mental illness
    but that the appellant appeared to be confused,  had  medication  which
    was "all over the cell" and  that  there  was  inappropriate  behaviour
    noted towards female staff. The  appellant  appeared  to  be  not  only
    "unkempt and dishevelled"  but  also  to  be  "confused  and  chaotic".
    Although no psychotic features had been observed he had exhibited "some
    deficits in memory but not gross".  The impression of the writer of the
    report had been "?? Organic dementia  secondary  to  alcohol??  Pseudo-
    dementia/depression".  It was stated that the appellant understood that
    he had a drink problem and had had that  for  some  considerable  time.
    The nurse manager at Maidstone Prison had stated that the appellant had
    developed a degree of cognitive impairment that was having an impact on
    his everyday life.

11.  The Tribunal took account  of  a  letter  from  a  consultant  forensic
    psychiatrist which stated that the appellant had been referred  to  the
    mental health in-reach team at Maidstone because of concerns about  his
    memory and stated that the appellant had  difficulty  in  learning  new
    information such as the town the prison was located in, and  difficulty
    recalling information.  It appears that the appellant had a "buddy"  in
    the prison  to  help  him  with  collecting  meals,  cleaning  and  kit
    changing.

12.  In paragraph 29 the Tribunal set out  details  of  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's daughter and then set out the evidence of the appellant.

13.  They noted that the appellant could not succeed under the  Rules.  They
    set out  their  findings  of  fact  in  paragraph  35  and  36  of  the
    determination as follows:-

         "35. We are satisfied that Mr  E  has  lived  continuously  in  the
             United Kingdom since, at least, September 1971.  The Secretary
             of State accepted in the letter dated 22 May 2013 that he  had
             lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  36  years  and  7  months
             excluding the time spent in prison.  In the light  of  Mr  E's
             age, there is nothing inherently  improbable  or  contrary  to
             known fact in his evidence that his parents are both dead.  We
             accept that part of his evidence.  But we are not satisfied he
             had no  ties  (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with
             Turkey.  We reach that conclusion for the following reasons:


             (a)  Mr E is a Turkish speaker.   His  English  is,  at  best,
                  poor.


             (b)  We are satisfied that whilst in the United Kingdom , Mr E
                  had,  as  indicated  by  Judge  Beech  in  her  sentencing
                  remarks, 'lived in a Turkish community'  -  which  is,  we
                  have little doubt, at least a substantial  reason  why  he
                  has not become a proficient English speaker.  All of those
                  who signed the letters to which  we  have  referred  above
                  (paragraph 32) have Turkish names.


             (c)  We take into account Mr E's evidence that his last  visit
                  to Turkey was c.10 years ago (we make a  positive  finding
                  that it was as long ago as that).  We have  no  reason  to
                  doubt, and accept that he has visited Turkey on  at  least
                  c.10 occasions since his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.
                  We are not satisfied that he has no  brothers,  sister  or
                  other remoter relatives living in Turkey - or that he  has
                  no friends there.


         In these circumstances, we are not satisfied  that  paragraph  399A
         applies.


    36.  Although we have no neurologist's report and only  the  2  letters
         from Dr Sarah Maginn (Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist) to which we
         have  referred  above,  and  therefore  no  formal  report  from  a
         consultant psychiatrist or geriatrician, we are satisfied that Mr E
         suffers from cognitive and  mental  impairments  and  is  not  able
         adequately to provide and care for himself without assistance.   We
         reach that conclusion for the following reasons.


         (a)  In her letter of 8 January 2012, Dr Maginn stated  that  Mr  E
             exhibited cognitive impairment.  She further  stated  that  he
             required


                  'ongoing support and in the community would need  support
                  due to the  level  of  disorientation  and  difficulty  of
                  learning new information as  well  as  current  needs  for
                  prompting with self-care'.


              We have no reason to doubt, and accept that she stated.   That
             accords with the other evidence to which we  refer  below  and
             our observations.


         (b)  It is apparent from Memorandum (24  January  2014)  from  John
             Millar to which we have referred above (paragraph  27(e))  and
             Mr TG's letter (see paragraph 28) that Mr E was  not  able  to
             cope on his own and that it had been necessary for  a  'buddy'
             to be appointed to assist him.  We have no  reason  to  doubt,
             and accept what Mr Millar and Mr TG wrote.   Neither  of  them
             had any motive to misrepresent.  Mr Millar was and is a public
             servant having public duties to  perform.   Mr  TG,  though  a
             serving prisoner, was, we are  satisfied,  in  a  position  of
             trust and  responsibility  in  the  prison.   The  length  and
             content  of  his  letter  demonstrate  that  he  has  taken  a
             substantial interest in Mr E and has taken substantial care in
             writing his letter.


         (c)  Mr Bicker's letter (30 August 2013) to which we have  referred
             in paragraph 27(b) indicates that the consultant  psychiatrist
             concluded that Mr E  lacked  capacity  in  'understanding  and
             decision making'.


         (d)  The medical notes (paragraph 27(a)) record that  Mr  E  had  a
             history of alcohol abuse  for  c.40  years  and  that  he  was
             thought to be suffering from  organic  dementia  secondary  to
             alcohol pseudodementia and/or depression.  We have taken  into
             account the question marks in the notes as well as Dr Maginn's
             indication (8 January 2014) that the MRI san of Mr  E's  brain
             was apparently normal for his age - and Mr Bicker's letter  (3
             October 2013) that 'all other tests  have  returned  a  normal
             result'.  Dr Maginn's opinion was given in the  light  of  the
             fact that the MRI scan was normal and, we have no doubt,  that
             the other tests had given the result stated by Mr Bicker.


         (e)  We have no reason to doubt, and  accept,  the  content  of  Mr
             Yilmaz' statement (paragraph 26).  What he wrote accords  with
             the other  evidence  to  which  we  have  referred  -  and  is
             consistent with the conclusion which we have  set  out  above.
             He had no obvious motive to misrepresent his observations.


         (f)  Our own observation of Mr E and the difficulties to  which  we
             have referred above in obtaining principal evidence  from  him
             supports our above conclusion.  We are well aware  that  false
             evidence  and   exaggeration   are   regrettably   common   in
             deportation and immigration appeals.  But even bearing that in
             mind, we are satisfied that Mr E's inability to  give  answers
             which were truly related to the questions which  he  had  been
             asked, his refusal to answer questions from  his  counsel  and
             his apparent lack of  understanding  of  the  reason  for  the
             hearing are genuine and  indicated  a  lack  of  capacity  and
             mental impairment.


         (g)  It was striking that, in the course of her sentencing remarks,
             Judge Beech had to break off and instruct Mr E to stop talking
             whilst she was sentencing him (see page 5 of the  transcript).
             Talking by the  individual  concerned  during  the  sentencing
             process is itself an indication of mental impairment and of  a
             lack of understanding of what  was  happening.   There  is  an
             obvious and inherent improbability in the proposition, and  we
             are not satisfied, that that was a piece of play acting.


         (h)  Crucially, the offences which Mr E committed, and particularly
             that which he committed against Miss K,  where  there  was  no
             suggestion that alcohol was  a  cause,  and  what  Mr  E  did,
             particularly when taken in conjunction with Mr E's age at  the
             time when he committed the offences (68 in November 2010  when
             the offence against Miss K was committed and 69 when the other
             offences were committed) indicate  an  impairment  of  Mr  M's
             mental faculties as the cause.   He  was,  quite  plainly,  no
             callow youth who had not attained a state of mental  maturity.
             His behaviour was so abnormal, particularly for a man  of  his
             age, that the only realistic conclusions are, and we conclude,
             that


             (1)  Mr E was and is suffering from a mental impairment,


             (2)  his  mental  control  mechanisms  had  been  impaired  by
                  alcohol abuse over a substantial period of time and/or  by
                  other unidentified factors (whether  earlier  than  normal
                  age related degeneration or otherwise, we do not know  and
                  the precise cause does not matter), and


             (3)  the mental impairment from which he was suffering at  the
                  time when he committed the offences was a substantial,  if
                  not the sole, cause of his behaving as he  did  (including
                  drinking to excess on 29 March 2011).


         All that is confirmed by  the  other  evidence  to  which  we  have
         referred above.

    (j)  Although we have in mind that Mr Bicker's letter of 3 October 2013
         contained the second extract we have set out  in  paragraph  27(c),
         which suggests that, in general, Mr E was able to cope and that  it
         was only occasionally that he required assistance,

         (1)  we prefer what Mr Millar and Mr TG  stated  (paragraphs  27(e)
             and 28(d) and (e)) - what they stated being unqualified,  they
             being better placed to observe what was and was not  happening
             than Mr Bicker, and, crucially, we can see  no  reason  why  a
             'buddy' should  have  been  thought  necessary  or  have  been
             appointed if there  had  been  only  occasional  instances  of
             forgetfulness, and

         (2)  even  occasional  failures  to  collect  food  and  attend  to
             personal hygiene cannot but be a matter of significant concern
             and an indication of mental impairment."

14.  He went on to state that  they  were  unwilling  to  place  substantial
    weight on the statement from the appellant's daughter as  she  had  not
    attended the hearing and they were not willing to  make  an  assumption
    that the appellant's son could give or would give him assistance.  They
    went on to say:-

         "40. We have very much in mind that

             (a)  Mr E's behaviour on 12 November 2010  and  29  March  was
                  truly dreadful and  cannot  but  have  caused  substantial
                  distress to his victims (and particularly to both  Miss  K
                  and Miss T) and that Miss T was continuing  to  experience
                  symptoms in September 2011,

             (b)  Mr E has the wretched and shameful history  of  offending
                  which we have set out in paragraph 6,

             (c)  Judge Beech concluded, and we respectively agree with her
                  conclusion, that he was a dangerous offender,  that  there
                  was a significant risk of  his  causing  serious  harm  to
                  other women in future and all his offences of violence had
                  been directed at women.

             We do not accept that the risk of Mr E's being reconvicted is,
             as the NOMS report indicates, properly categorised  as  'low'.
             Even on the basis of the percentages given by reference to the
             OGRS and OGP scales, 'low' seems to us (even though  this  may
             be the category given by those scales)  to  be  divorced  from
             reality.  Although we were provided with a certificate  issued
             by the NOMS  on  13  March  2013  indicating  that  Mr  E  had
             completed one  session  on  alcohol  awareness,  we  were  not
             provided with any report of satisfactory progress,  let  alone
             completion of a course designed to ensure that he remains free
             of alcohol for the future.  We have in mind also, and  accept,
             that Mr E's poor English and denial of the sexual offences had
             prevented any useful steps being taken to reduce the  risk  of
             his committing sexual offences in future.   We  conclude  that
             the more realistic assessment  of  risk,  and  that  which  we
             accept, is that given (in the NOMS report) by reference to the
             'Risk Matrix 2000', i.e.

                       'Medium risk of sexual assault and violence but Final
                  Risk Group is High'."

15.  However, in paragraph 41 the Tribunal stated that  "in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case there were  'very  compelling  reasons'  and
    therefore 'exceptional circumstances' outweighing the  public  interest
    in deportation."  They gave their reasons in subparagraphs 41(a),  (b),
    (c), (d), (e) and (f) of the determination.

16.  They concluded therefore  that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  would
    involve a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of
    the ECHR.  Therefore Exception 1 in Section 33 of the  2007  Act  would
    apply and from that it followed that Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act  did
    not apply and  the  decision  was  therefore  neither  correct  nor  in
    accordance with the Law and Immigration Rules.  They therefore  allowed
    the appeal.

17.  The Secretary of State appealed, arguing that  the  Tribunal  had  been
    wrong to find that there were exceptional circumstances in light of the
    appellant's age and length of time spent in Britain and they were wrong
    to consider  that  it  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  to  deport  the
    appellant to Turkey.  They pointed out that there was no report from  a
    consultant psychologist, neurologist or geriatrician as  found  by  the
    Tribunal in paragraph 27 and that the findings of the Tribunal that the
    appellant was suffering from mental impairment which contributed to his
    offending was based on medical notes from the prison which  reached  no
    definitive conclusion or diagnosis.  The evidence itself on  which  the
    decision was based did  not  point  towards  the  appellant  having  an
    impairment.  Moreover, the grounds argued that the conclusions drawn by
    the Tribunal in paragraph 36(h) that the appellant's mental  impairment
    was the sole cause of his behaving as he  did  was  not  based  on  any
    evidence and that the Tribunal had been wrong to place  weight  on  the
    length of time the appellant had spent in Britain and had again  placed
    undue weight on the fact the appellant was receiving  a  pension  here.
    The grounds also argued  that  the  Tribunal,  having  found  that  the
    appellant had a "wretched and shameful history of offending" and  there
    was a serious risk of him re-offending and causing harm to other  women
    in the future should have found that the deportation of  the  appellant
    was clearly in the  public  interest.   The  grounds  referred  to  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and
    argued that, given that the appellant did not qualify under the  Rules,
    his circumstances should not have been found  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in his deportation.

18.  On those grounds permission was granted on 4 August.

19.  The appeal was then listed for hearing before the Upper  Tribunal.   On
    the first occasion the appellant was brought  from  detention  but  was
    unrepresented.  There was no interpreter and therefore the  appeal  had
    to be adjourned.

20.  The appellant had no representation at the adjourned hearing before  me
    but there was an interpreter.  The appellant stated  that  he  did  not
    wish to employ a representative because he could not afford to  do  so.
    There was no indication that should the appeal be adjourned further the
    appellant would obtain representation.  In these  circumstances  I  did
    not  consider  it  appropriate  to  adjourn  the  appeal  further:  the
    appellant could not be compelled to employ a representative nor  indeed
    could any representative be compelled to appear on his  behalf.   There
    was, of course, no application for an adjournment.

21.  I therefore decided to  go  ahead  with  the  hearing.   The  appellant
    informed me that he  had  seen  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    tribunal but I handed to him a copy of the grounds of appeal  to  which
    he could refer.  I then as carefully as possible summarised the  issues
    in the case for him, focusing on the fact that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had considered that the issues in this appeal turned on whether or  not
    there  were  exceptional  circumstances  which  would  mean  that   the
    appellant should not be  deported  and  explaining  their  reasons  for
    reaching their conclusion that such circumstances existed.

22.  I then asked Mr Jarvis, on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  to  make
    submissions.  I am satisfied that in  essence  those  submissions  were
    properly translated for the appellant.

23.   In  his  submissions  Mr  Jarvis  amplified  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    referring first to the terms of paragraph 36(h)(3) of the determination
    stating that  the  Tribunal  had  gone  beyond  the  grounds  of  their
    expertise and reached conclusions which were not open to them.  He went
    on to state that evidence from the hospital was  minimal  and  did  not
    support the conclusions of the Tribunal: there was no expert opinion on
    which they would have been able to rely to reach the conclusions  which
    they had.  He pointed out that mental impairment was not a  feature  of
    the sentencing judge's remarks.  Moreover there was simply  nothing  to
    suggest that mental impairment had led  the  appellant  to  commit  the
    sexual offences - on that the Tribunal had  reached  conclusions  which
    were simply not open to them and were going behind the judgment in  the
    criminal court.  Moreover the bare assertion that the appellant, at his
    age, would not have  committed  sexual  offences  unless  he  had  been
    mentally impaired was without any foundation.

24.  He emphasised the importance of deterrence and stated  that  the  terms
    of Section 32 were clear.

25.  With regard to the appellant's private life the Tribunal had  erred  in
    their consideration of the judgment in RU (Bangladesh) [2011] EWCA  Civ
    651 which had emphasised the importance of the public interest and  the
    public good in deportation.  In that judgment it had been stated that:-

         "That element of 'public interest' or 'public good' is  a  part  of
         the legislative policy, declared by Parliament in Section 32(4)  of
         the UKBA, that the deportation of 'foreign criminals' is  conducive
         to the public good."

26.  He went on to state  that  there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant could be considered to be a "home-grown" criminal - that  had
    been defined in the judgment in �ner v the Netherlands [2006] ECHR 873.
    Moreover,  the Tribunal had erred in  that  they  had  not  taken  into
    account the  case  law  relating  to   "medical  cases"  and  the  high
    threshold that had to be met.  He stated there was nothing to  back  up
    the Tribunal's assessment of the difficulties which the appellant would
    face in Turkey.

27.  At the end of Mr Jarvis's submissions I summarised, in  turn,  each  of
    the points raised by Mr Jarvis as simply as possible and asked for  the
    appellant for his comments.

28.  I asked him why he had committed the offences and  whether  or  not  he
    thought it was because of any mental impairment.  He  said  that  there
    was no evidence whatsoever that he was mentally impaired.   His  lawyer
    had advised him to plead guilty to the offences and so he did  so.   He
    had been advised that should he have claimed that he was  mentally  ill
    he would have been given an indeterminate sentence and therefore he did
    not raise that but in any event the reason why he committed the  sexual
    offences while in hospital was that he had been with  three  women  who
    were jealous of each  other  and  were  angry  with  him  when  he  was
    discharged.  He also said that he had been depressed and had  been  all
    alone at home where he had nothing to eat and had  turned  to  drinking
    and smoking.  He asserted that one of the women had been stalking him.

29.  He emphasised that he had a problem with drink and depression.

30.  I asked him what life would be like for him in Turkey and he said  that
    as alcohol was forbidden there and he would therefore stay quiet.   His
    home area was religious where people had to pray five times a  day.   I
    then asked him if he considered that he would be better off in  Turkey.
    His reply was that he did not know anything about Turkey  now,  he  did
    not even know the conversion rate.  He went on to say that he  had  not
    cared about trying  to  obtain  a  British  passport.   He  added  that
    although he had not travelled to Turkey after he had arrived for  about
    eight years he had travelled to Turkey thereafter from time to time, on
    holiday although he had not been there for fifteen years.  Even when he
    had gone to Turkey he had always stayed in a hotel rather than  at  his
    brother's house.  He said that his home area was near  Antalya  and  he
    referred to a town where he had had  a  bank  account  but  somehow  he
    considered that that money had disappeared.  He then went on  to  refer
    to his various bank accounts in Britain, stating that his  family  here
    had merely wished to take his assets.

31.  I asked him that if I found any error in the determination  whether  or
    not he would wish to address  me  further  or  would  wish  me  to  re-
    determine the appeal.  He stated that he would not  wish  to  make  any
    further submissions but would leave it to me to reach a decision.



Discussion

32.  The First-tier Tribunal set out the evidence and  indeed  set  out  the
    relevant law correctly.   I  would  add  that  I  consider  that  their
    conclusion in paragraph 35 that paragraph 399A did not apply because it
    could not be said that the appellant had no ties to Turkey was correct.
    Indeed, I consider that their findings of fact  in  paragraph  35  were
    fully open to them.  However, I consider that there are material errors
    of law in the determination of the Tribunal. However, I  consider  that
    the conclusions of  the  Tribunal  in  paragraph  36,  particularly  at
    subparagraph (h) were simply not open to  them  on  the  evidence.   In
    particular they had simply no evidence  whatsoever  on  which  to  base
    their conclusions that the mental impairment from which  the  appellant
    might suffer was a substantial cause of his behaving as he had -  there
    is no evidence to indicate that men of the appellant's age who have  no
    mental impairment do not commit  crimes of a sexual  nature.    In  her
    sentencing remarks Judge Beech gave no indication that there  were  any
    mitigating factors which were relevant: she  did  not  state  that  the
    appellant's mental condition was a factor in his offending.

33.  I would add that the assertions of  the  Tribunal  in  paragraph  41(a)
    where they did not accept that the appellant was "in the category which
    Parliament had in mind in enacting Section 32 of the 2007 Act" and that
    "right minded, informed and sensible members of the public"  would  not
    consider him to be in a category which the Court of  Appeal...  had  in
    mind when  considering  "the  need  to  deter  foreign  nationals  from
    committing serious crimes"" was without any  basis,  particularly  when
    considering what Parliament had in mind when enacting Section 32 of the
    2007 Act and taking into  account  the  intention  of  Parliament  when
    paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules were drafted.    As  is
    stated in the judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.the reality
    is that those  Rules  reflect  the  wishes  of  Parliament  and  are  a
    comprehensive code.  The appellant committed, as the Tribunal accepted,
    crimes which caused substantial distress to his victims and one of them
    was continuing to experience symptoms in September 2011.  The  Tribunal
    also accepted the appellant had a  wretched  and  shameful  history  of
    offending.  Moreover the appellant is, as  the  Tribunal  accepted  and
    Judge Beech had concluded,   a  dangerous  offender  and  there  was  a
    significant risk of his causing serious harm  to  other  women  in  the
    future - all his offences of  violence  having  been  directed  towards
    women. There is simply nothing to indicate that  Parliament  would  not
    have had in mind the need to a deport  foreign  criminal  such  as  the
    appellant.

34.  I would add that I simply do not consider that this appellant could  be
    thought to be a "home grown" offender.  A "home grown" offender is  one
    who has been brought up in Britain and  has  known  no  other  culture.
    That is simply not the case here where the appellant was aged  29  when
    he arrived in Britain.  It is mere  speculation  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant's criminality  was  a  consequence  of  something  which  had
    happened in Britain and  there  is  certainly  nothing  for  which  the
    British state could be considered responsible which would have  led  to
    such unpleasant behaviour.

35.  These factors, together with the conclusion  that  the  appellant   has
    shown no understanding of his crimes nor of their affect on the victims
    and taking into account that I consider that the Tribunal  were correct
    to consider that the risk of the appellant being re-convicted  was  not
    properly categorised as "low",   means  that  I   cannot  see  how  the
    Tribunal could consider that the removal of the appellant  would  be  a
    disproportionate  interference with his rights under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR and that there were "exceptional circumstances"  which  outweighed
    the public interest in the deportation of the  appellant.  I  can  only
    conclude the Tribunal erred in not placing appropriate  weight  on  the
    deportation of those such as this appellant who commit  serious  crimes
    of a sexual nature.  For these reasons I find that there  are  material
    errors of law in the determination and I set aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

36.  The appellant stated that if I set the decision aside he was  agreeable
    to my going on to remake the decision. He had no further submissions to
    make.

37.  The reality is that I do not consider that there  are  any  exceptional
    factors which would mean that this appellant should not be deported.

38.  I take into account the fact that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules.  I place weight on the serious nature of the
    appellant's offending, his  lack  of  remorse  and  the  fact  that  he
    offended over a very long period of time. I take into account that  the
    assessment of the First-tier tribunal with which I  agree  is  that  he
    was not at a low risk of re-offending and that it is accepted  that  he
    is a serious danger to the public and in particular to women  here.   I
    consider that it is in the public interest that  a  dangerous  offender
    such as the appellant should be removed.

39.  I agree with  the Tribunal that  the  appellant  still  has  ties  with
    Turkey and that he has no family life with his children but  I   accept
    that the appellant has some, albeit weak,  private life here give  that
    he has lived here  for 40 years. I also accept that there is little for
    him in Turkey although I agree with the Tribunal that it cannot be said
    that he has no ties with that country given that his first language  is
    Turkish, he has some relatives there and he visited Turkey from time to
    time after settling in Britain.   Moreover,  I  conclude,  taking  into
    account that the appellant's daughter said that she would provide  some
    support for the appellant here, that that does not preclude her  giving
    some support on return to Turkey - for example setting up a  carer  for
    the appellant. The appellant  would,  of  course,  retain  his  British
    pension and so would have the wherewithal to support himself in Turkey.
     I accept that the appellant would  have  difficulties  in  Turkey  but
    there is simply no evidence to suggest  that  he  would  not  have  any
    support from the Turkish state  let  alone  that  his  returning  to  a
    country where he speaks the language, and to an  environment  which  he
    understands - it is accepted that he has always lived  in  the  Turkish
    community here would be a combination of factors which would mean  that
    his removal to Turkey would be unduly harsh. Indeed given that  he  has
    made it clear that it would be very much more difficult for him to  get
    drunk in Turkey it is arguable that his removal would be beneficial.

40.  I accept that there are compassionate factors in this case  given  that
    life in Turkey would be difficult for the appellant but  it  is  highly
    relevant to place weight on the rights  of  the  appellant's  potential
    victims not to suffer harassment.

41.   I  conclude  that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  would  be   a
    proportionate interference with his rights to private life:  there  are
    no "exceptional "factors which would mean that  his  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

42.  I therefore, having set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    re-make the decision and dismiss this appeal on  both  immigration  and
    human rights grounds.

Decision.
This appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.
This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.



Signed        Date 6 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

