

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01366/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 14th July 2015                             |On 20th July 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             YOANY ABDELK NZINGA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of Paton Farrell, Solicitors,
Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Angola,  born  on  3rd  July  1981.   The
    respondent on 20th August 2001 refused his asylum claim (against  which
    he did not appeal) but granted exceptional leave to remain in  the  UK,
    which later became indefinite leave.

 2. The appellant was convicted on 19th April 2013 at Glasgow Sheriff Court
    on a charge of possession of a controlled drug with  intent  to  supply
    and sentenced to 396 days (15 months, reduced by  10%  for  a  plea  of
    guilty at the trial).

 3. The respondent on 29th April 2013 invited the appellant  to  raise  any
    reasons why he might fall within any of the exceptions to  deportation.
    In a statement in response the appellant said that he feared  political
    persecution in Angola, being a former beneficiary of refugee protection
    who was still afraid to return, and added, "My views are in  opposition
    to the current Government".

 4. In a letter of 14th June 2013 the respondent said she  was  aware  that
    the appellant had been in the UK since at least  2001,  and  asked  for
    details of any sur place activities since then.

 5. The respondent made a deportation order dated 2nd and issued  a  notice
    to the appellant dated 3rd July 2013.   This  decision  says  that  the
    appellant was granted exceptional leave due to UNHCR concerns at a time
    when males aged between 15 and 25 might be press-ganged by  both  sides
    in the civil war.  However, on 4th April 2002 the Government and  UNITA
    formalised a ceasefire, and elections were held in September 2008 which
    were accepted by UNITA and most other opposition parties:

         The  Secretary  of  State  has   therefore   concluded   that   the
         circumstances whereby you were granted  exceptional  leave  ...  no
         longer exist ...  We wrote to you seeking clarification of how your
         circumstances had changed since your asylum claim  was  refused  to
         see if you had been engaged in any sur  place  activities  ...  You
         have failed to respond to that letter.

    At page 5 the respondent says:

         You claim that you are still afraid to return ...  Your  expression
         of fear of return was dealt with during your asylum claim  in  2001
         ...  In addition the situation in Angola  has  altered  drastically
         since you left in 2000 ... You claim that your views are  different
         to the Government but have failed to expand on this  despite  being
         given the opportunity to do so.

    The Secretary of State  quotes  information  about  generally  peaceful
    elections in Angola and finds no reason  to  believe  that  deportation
    would breach the UK's obligations.

 6. In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the appellant said:

         The respondent states that the situation  in  Angola  has  improved
         since ... April 2001.  This I do not accept because  the  political
         party in power in 2001 remains in charge now.  The reality is  that
         there is no democracy in Angola.

 7. A Panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Designated  Judge  Murray
    and Mrs S Singer dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  determination
    promulgated on 10th  September  2013  on  all  available  grounds.   He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal only  on  the  asylum  aspect,  on  these
    grounds:

         HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 ... confirmed the principle  that  if  one
         was to require to conceal certain aspects of character, or to  live
         discreetly in order to avoid persecution, this  in  itself  can  be
         deemed persecutory.

        The appellant had confirmed as had two witnesses that he was afraid
        that he would be required to live  discreetly  regarding  political
        views in order to avoid persecution in Angola.

        The FtT confirmed at paragraph 52 that they did not  consider  that
        he was entitled to refugee protection as he "has not  been  engaged
        in any sur place activities in the UK".  The FtT failed to consider
        whether the appellant, who had lived in a functioning democracy  in
        a society which  strives  to  uphold  many  values  which  are  not
        observed in Angola, would indeed wish to express political views if
        returned to Angola.  In his witness  statement  and  in  supporting
        witness statements it had been confirmed that  Mr  Nzinga  ...  had
        political views ... likely to raise themselves given, for  example,
        the level of corruption in Angola.  It was incumbent upon  the  FtT
        to consider such evidence and  to  consider  the  risk  to  him  on
        return.  By focussing solely on whether he  engaged  in  sur  place
        activities the FtT neglected to consider evidence  which  may  well
        have had a material bearing on the outcome ...

        The FtT errs at paragraph 61.  It has indicated there that there is
        "no evidence" that the appellant  would  be  likely  to  speak  out
        against the Government if returned to Angola.  On the contrary  the
        appellant has confirmed so in his witness statement (paragraph 41).
         Mario De Barros confirmed this  (paragraphs  11  and  20)  as  had
        United De Barros (paragraphs 5 and 6) ...

 8. Mr Bradley submitted that  in  the  light  of  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant and those two witnesses  the  FtT  had  clearly  fallen  into
    material error.  The  FtT  failed  to  consider  whether  there  was  a
    reasonable likelihood of the appellant voicing political opinions about
    the regime and thereby running a risk of persecution.  Whether  he  had
    spoken out when in Angola in the past was not relevant, long  ago  when
    he was a child.  The FtT was wrong to say that there was "no evidence".
     The errors were material because on further and  proper  consideration
    there might have been a different outcome.  Mr Bradley  asked  for  the
    determination to be set aside but said he was unable  to  ask  for  the
    appeal to be allowed outright on the evidence which had been before the
    First-tier Tribunal, and that the case should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

 9. Mrs O'Brien in response said that in essence the grounds challenged the
    Tribunal's clear finding that the evidence for the  appellant  did  not
    discharge the burden upon him.  At paragraph 51 the  Tribunal  said  it
    had considered all the evidence, written and oral, and the submissions.
     At paragraph 52 the Tribunal noted that  in  his  original  claim  the
    appellant had been unable to show a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    over and above the risk to life and liberty inherent  in  a  civil  war
    situation  and  had  been  unable  to  describe  any  single  event  of
    persecution directed towards him by the Angolan authorities  or  UNITA.
    There had been a ceasefire in 2002 and in  2008  legislative  elections
    which were accepted by UNITA.  He had not  engaged  in  any  sur  place
    activities in the UK.  The panel was entitled to find no evidence of  a
    real risk on return for a Convention reason.  The evidence  before  the
    panel showed that everything said at paragraphs 50 to 52  was  correct.
    The question of "speaking out" in Angola had been mentioned but was not
    a prominent part of the claim put  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Tribunal set out the oral evidence of United De Barros at paragraphs 22
    to 24.  He mentioned inability to speak one's mind in Angola,  but  did
    not appear to have been asked how that might affect the appellant.  The
    Tribunal had been entitled to find that there was no evidence that  the
    appellant held any strong political opinion or was likely to incur  the
    risk of persecution.  The Tribunal had found as it was entitled  to  do
    that the appellant had not proved any case of persecution  for  reasons
    of political opinion.

10. Mr Bradley in response  said  that  the  respondent  and  the  Tribunal
    misrepresented the appellant's original evidence in suggesting that  he
    had no problems in Angola.  At his original interview he described such
    significant matters as the killing of his father (said to have  been  a
    UNITA supporter), the loss of other relatives and having to live  as  a
    street child.  At the time of that interview he was aged only 20.   His
    character and attitudes could not be  assumed  to  be  unchanged  after
    fourteen years of living in a country and culture where opinions can be
    freely expressed.  An analysis of how he had changed and was likely  to
    express opinions was lacking, and required to be undertaken.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. In the statement which he  provided  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant says that  in  Angola  he  favoured  the  democrats  not  the
    communists and that some fighting still goes on in Angola;  he  prefers
    living in Scotland, where all parties are committed to democracy and he
    feels no need to be politically active; and in Angola human rights  are
    abused.  At paragraph 41 he says:

         I would find it very difficult to bite  my  tongue  in  Angola.   I
         would want to  become  active  in  opposition  to  the  Government.
         People get killed there or tortured.  I  would  be  scared  to  get
         involved though.  I am not sure if I would  be  able  to.   I  feel
         strongly about this.  My expectations of life and  the  way  things
         should be have changed in the thirteen years I have been here.

         I come from a political background.  My father was an active member
         ... killed because he was supporting ... UNITA ...  If  I  do  take
         action I will probably end up like my father.  The only thing  that
         would stop me would be fear of the Government and what  they  would
         do.

13. In examination-in-chief and in cross-examination the appellant does not
    appear to have said anything further  about  whether  he  might  become
    involved in politics if returned to Angola and if not, why not.

14. The witness Mario Alberto De Barros  described  in  his  statement  how
    angry he was to see conditions in Angola when he visited there in 2011.
     He goes on:

         18.      I don't see how Yoany would become even more angry than me
             if he was there.  It would be awful for him.  He doesn't  have
             any family there as far as I know.  He wouldn't know  what  to
             do with himself ...

         19.      He has no-one to fall back on as far as I know.  He may be
             recognised by someone who has done something bad to his family
             ...

         20.      He doesn't understand how the country works.  I  think  he
             would be too scared to get involved in politics.

15. It appears that in oral evidence  the  witness  was  asked  what  might
    happen to the appellant on return, but not about how he  might  behave,
    and on that point he did not add to the above.

16. The statement of the witness United De Barros, another  friend  of  the
    appellant, includes the following:

         The appellant often talks about the political situation  in  Angola
         ...

         He has told me he doesn't support the Government.  He  always  gets
         involved in political arguments and  supports  the  opposition.   I
         don't think he would be able to stop himself  getting  involved  in
         politics if he is returned ...

17. Paragraphs 23 and 24 record the witness as saying that  in  Angola  you
    cannot speak your mind and if you do not agree with the Government  you
    are  made  to  disappear.   It  does  not  appear  that  he  was  asked
    specifically about how the appellant might behave in Angola.

18. There was before the First-tier Tribunal the US State Department report
    for 2012.  It is not recorded which  side  provided  it  (perhaps  more
    likely to have been the  appellant).   Its  opening  summary  describes
    generally peaceful and well organised elections, but includes limits on
    freedom of speech among the most important human rights abuses.   There
    were reports during the  year  "that  political  party  supporters  and
    security forces arbitrarily killed at least eight  persons  during  the
    year".  Section 2 a of the report, "Freedom of Speech and Press", says:

           Individuals reported practicing  self-censorship  but  generally
           were able to criticize the government  without  fear  of  direct
           reprisals.  The government engaged  in  subtle  repression  ....
           Multiple sources reported that citizens  often  curtailed  their
           support of an opposition  political  party  because  they  would
           suffer reprisals from MPLA supporters.

19. The Tribunal records the submissions for the appellant at paragraphs 38
    to 49, including (at 47 and 48) submissions that he  might  well  speak
    out against the Government, that  he  has  political  views,  and  that
    "being forced not to speak out is persecution in itself".

20. The above was the essential  state  of  the  evidence  and  submissions
    before the First-tier Tribunal on the aspect of the case which  remains
    live, the risk of persecution for reasons of political opinion.

21. While the First-tier Tribunal had to bear in mind that a claim  is  not
    defeated because fear of persecution will  prevent  the  expression  of
    political opinion, it was for the appellant to prove his case, both  as
    a subjective fear and as an objective risk.  He had to show that he was
    likely to give voice to political opinions of such a nature and in such
    a way as might attract adverse attention, or that he would refrain only
    for fear of the consequences, and that such consequences  might  amount
    to persecution.

22. On the case before it,  did  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    involve the making of any error on a point of law, or of any such error
    as might require the determination to be set aside?

23. The respondent had stated her view to the First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    situation in Angola, and cited specific changes.  The appellant and his
    two witnesses generally denied any material improvement.  The appellant
    made no specific reference to any background materials  about  risk  to
    those who speak out openly against the government or against the  MPLA.
    Although the US State Department report (generally agreed to be a  good
    guide) was before the First-tier Tribunal, nothing in it was  cited  by
    either side.  The appellant's grounds  and  submissions  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal do not suggest that he made any case on objective risk,  other
    than by his own evidence and that of his two friends.   No  doubt  they
    had knowledge of and opinions about their country, but  they  were  not
    expert witnesses.

24. The past conduct of the appellant (not only before but  since  he  left
    Angola) must have some relevance to his likely future  conduct.   There
    is little on which to base such judgments apart from past  conduct  and
    statements of future intent, which are  easily  made.   Such  political
    opinions as the appellant expresses are very  general.   They  show  no
    deep consideration of ideology or of the politics  of  Angola.   It  is
    clear that he and  his  witnesses  are  all  repelled  by  the  general
    circumstances in Angola, but that is a different matter. What he may do
    in Angola is of course a different question from what he  has  done  in
    the United Kingdom, but the Tribunal had to decide on the  evidence  it
    had.  Apart from some conversations  with  friends  the  appellant  has
    expressed no political opinions  and  certainly  not  in  a  public  or
    confrontational context.

25. The appellant based his case on an implicit presumption that "to  speak
    out"  in  the  way  he  vaguely  describes  would  attract  persecutory
    consequences.  He did not produce or refer to evidence adequate to back
    that up.  The case he had to meet was that the situation in Angola  had
    significantly changed and that elections have been held, the result  of
    which was accepted by parties including UNITA.  Angola is far  from  an
    ideal state but it is no longer in  a  condition  of  civil  war.   The
    undisputed background is that UNITA gave up its armed struggle in 2002.
     Although a deep political difference remains between it and  the  MPLA
    it remains openly active in Angola, stands in elections and  has  seats
    in the legislature.   I recognise that the US State  Department  report
    is qualified, but the general statement that citizens  "generally  were
    able to criticize the government without fear of direct  reprisals"  is
    against the appellant's case.  It was accepted on his behalf that  even
    if some error were to be found it was not one which could  be  remedied
    in his favour on the evidence which  had  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

26. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the submission that the appellant  was
    likely to speak out against the government as he had  political  views.
    The evidence of likely motivation to become involved in  any  political
    activity which would give rise to any risk, and of refraining for  fear
    of the consequences, was weak.  The  Tribunal  should  have  said  that
    there  was  no  sufficient  or  adequate  evidence,  rather  than   "no
    evidence", but its conclusion was  open  to  it.   In  any  event,  the
    appellant had failed to show that he was  likely  to  be  motivated  to
    express himself in any way which would carry an objective risk.  He has
    not shown any error by the Tribunal which on  the  evidence  before  it
    might have led to a different result.

27. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

28. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        [pic]
             Upper            Tribunal            Judge             Macleman
17 July 2015
