
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01746/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 9th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Andrew Joseph, Counsel


                             DECISION & REASONS

 1. The anonymity direction made by the First-Tier Tribunal  is  continued.
    I will refer to the parties by the style in which they appeared  before
    that Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  In January 2012, the  appellant
    was sentenced to  a  period  of  3  years  6  months  imprisonment  for
    possessing heroin with the intent to supply.  A deportation  order  was
    subsequently signed.  The appellant appealed against the decision  with
    regard to deportation.  His appeal was dismissed in November  2013  and
    an appeal to the Upper Tribunal was rejected.  A subsequent  appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal was  refused  and  the  appellant  was  removed  to
    Jamaica  in  August  2014.   The  appellant  subsequently  applied  for
    revocation of the  deportation  order.   The  respondent  refused  that
    application and the appellant appealed that decision.

 3. The appellant's appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Holder sitting  at  Newport  on  25  March  2015.   Both  parties  were
    represented.  The appellant's wife and children attended  the  hearing.
    In a decision dated 27 April 2015, Judge Holder allowed the appellant's
    appeal both in respect of the revocation decision  and  in  respect  of
    Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The respondent sought leave  to  appeal.   The  grounds  seeking  leave
    allege three errors of law, namely a misapplication  of  Devaseelan,  a
    misapplication of the law in the proportionality assessment and thirdly
    a misapplication of law in respect of Section 117 of the 2002 Act.

 5. The application went before another judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    who granted leave and gave the following as his reasons:

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission in time to appeal against  the
         decision of the First-Tier Judge Holder (the Judge),  allowing  the
         Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8  against  the   Respondent's
         decision to refuse to revoke a deportation order  pursuant  to  the
         provisions of paragraphs 390 - 399A of the Immigration Rules and  s
         117A - D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         2.   It is arguable, as asserted in ground 3, that in applying  the
         criteria set out in paras 399A and 399B of the  Immigration  Rules,
         the Judge considered the provisions that were  in  force  prior  to
         June 2014.  Para 399A requires it to be established that  it  would
         be unduly harsh for the Appellant's children to remain  in  the  UK
         without the Appellant, and para 399B requires it to be  established
         that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner  to  live
         in Jamaica with the Appellant because of  compelling  circumstances
         over and above those described in paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.
         The issues here is whether the failure to apply the  correct  tests
         under Immigration Rules would have any bearing on  the  outcome  of
         the appeal, bearing in mind the similarity of  the  provisions  the
         Judge in fact applied under  s  117C(5).   However,  the  issue  is
         arguable and this will also have some impact on the  assessment  of
         proportionality (see ground 2), but not because the Judge failed to
         consider the public interest, but because the  public  interest  is
         set out in the relevant legal provisions and the Judge applied  the
         wrong version of the Immigration Rules.

         3.   Ground 1 is that the Judge misapplied Devaseelan and this  has
         less arguable merit; The Judge was mindful of the findings  of  the
         previous Tribunal and examined how the report of Dr Claridge, which
         was  not  before  the  previous  Tribunal,  affected  the  previous
         assessment as to whether the effect of deportation of the Appellant
         on his wife and children would be unduly harsh (see paras 56 -  58,
         61, 64 - 65, 73 - 74 and 86 - 87)".

 6. Following the  grant  of  permission  the  appellant's  representatives
    produced a "Rule 24 response".  This  document  dealt  with  the  three
    grounds raised in the leave application.  In respect of Ground  1,  the
    appellant's solicitor emphasised that the medical report relied  on  by
    the appellant had been unchallenged by the respondent before the judge,
    and that any apparent failure on the part of the judge would  not  have
    made a "material difference".

 7.  In  respect  of  Ground  2,  the  response   supported   the   judge's
    proportionality assessment.  In respect of  Ground  3,  the  judge  had
    asked himself all the appropriate questions.

 8. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

 9. Mr Richards in his submission relied upon the  grounds.   He  submitted
    that the judge had got "it very wrong".  He did not seek  to  make  too
    much of the Devaseelan point.  The report of the doctor  had  not  been
    before the original Tribunal, but Judge Holder made far too much of the
    contents of the report.  Mr Richards referred to paragraph  84  of  the
    determination which contained the findings Judge Holder made  from  the
    medical report.  The contents of the report  were,  however,  what  you
    would expect where a father is absent  from  the  family.   There  were
    certain behavioural difficulties, but these were all typical of such  a
    situation.

10. Mr Richards said that the judge fell into error by applying  the  wrong
    Immigration Rules, which was a clear and material error of law.  He had
    looked at the situation through the wrong  prism.   He  had  looked  at
    unreasonableness rather than "unduly harsh".  Mr Richards produced  the
    Upper Tribunal decision (reported) in the case of MAB (para 399 "unduly
    harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC).  He very fairly pointed  out  that
    the effect of MAB was to weaken the contention made in paragraph  9  of
    the grounds.  Mr Richards made various  comments  from  MAB  which  are
    noted in the record of proceedings.  In effect the situation had to  be
    "inordinately harsh".  A situation such as the appellants would  always
    involve difficulties.  There is nothing the  reports  to  say  that  it
    reaches the heightened standard as set out in MAB.  Mr Richards pointed
    out that the offences committed by the appellant were extremely serious
    and Judge Holder had sought to gloss  over  the  seriousness  of  those
    offences.  In short the judge had approached the case in the wrong  way
    and his decision was irrational given the seriousness of  the  offence.
    Mr Richards invited me to find a material error of law and to set aside
    Judge Holder's decision.

11. Mr Joseph acknowledged the content of the Rule 24  response.   He  said
    that irrationality had not been argued in the grounds and had not  been
    raised before.  The question  was  whether  or  not  Judge  Holder  had
    applied the wrong form of the Immigration Rules.   He  referred  me  to
    paragraph 27 of the determination which shows  that  Judge  Holder  was
    conscious of the  date  of  the  decision  and  the  relevance  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 85 Judge Holder had concluded that  it
    was unduly harsh and at paragraph 90(g)  the  judge  had  engaged  with
    Section 117.  The judge had found the case exceptional.  Any  error  is
    not material.  At paragraphs 58 and 62, Judge Holder had found that the
    old rules had not been met by the appellant and at paragraph 64 he  had
    quoted  from  the  original  Tribunal  determination  with  regard   to
    obstacles for the family to relocate.  Mr Joseph referred to  paragraph
    47 of MAB and that it was clear from paragraphs 90(h) and 91  of  Judge
    Holder's determination that there was, in this case, something over and
    above the situation set out in MAB (47).  In short the judge had  found
    very compelling reasons.   His  decision  was  not  irrational  and  he
    emphasised that the doctor's report had  not  been  challenged  at  the
    hearing.

12. In response Mr Richards again stated that in his opinion the error  was
    material.  The judge had not looked at the correct rules and  paragraph
    8 of the  grounds  seeking  leave  can  be  read  as  a  suggestion  of
    irrationality.

13. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I was reserving my decision,
    which I now give with reasons.

14. I find no error that was material to the outcome of the decisions  made
    by Judge Holder.

15. As to Ground 1, Judge Holder was  clearly  conscious  of  the  previous
    determination.  Judge Holder had before him medical  evidence  from  Dr
    Claridge.  The reports of Dr Claridge  were  not  before  the  original
    Tribunal and it is quite clear that  Dr  Claridge's  evidence  was  not
    challenged  by  the  respondent  at  the  hearing.   Judge  Holder  was
    perfectly entitled to accept the evidence of  Dr  Claridge,  especially
    when it was taken in the round with the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    family.  Indeed Mr Richards in his submission to me indicated  that  he
    did not "make too much" of that ground.  I take  the  view  that  Judge
    Holder properly dealt  with  the  previous  Tribunal's  decision  as  a
    starting point and had the further evidence before him which led him to
    the conclusions that he reached.  There was no error in respect of this
    allegation.

16. As to the remaining two grounds upon which  leave  have  been  granted,
    these in essence relate to a single allegation that the judge failed to
    properly assess proportionality in keeping with the rules and statutory
    provisions that were relevant  at  the  time  of  the  decision  and/or
    hearing.  Mr Joseph rightly drew my attention to paragraph 27 where the
    judge directs himself with regard to  dates.   On  the  other  hand  Mr
    Richards makes the point that the judge viewed the  relevant  questions
    through the wrong prism.

17. It is quite clear from a reading of the  determination  as  whole  that
    Judge Holder fully  engaged  with  all  the  evidence  before  him  and
    systematically  worked  his  way  through  the  "legal  framework"   at
    paragraph 25 onwards.  Paragraphs 58 and 62 show that  he  reached  the
    conclusions that the "old" provisions were not met, but it is  arguable
    that Judge Holder then did take an incorrect view of the evidence.

18. The respondent, in the grounds, criticised Judge Holder for the way  he
    has accepted the evidence (the question of  proportionality).   Mention
    is made of the Court of Appeal case of Gurung and it is suggested  that
    at paragraph 88 of the determination, Judge Holder  is  simply  finding
    arguments  against  deportation  and  is   merely   listing   "apparent
    mitigation" for the conduct of the appellant.  However I do not  agree.
    Again it is necessary to read the determination as a whole by reference
    to findings on all the evidence and to understand how Judge Holder  has
    reached his conclusions on proportionality.

19. I have noted the third allegation of material  error.   In  addition  I
    have noted the views of the Upper Tribunal in MAB as  to  how  a  judge
    should view situations such as this appellants.  Again Mr Joseph refers
    me to paragraph 90(g)  and  paragraph  91  of  the  determination,  and
    clearly Judge Holder considered  the  term  "unduly  harsh"  and  "very
    compelling circumstances" in reaching the conclusions that he did.

20. Whilst I accept Judge Holder may have made an error in the way  he  has
    described both the rules and the statutory provisions, through which he
    must look at the evidence, he has asked himself the right questions  in
    his general assessment of proportionality and has  reached  conclusions
    on the evidence that were perfectly open to him.   Any  such  error  is
    therefore not material to the outcome of the appeal.

21. I therefore conclude that no material error of law is contained in  the
    determination.

22. The respondent's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  Judge  Holder
    must stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
