

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01274/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision and Reasons    |
|On 27 October 2015                       |Promulgated                           |
|                                         |On 12 January 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Evandro Oliveira dos Santos
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:        In person

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the claimant  against  her
   decision to remove him to Portugal under Regulation 21 of the Immigration
   (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

2. The claimant is a citizen of Portugal who  claims  to  have  entered  the
   United Kingdom in June 1996, when he was 4 years old.  His mother brought
   him here:  his father remained in Portugal.  His mother is a care  worker
   and a Portuguese  citizen.    The  claimant's  residence  in  the  United
   Kingdom has been lawful throughout: that was not disputed  before  me  or
   before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  claimant  speaks   very   little
   Portuguese and his connections with Portugal are faint now.   His  mother
   told the First-tier Tribunal that she had no siblings: she did have  some
   cousins in Portugal, but they were not close.  The claimant's  father  in
   Portugal died in approximately 2013 and the claimant has 3 paternal aunts
   in Portugal with whom his mother is not in touch, although  she  did  let
   one of her husband's sisters know, when she learned that he had died.

3. The claimant has an  unpleasant  criminal  history.   He  first  came  to
   adverse attention on 11 June 2007 when he was reprimanded for shoplifting
   by the Metropolitan Police.  He was then 16 years old.  In July 2007,  he
   was warned for possession of an imitation firearm.  He  was  then  living
   with his mother and 2 sisters in a council flat, in a an area  which  was
   perceived by the Probation Service as 'somewhat  problematic  so  far  as
   criminal active goes'.

4. Between 7 July 2008 (when he was 17) and 21 February 2013 (by which  time
   he was 22 years old), the claimant was convicted on 6  occasions  for  11
   offences including theft, possessing an  offensive  weapon  in  a  public
   offence, failure to surrender to custody at an appointed time, disorderly
   conduct, having a bladed article in a public  place,  attempted  grievous
   bodily harm with intent, and failure to comply with the conditions of his
   licence.  In his OASys report, the claimant admitted that  he  was  using
   cannabis at this time.

5. The index offence which led the Secretary of State to  decide  to  remove
   him from the  United  Kingdom  was  his  conviction  on  9  May  2012  at
   Snaresbrook Crown Court for unlawful wounding and possessing an offensive
   weapon in a  public  place.   The  claimant  was  sentenced  to  3  years
   imprisonment on the first offence and  18  months  on  the  second.   The
   claimant did not appeal either conviction or sentence.

6. The circumstances were that the claimant had taken a  minicab  at  night,
   diverted it from the planned route, and when the  cab  driver  asked  for
   payment, he at first told the driver that he would  get  his  money  then
   threatened the driver with a flick knife, and finally stabbed the  driver
   in the thigh.  The  minicab  driver  required  3  stitches  and  suffered
   psychological damage.  The sentencing Judge noted the claimant's evidence
   that he carried a knife to protect himself and to intimidate others:   he
   considered the offence to be aggravated by  its  having  taken  place  at
   night, that it was pre-meditated, and that a blade was involved.

7. The Judge stated that the claimant had 'a chilling attitude  to  carrying
   weapons and the use of weapons...you told the interviewing  officer  that
   you carried a knife to protect yourself and to intimidate  others'.   The
   Judge was satisfied that the offence  was  a  Category  1  crime,  having
   regard to the physical and psychological injury to  the  minicab  driver,
   who was performing a public service.

8. The National  Probation  Service  (NPS)  Report  stated  that  the  knife
   offence was one in which the claimant had acted alone, rather than  being
   influenced by criminal associates, and that his intent to intimidate  the
   victim 'suggests predatory and risk-taking behaviour'. The NPS considered
   that the claimant should be managed after his release at  MAPPA  Level  1
   and    presented a Medium risk for causing serious harm, the risk factors
   being identified as 'fear and intimidation' and 'physical  injury'.   His
   likelihood of re-conviction was described as by the NPS  as  Low  (up  to
   40%), but his Offender Manager considered that his OGRS  (offender  group
   reconviction score) was 54%  within  1  year  of  community  sentence  or
   discharge, and 71% at the end of 2 years. OASys rated his  likelihood  of
   reconviction as Medium, and the risk  of  his  causing  serious  harm  to
   others also rated as Medium.

9. At the end of his sentence, on 28 August 2014, the claimant was  released
   on a lifetime licence, which meant that his crime was  of  such  severity
   that he would always be a threat to the community and could be subject to
   recall to prison at any time for breach of conditions.  However,  at  the
   time of release, the Secretary of State was satisfied that  the  claimant
   met the 'integration test' set out at Recitals 23 and 24 of the Directive
   and in the decision in Tsakouridis (European citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-
   145/09.  The Secretary of State considered that  there  was  insufficient
   evidence that the claimant had adequately addressed the reasons  for  his
   offending behaviour: he had not produced evidence that while in prison he
   had completed an Enhanced Thinking  Skills  or  Victim  Awareness  Course
   which might reduce the risk of his offending in future.

10. While in prison, on 21 February 2013, the claimant  had  been  convicted
   of a further offence of wounding with intent to  commit  grievous  bodily
   harm and was sentenced to a  further  3  years'  imprisonment:  he  threw
   boiling water over his cell mate  and  then  hit  him  with  the  kettle,
   causing burns and injuries described as  'really  serious  harm'  by  the
   Judge.  The Judge in that case considered that the claimant had committed
   the offence 'in circumstances where anyone's  patience  would  have  been
   sorely tried' and that  the  offence  arose  from  a  momentary  loss  of
   control, the other prisoner having set the kettle to boil,  so  that  the
   weapon with which the claimant attacked him was to  hand  and  ready  for
   use. The decision to deport the claimant was made  by  the  Secretary  of
   State on 11 May 2014.

11. On 10 March 2015, the Secretary of State issued a supplementary  removal
   decision, to be read with the earlier decision,  taking  account  of  the
   further offence, which had not come to  her  attention  previously.   She
   considered that this illustrated the claimant's continued  disregard  for
   United Kingdom law, and his propensity to reoffend, as well as indicating
   a lack of integration into British society.  She maintained her  decision
   to remove him  to  Portugal.  She  did  not  state  that  the  protection
   available to the claimant under the Regulations should be  reduced  below
   the 'imperative grounds' level. The claimant  has  not  appealed  against
   that second decision letter or sought to challenge it by judicial review.



First-tier Tribunal decision

12. It was not disputed in the Secretary of  State's  decision  letter,  and
   the First-tier Tribunal accepted, that the claimant was entitled  to  the
   highest  level  of  protection  (the  'imperative  grounds'   protection)
   afforded by Regulation 21(4) of the EEA Regulations  because  immediately
   before the decision to remove him he had resided in  the  United  Kingdom
   for a continuous period of at least 10 years.  Nor was that point  raised
   as an issue before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. The issue in the First-tier Tribunal was accepted to be  the  extent  of
   the claimant's 'social and cultural integration into the United  Kingdom'
   as set out in Regulation 21(6).  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found as a
   fact that the claimant was integrated into  United  Kingdom  society  and
   would have  no  memory  of  living  anywhere  else.   In  particular,  at
   paragraph 41 the Judge found that the claimant

         "41...has resided in the United Kingdom since he was 4  years  old.
         He has therefore been here for nearly 20 years.  As such  I  accept
         that he will have no memory of  having  resided  anywhere  but  the
         United Kingdom. Whilst he may not have worked since leaving prison,
         this does not mean he has not integrated.  He has  been  to  school
         here and spent his formative years here.  I consider  that  in  the
         circumstances he is integrated into United Kingdom society. ...

         42.  Both the [claimant] and his mother gave evidence that  he  had
         never returned to Portugal and  whilst  his  mother  has  relatives
         there, the [claimant] does not have contact with them.  There is no
         supporting evidence to show either that he has or has not  returned
         to Portugal [since coming to the United Kingdom age 4].  ...In  the
         circumstances, whilst the  [claimant]  may  have  some  links  with
         Portugal,  I  do  not  consider  that  they  are  recent  and   any
         relationships he has are likely to be distant. "

14. She  considered  that  a  medium  risk  of  further  offending  was  not
   sufficient to meet the imperative grounds of  public  security  test  and
   that the claimant was integrated into the United Kingdom, such  that  his
   removal Portugal would be disproportionate. She allowed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

15. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal. In  her  grounds  of
   appeal, she disputed the finding that she had  conceded  the  'imperative
   grounds' test in her principal decision letter and argued that the  Judge
   should have considered for herself  whether  the  test  was  met,  having
   regard to the offence in prison.  The Secretary of State  contended  that
   the First-tier Tribunal decision was inadequately reasoned as to the lack
   of correlation between a  medium  risk  of  further  offending   and  the
   required threat level for the 'imperative grounds' level  of  protection.
   She also considered that the Judge's finding that the claimant had  never
   been to Portugal was unsound and insufficiently reasoned.

16. Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt  granted  leave  on  the  basis  that  it  was
   arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had not correctly assessed  whether
   the claimant was 'integrated' in European Union terms.

17. That was the basis on which the Secretary of State's appeal came  before
   me.

Upper Tribunal hearing

18. The claimant was not represented before me.  He  attended  the  hearing,
   accompanied by his mother, and represented himself. The  claimant  stated
   that as concerned the legal position, he had no submissions  to  make  to
   the Upper Tribunal because he was not a lawyer.

19. The claimant explained his current circumstances.   He  stated  that  he
   had committed no further offences since his release in  August  2014  but
   remained on licence until November  2015.   He  had  been  working  as  a
   labourer and cleaner, ever since he left  prison,  and  would  have  been
   working on the day of the hearing if he had not been attending at  Court.
   He could not explain why the First-tier Tribunal Judge had thought he was
   unemployed.  It does appear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge overlooked
   the submissions recorded at paragraph 23 of her decision when so holding,
   but nothing material turns on that error of fact, if that is what it was.



20. The claimant stated that in the past he had been  lost  and  young,  but
   that he  had  matured  a  lot  since  then.   He  had  got  into  railway
   engineering, and was working on track  renewal.   He  was  not  the  same
   person he had been.  He had not been able to join an apprenticeship  with
   Network Rail because he was required to sign on  at  Beckett  House  each
   week, but he was no longer a risk to the public.

21. For the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Melvin  argued  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge had erred in law in concluding that the claimant could not
   be removed.  He had shown a persistent reluctance to obey the law of  the
   land and the Upper Tribunal should find an error of law and set aside the
   decision. The findings of fact were not in dispute: the question for  the
   Upper Tribunal would be whether they amounted to integration. The  prison
   sentence should be treated as reducing the level of protection applicable
   and the two  removal  decisions  should  be  read  together.   The  Upper
   Tribunal should dismiss the claimant's appeal on the  basis  of  all  the
   evidence before it.

22. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

23. I first consider the applicable level of protection  for  this  claimant
   under the EEA Regulations. It  is  clear  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   decision that this point was not in issue before the First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge,  since  the  Judge  recorded  that  the   Secretary   of   State's
   representative conceded that the 'imperative grounds' protection was  the
   correct  level.   Neither  the  May  2014  removal   decision   nor   the
   supplementary decision of 10 March 2015  asserts  to  the  contrary.   My
   attention was drawn to the decision  of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
   European Union in Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  v  M.G.
   [2014] EUECJ C-400/12, which held as follows:
         "1.      On  a  proper  construction  of  Article   28(3)(a)   of
         Directive 2004/38/EC ... the 10-year period of residence  referred
         to in that provision must, in principle, be continuous and must  be
         calculated by counting back from the date of the decision  ordering
         the expulsion of the person concerned.
         2.      Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted
         as meaning that a period of imprisonment is, in principle,  capable
         both of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence  for
         the purposes of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the  decision
         regarding  the  grant  of  the  enhanced  protection  provided  for
         thereunder, even where the person concerned  resided  in  the  host
         Member State for the 10 years prior to imprisonment.  However,  the
         fact that that person resided in the host Member State for  the  10
         years prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration as part
         of the overall assessment required in order  to  determine  whether
         the integrating links previously forged with the host Member  State
         have been broken."

24. It follows from that judgment that,  in  principle,  the  continuity  of
   residence in this appeal could properly be  regarded  as  broken  by  the
   claimant's imprisonment, such that Regulation  21(3)  rather  that  21(4)
   would be the applicable provision and the Secretary of State  would  only
   be  required  to  show  'serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
   security'.  However, the highest that  the  grounds  of  appeal  put  the
   Secretary of State's argument is that 'had the Judge  considered  MG  she
   could have decided that imperative grounds of public security was not the
   proper threshold'.  If  the  point  had  been  placed  in  issue  by  the
   Secretary of State, that would be a criticism which  she  could  properly
   make, but that was not the case here.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was
   entitled to, and did, rely upon the Secretary of State's  concessions  in
   her removal decision and at the hearing, and Secretary  of  State  cannot
   now be heard to assert that she should have done otherwise.

25. The challenges to the First-tier Tribunal's findings on  the  claimant's
   having been to Portugal, the treatment of the likelihood of  reconviction
   finding by the NPS, and  the  applicant's  integration  into  the  United
   Kingdom, are all  challenges  to  findings  of  fact  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal decision.  I remind myself that  part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended  is  not  applicable  in  EEA
   Regulations cases and that the statutory presumptions  therein  are  also
   inapplicable.  The standard for reopening a finding of fact on appeal  to
   the Upper Tribunal was set out in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for
   the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraph 90.2 in the judgment
   of Lord Justice Brooke:

         "90.     It may now be convenient to draw together the main threads
         of this long judgment in this way. During  the  period  before  its
         demise when the IAT's powers were restricted to appeals  on  points
         of law:

         1. Before the IAT could set aside a decision of an  adjudicator  on
         the grounds of error of law,  it  had  to  be  satisfied  that  the
         correction of the error would have made a  material  difference  to
         the outcome, or to the fairness of the proceedings. This  principle
         applied equally to decisions of adjudicators on proportionality  in
         connection with human rights issues;

         2. A finding might only be set  aside  for  error  of  law  on  the
         grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable  in  the
         Wednesbury sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly  unsupported  by  the
         evidence.

         3. A decision should not be set aside  for  inadequacy  of  reasons
         unless the adjudicator failed to identify and  record  the  matters
         that were critical to his decision on material issues,  in  such  a
         way that the IAT was unable  to  understand  why  he  reached  that
         decision. ..."

26. Appeals to the Upper Tribunal are also  restricted  to  points  of  law.
   Contrary to the submission in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge did give reasons for all of the  disputed  facts,  and  in
   particular, at paragraphs [41]-[42] of her decision,  she  gave  adequate
   reasons supporting her finding that the claimant is integrated  into  the
   United Kingdom.  He has been educated here, he has lived here for  almost
   20 years since he was 4 years old, he spoke very little  Portuguese,  had
   not travelled to Portugal since leaving the United Kingdom,  and  had  no
   access to extended family support in  Portugal.   On  that  basis,  while
   another Judge might have  reached  a  different  conclusion,  it  is  not
   possible to say that the integration decision is perverse  or  Wednesbury
   unreasonable and no error of law has been established in relation to  the
   First-tier Tribunal's reasoning in that respect.

DECISION

27. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows: The making of  the
   previous decision involved the making of no error on a point of  law  and
   the First-tier Tribunal decision stands.


Date:         11 January 2016           Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


