

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01414/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 13th February 2014                         |on 25th February 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AD
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Shoye of Graceland Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  who  allowed  AD's
        appeal against the refusal  to  revoke  a  deportation  order  made
        against him.






Error of law finding


     2. AD was born in 1972 and is a national of Gambia.  He entered the UK
        on 15th September 2001 as a spouse and was granted indefinite leave
        to remain on 28th March 2003 in that capacity.  On 8th May 2008  he
        was arrested for possessing cocaine and diamorphine with intent  to
        supply and possession of  cannabis.  He  pleaded  guilty  to  those
        offences and  on  24th  July  2009  was  sentenced  to  four  years
        imprisonment.   He  was  served  with  notice  of   liability   for
        deportation and on 6th January 2011 a deportation order was signed.
        The deportation order is an automatic deportation order made  under
        the provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 [SSHD bundle, section D].
         An appeal again the order for his deportation was dismissed  by  a
        panel of the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Nottingham on 3rd March
        2011 ( the TRP Hollingworth Panel)


     3. The relevant parts of the sentencing remarks of  His  Honour  Judge
        Fowler are as follows:


              Both of you have pleaded guilty to offences of  possession  of
   class A drugs.  In           your  case,  [B],  3.83g  of  heroin  and  a
   further offence of possession of cannabis.   In               your  case,
   [AD], you were convicted of two offences: one of possession  of  2.8g  of
     crack cocaine, another of 2.3g of heroin.  All those offences, save for
   the ones of             cannabis, with intent to supply.


              I deal with you first [AD]. I take the view having  heard  the
   evidence in the trial            that you were a regular visitor to these
   premises  and  that  the  circumstances  in              which  you  were
   arrested  and  the  matters  that   were   found   in   your   possession
   indicate that your possession of these amounts of cocaine and heroin were
   as part             of commercial supply.  But I make it  clear,  and  it
   will be from the sentence, that I             am only sentencing you  for
   the possession of these relatively limited amounts of            class  A
   drugs.


              You are 36.  You have a previous good character - that goes to
   the extent of you            having a good work record.   But  these  are
   serious offences, a seriousness that is            marked by the Court of
   Appeal indicating that a starting point for sentences in             such
   matters for one offence would be 5 years.  But I  mitigate  the  sentence
   that I              pass upon you to take account firstly  of  your  good
   character, secondly, to the           amount of the drugs involved.   The
   least sentence I can  pass  upon  you  is  one  of  4               years
   imprisonment.  There will be no  separate  penalty  in  relation  to  the
      additional  offence  of  possession  of  cannabis.  That  is  4  years
   imprisonment on              each count to run concurrently.


     4. AD made his first application to revoke the  deportation  order  on
        19th July 2011, shortly after his appeal  against  that  order  had
        been dismissed.  The application was refused on  the  20th  October
        2011 but with an 'in country' right of appeal. The  appeal  against
        the refusal to revoke was also dismissed, on 6th March 2012,  by  a
        panel of the First-tier Tribunal composed of Judge Landes and Mr  G
        F Sandall (the Landes Panel) and AD became appeal rights  exhausted
        on 16th March 2012.  A decision to detain pending  removal  on  9th
        May 2012 was cancelled as AD had, on the 2nd May 2012,  applied  to
        the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal  the  decision  of
        the Landes Panel dismissing  his  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
        Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but was
        renewed on application to the Upper Tribunal on 21st May  2012  but
        again refused. AD became appeal rights exhausted on 20th July 2012.




     5. Rather than agree to removal AD advised an immigration official  on
        reporting that he had submitted an application for further leave to
        remain on 1st August 2012.  This was treated as another application
        to revoke the deportation order and refused on 14th November  2012.
        AD  was  detained  and  served  with  the  refusal  to  revoke  the
        deportation order which was certified under section 94 of the  2002
        Act restricting any right  of  appeal  to  one  that  can  only  be
        exercised once he has left the UK.  On 23rd November  2012  removal
        directions were set for  7th  December  2012  and  served  upon  AD
        although on the same day further representations were made on  AD's
        behalf,   which   were   refused   and   certified,   followed   by
        representations made on 29th November 2012 which were refused under
        paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.


     6. A few days later further representations dated  3rd  December  2012
        were  received,  on  7th  January  2013,  asking  for  them  to  be
        considered as an asylum claim. AD underwent a  screening  interview
        and then a substantive interview  on  30th  January  2013.  In  the
        interim AD also lodged a  Judicial  Review  application  which  was
        served on 6th December 2012 challenging  the  decision  dated  30th
        November 2012  to  refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  and
        maintain the removal direction, which was refused by the High Court
        on 29th April 2013.  Representations made on 3rd December 2012 were
        refused on 27th June 2013, supported  by  a  supplementary  refusal
        letter of 13th September 2013, with an 'in country' right of appeal
        which AD exercised. It is the appeal against  this  decision  which
        was considered by Judge PJM Hollingworth and allowed.


     7. The  starting  point  in  any  revocation  claim  is  the  relevant
        Immigration Rules which are:




         Revocation of deportation order

         390.     An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
be considered in the            light of  all  the  circumstances  including
the following:

                  (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;

                   (ii)      any  representations   made   in   support   of
revocation;

                  (iii)    the interests of  the  community,  including  the
maintenance of an                       effective immigration control;

                  (iv)     the interests of  the  applicant,  including  any
compassionate                           circumstances.

         390A.Where paragraph  398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
consider whether                paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,  if  it
does not, it will only be  in  exceptional               circumstances  that
the public interest in maintaining the deportation  order  will           be
outweighed by other factors.

         391.     In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
conviction  for  a  criminal            offence,  the  continuation   of   a
deportation order  against  that  person  will  be  the               proper
course:

              (a)      in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
the person was                      sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment
of less than 4 years, unless 10  years                  have  elapsed  since
the making of the deportation order, or

              (b)      in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
the person was                      sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment
of at least 4 years, at any time,

              Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to
the  Human  Rights            Convention  or  the  Convention  and  Protocol
Relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees,  or             there   are   other
exceptional    circumstances    that    mean     the     continuation     is
outweighed by compelling factors.

         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally  be
authorised unless  the            situation  has  been  materially  altered,
either by a change of circumstances since             the  order  was  made,
or   by   fresh   information   coming    to    light    which    was    not
before the appellate authorities or the Secretary of State. The  passage  of
time              since the person was deported may also  in  itself  amount
to such a change of             circumstances as to  warrant  revocation  of
the order.

         392.     Revocation of a deportation order  does  not  entitle  the
person concerned to re-             enter    the United Kingdom; it  renders
him eligible  to  apply  for  admission  under              the  Immigration
Rules. Application for revocation of the order may be made  to           the
Entry Clearance Officer or direct to the Home Office.



     8. At the hearing before Judge PJM  Hollingworth  Mr  Shoye  confirmed
        that the asylum appeal was not being pursued.


     9. Whilst I accept there is no legal obligation upon a Judge  to  make
        findings on each and every element of an appeal, it is important  a
        reader of a determination understands the reasons for the  decision
        made and can have confidence that all relevant matters, both  legal
        and factual, have been considered.  Of the four elements  specified
        as being relevant to a decision to revoke a deportation order  only
        one appears to  have  been  fully  explored  and  reasoned  in  the
        determination.  For  example,  bar  a  reference  to  the  fact  AD
        committed a very serious offence [12] there is  little  mention  of
        the grounds on which the deportation order was made.  The  fact  it
        related to the supply of drugs for which AD received a  substantial
        prison sentence was very  relevant  as  is  the  fact  this  is  an
        automatic deportation appeal.  There is in particular an inadequate
        assessment of the interests of  the  community  which  include  the
        maintenance of immigration control. There is  no  analysis  of  the
        weight given to the fact AD has not been deported and has  resisted
        deportation at every stage of the proceedings, including the filing
        of what appears to have  been  a  false  claim  for  asylum,  which
        delayed his removal but which was not pursued on  appeal.  For  the
        community to have confidence in an effective deportation regime  as
        a means of removing foreign criminals there must be  a  possibility
        they will actually be removed. There is no mention of any deterrent
        element which is arguable in relation to this  case.   The  passing
        reference to these elements having been considered in paragraph  73
        is arguably insufficient to establish that the Judge discharged the
        duty of anxious scrutiny.


    10. I accept that the representations made  in  support  of  revocation
        were considered in detail as were the interests  of  AD,  including
        compassionate circumstances. The problem with the determination  is
        that it is suggestive of a focus on the  points  raised  by  AD  in
        support of his case with inadequate evidence of a balanced approach
        being undertaken as required by the Rules.


    11. In relation to the Immigration Rules it was accept that the AD  was
        not able to satisfy the relevant provisions [36] but beyond  making
        this statement there is no indication of the weight the Judge  gave
        to  this  fact.  Indeed  it  appears  that  having   accepted   the
        requirements of the Rules could not be met the Judge sidelined this
        element and proceeded to conduct an  'old  style'  Article  8  ECHR
        assessment. There is also the question whether the  finding  AD  is
        unable to succeed under the Rules is acceptance  he  is  unable  to
        succeed under paragraph 390 too.  If so it is arguable  the  appeal
        should have been dismissed.


    12. The Judge took as his starting point the  findings  of  the  Landes
        Panel whose determination  was  promulgated  in  March  2012.  That
        appeal against the refusal to  revoke  the  deportation  order  was
        therefore dismissed on its facts even before  the  introduction  of
        the more stringent requirements to be found in  the  current  Rules
        relating to deportation.


    13. The human right element of the  appeal  had  to  be  considered  in
        accordance with the approach set out by the Court of Appeal  in  MF
        (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the High Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC
        720 (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  640.
        These  judgments  have  made  it  clear  that   the   question   of
        proportionality must be looked at in the context of the Immigration
        Rules with no need to go on to a specific assessment under  Article
        8 if it is clear from  the  facts  that  there  are  no  particular
        compelling or exceptional circumstances requiring that course to be
        taken. That approach is consistent with what the  Court  of  Appeal
        said in MF (Nigeria) and with the approach of the House  of  Lords,
        particularly in cases such as  Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11  and  Razgar
        [2004] UKHL 27. The starting position for the Judge was to look  at
        the  Rules  and  see  whether  the  AD  was  able  to  meet   their
        requirements.  If not, the question to be considered is whether the
        decision would lead to a breach of Article 8 but in the context  of
        whether there are factors not covered by the Rules which give  rise
        to the need to consider Article 8 further.  A failure to apply this
        structured approach by the Judge is also an  arguable  misdirection
        of law and legal error.


    14. Mr Shoye sought to rely upon MF in support of his case although  in
        doing so he highlighted the effect of the error referred to  above.
        In paragraph 35 of the judgment in MF the Court of Appeal state:


              35. It is common ground that the first step  that  has  to  be
   undertaken under the                  new  rules  is  to  decide  whether
   deportation  would  be  contrary  to  an                     individual's
   article 8 rights on the grounds that  (i)  the  case  falls  within  para
     398 (b) or (c) and (ii) one or more of the conditions set out  in  para
   399 (a) or                   (b) or para 399A (a) or (b) applies. If  the
   case falls within para 398 (b) or (c)                  and one or more of
   those   conditions   applies,   then    the    new    rules    implicitly
   provide that deportation would be contrary to article 8. Whether  a  case
          satisfies the criteria set out in para 398 (a), (b) or (c) is self-
   evidently  a                       question  of  "hard-edged"  fact;  and
   whether one or more of the conditions                  set  out  in  para
   399  or  399A  applies  may   also   involve   a   question   of   "hard-
   edged" fact. But it may involve a question of evaluation, such as whether
   it                  would be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
   UK  (para   399(a)(ii)(a))                     or   whether   there   are
   "insurmountable    obstacles     to     family     life"     with     the
   partner continuing outside the UK (para 399(b)(ii)). We shall  revert  to
   the                 meaning of "insurmountable obstacles" later  in  this
   judgment.


    15. At paragraph 46 of the judgment it is stated:


              46. There has been debate as to whether there is a  one  stage
   or two  stage  test.  If                  the  claimant  succeeds  on  an
   application of the new rules at the  first  hurdle                 ie  he
   shows that para 399 or 399A applies, then it can  be  said  that  he  has
          succeeded on a one stage test. But if he does not, it is necessary
   to consider                  whether there are  circumstances  which  are
   sufficiently compelling (and                  therefore  exceptional)  to
   outweigh the public interest in  deportation.  That                is  an
   exercise which is separate from a consideration of whether  para  399  or
          399A applies. It is the second part of a two stage approach which,
   for the                 reasons we have given, is  required  by  the  new
   rules. The UT concluded                   (para 41) that it  is  required
   because     the     new     rules     do      not      fully      reflect
   Strasbourg jurisprudence. But either way, it is necessary to carry out  a
   two                 stage process.


    16. In paragraph 45 the Court found that  however  the  proportionality
        test was applied, i.e. inside or  outside  the  Rules,  the  result
        should be the same. The difficulty for  AD  is  that  as  a  proper
        assessment of the merits of  the  case  under  the  Rules  was  not
        undertaken it cannot be said that the outcome  of  the  traditional
        Article 8 ECHR assessment was the  outcome  that  would  have  been
        arrived at under the Rules. The  determination  as  promulgated  in
        fact has differing outcomes under the Rules and Article 8 ECHR.


    17. I find arguable legal error in the determination for the reason set
        out above and move on to consider whether it  is  material  to  the
        decision to allow the appeal.



Is the legal error material?





Discussion



    18. On 6th March 2012 the Landes Panel promulgated their  determination
        in which they dismissed AD's first attempt to have the  deportation
        order revoked.  The findings of the Landes Panel are said  to  have
        been the starting point for  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth.  The  Landes
        Panel only carried out an assessment of the Article 8 ECHR elements
        of the appeal as the hearing was before the 9th July 2012 when  the
        current provisions set out in  the  Rules  came  into  force.   The
        Landes Panel  accepted  there  was  family  life  between  AD,  his
        partner, and their child A as they were living together [23].


    19. It was accepted by the Landes Panel that the issue before them  was
        one of proportionality. The Panel set  out  the  Bouliff  test  and
        analysed each of the elements of that  case  by  reference  to  the
        facts as found in this case, including a report from an independent
        social worker Christine Brown [27-43]. The Landes Panel  set  their
        conclusions out at paragraphs 44 to 53 leading to  a  finding  that
        the appeal must be dismissed. The Landes Panel specifically  stated
        that were it not for the child A they would have no  hesitation  in
        saying that deportation was in the public  interest  [51]  although
        the offence was found to be so serious that  the  separation  of  a
        father and his son, who had only been together for a period of  six
        months at that time, as well as  the  separation  of  AD  from  his
        partner was justified.


    20. As this was the starting point for Judge PJM Hollingworth his focus
        was on what had changed in the 18 months between the  two  hearings
        such as to make the decision to remove no longer proportionate. The
        Judge thought the following to be relevant:


              i.  Since the Landes Panel promulgated their determination  AD
   and his                 partner have had another  child,  born  in  April
   2013 [41].


              ii. AD has resided with his partner  since  his  release  from
   custody                      subject  to  a  short  period  of  detention
   before he was granted bail [41].


              iii.     That AD and his partner do intend to continue to live
   together in the                  future, a conclusion  supported  by  the
   birth of the child in April 2013              [44].


              iv. AD's partner has been very depressed and anxious since  AD
   was                 informed that he will be deported and in light of the
   continuing                    appeal  hearings  for  which  she  receives
   medication [54].


              v.  AD's partner told her GP that she will be unable to manage
   to look                 after the two boys without his help.  Members  of
   the family have                  been supportive  but  his  will  not  be
   enough to prevent her taking her                   own life [55].


              vi. The GP advises upon the course of action to be taken if AD
   is to be                deported. AD has to help  with  household  duties
   because she is                        depressed and anxious although this
   would lift if AD was allowed to               remain as it is a  reactive
   depression [56].


              vii.     AD has been assessed as presenting a low risk of  re-
   offending [57].


              viii.    AD's  Offender  Manager  expresses  concern  for  the
   effect on the                    family of AD's removal [59].  On  visits
   to the home A has been                    observed to be a  happy  child.
   AD is observed as being a 'hands-on'               father [60].


              xi. A letter from a Meredith  Ripley  Children  Centre  worker
   refers to the                role played by AD  in  the  family  and  the
   strong  bond  he  has  with  his                son  A  and  the   strong
   relationship AD has with his partner 64-66].
    21. Not all the above are, however, changes to the  circumstances  that
        existed previously.  I accept the birth of another child  in  April
        2013  is  but  the  domestic  arrangements  creating  family   life
        recognised by Article 8 was accepted by the  Landes  Panel.  It  is
        therefore not a new element but one that has continued  during  the
        passage of time created by the attempts by AD to avoid deportation.
          It was accepted by the Landes Panel that the relationship between
        AD and his partner is one they consider to  be  permanent  although
        the Landes Panel note AD does not appear to have done  anything  to
        bring about a divorce from his first wife despite the length of the
        separation until after the deportation  order  [36].  They  further
        found that "It is right [AD] and [his partner] are living  together
        at a stressful time for them when they are both on  medication  for
        depression, but it is also an artificial time  when  a  deportation
        order has already been made and the appellant is living under  that
        shadow and unable to do anything other than be  at  home  with  his
        partner and child.  Their behavior in  this  short  period  is  not
        necessarily an indication that the relationship will  be  permanent
        in a less artificial situation."[37]. The Landes Panel  also  found
        AD's partner was aware of his substance abuse and  of  the  offence
        early in the relationship. It was also noted that it was not  until
        AD was arrested and charged that she became pregnant with A [38]. A
        was born when AD was in prison and was two years of age at the date
        of the hearing before the Landes Panel.


    22. The situation of the older child A was considered in detail as  was
        the report of Christine Brown who was  found  to  lack  objectivity
        [Landes Panel determination para 34] although  her  record  of  her
        observations of the family were accepted by the  Landes  Panel.  No
        further report  from  this  source  or  other  up-to-date  evidence
        regarding the children has been provided. In relation to  the  best
        interests of A the Landes Panel found:


              41. A now has a father not just in his life, but  living  with
   him  and  being                 a  positive  parent.  He  will  have   no
   meaningful relationship with him                   if  the  appellant  is
   deported to Gambia. A is simply not of an age                   where  an
   effective  relationship  can   be   maintained   long   term   over   the
   telephone and through the odd visit.  We  accept  that  A  is  too  young
     to understand why his father is no longer  living  with  him  and  that
          separation is likely to have the effects which Ms  Brown  outlines
   in                  her report.  We accept also that if A  were  able  to
   say what he wished,                   he  would  wish  the  situation  to
   continue as it is, that is that his                    mother and  father
   live  with   him   and   together.    As   a   result   it   is   clearly
   in A's best interests that the appellant remain  in  the  UK.   Ms  Brown
          has not considered the position if the  relationship  between  the
              appellant and [his partner] were to break down in the  future,
   the                 appellant having been allowed to remain  in  the  UK,
   but given the                relationship between A and his father as  it
   is now and given that it is               generally in the best interests
   of children to maintain a relationship                 with both parents,
   we    are    satisfied    that    it    would    be    in    the     best
   interests of A for the appellant to  remaining  in  the  UK  even  if  he
     were not to maintain a relationship with [his partner].

    23. The Immigration Rules now set out in codified form the view of  the
        Secretary of State in relation to how Article 8 should be assessed.
         Paragraph 398  states  that  where  a  person  claims  that  their
        deportation would be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article
        8 of the Human Rights Convention, and (a) the  deportation  of  the
        person from the UK is conducive to the  public  good  because  they
        have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
        sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years; (b)  the
        deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the  public
        good because they have been convicted of an offence for which  they
        have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  less  than  4
        years but at least 12 months; or (c) the deportation of the  person
        from the UK is conducive to the public good because, in the view of
        the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm  or
        they are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
        the law, the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
        consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
        it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
        interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors.


    24. Paragraph 399 only applies where paragraph 398  (b)  or  (c)  apply
        which are not relevant in this case as a result of  the  four  year
        prison sentence.  For AD to succeed under the Rules it is therefore
        necessary for him to establish 'exceptional circumstances'. This is
        a term which has been considered by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
        (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  in  which  the  Court  accepted  a
        submission  for  the  SSHD  that  "the  reference  to   exceptional
        circumstances serves  the  purpose  of  emphasising  that,  in  the
        balancing exercise, great weight should  be  given  to  the  public
        interest in deporting foreign criminals who do  not  satisfy  paras
        398 and 399 or 399A.   It is only exceptionally that  such  foreign
        criminals will succeed in showing that their rights  under  article
        8(1) trump the public interest in their deportation" (paragraphs 39
        and 40).  The Court went on to say: "In our view, [this] is not  to
        say that a test of exceptionality is being applied.  Rather  it  is
        that,  in  approaching  the  question  of  whether  removal  is   a
        proportionate interference with an individual's article  8  rights,
        the scales are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of  deportation  and
        something very compelling (which will be "exceptional") is required
        to outweigh the public interest in removal"  (paragraph  42).   The
        Court found that the Rules did mandate or direct a  decision  maker
        to  take  all  relevant  criteria  into  account  (paragraph   44).
        Accordingly, the new rules applicable to deportation  cases  should
        be seen as "a complete code ... the exceptional circumstances to be
        considered in the balancing exercise involve the application  of  a
        proportionality test as required by the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence"
        (ibid).


    25. In Kabia (MF: para 298 - "exceptional circumstances")  [2013]  UKUT
        00569 (IAC) it was held that (i) The new rules relating to  article
        8  claims  advanced  by  foreign  criminals   seeking   to   resist
        deportation are a complete code and the  exceptional  circumstances
        to be considered in the balancing exercise involve the  application
        of  a  proportionality  test  as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
        jurisprudence: MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at para 43; (ii) The question being
        addressed by a decision maker applying the new  rules  set  out  at
        paragraph 398 of HC 395 in considering a claim founded upon article
        8 of the ECHR and that being addressed by the judge who carries out
        what was referred to in MF (Article 8 - New Rules)  Nigeria  [2012]
        UKUT 393 (IAC) as the second step in a  two-stage  process  is  the
        same one that, properly executed,  will  return  the  same  answer;
        (iii) The new rules speak of "exceptional  circumstances"  but,  as
        has been made clear  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria),
        exceptionality is a likely characteristic of a claim that  properly
        succeeds rather than a legal test to  be  met.   In  this  context,
        "exceptional" means circumstances in which deportation would result
        in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  individual  or  their
        family such that a deportation would not be proportionate".


    26. The question to consider is therefore whether there is anything  on
        the  facts  of  this  case  which  is  very   compelling   and   so
        "exceptional" such as the public interest  is  outweighed  and  the
        revocation of the deportation order justified.


    27. Judge PJM Hollingworth concluded that those elements in AD's favour
        had  strengthened  and  that   he   had   demonstrated   that   the
        rehabilitative aims  of  the  criminal  justice  system  have  been
        achieved. In relation to AD's partner's medical condition the Judge
        found at paragraph 72 that her condition will improve on resolution
        of the appeal, whatever the outcome, and that the relevance of  the
        health issues is in relation to the ability of AD's partner to care
        for the children and  the  impact  of  this  upon  the  section  55
        assessment. It was found this element accorded greater  weight  and
        so the appeal was allowed.


    28. As stated above exceptional  circumstances  have  been  defined  as
        circumstances in which deportation would  result  in  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the individual or  their  family  such  that
        deportation would not be proportionate. There is  no  evidence  the
        family were unable to cope during the period of  AD's  imprisonment
        or whilst in immigration detention  such  that  the  needs  of  his
        partner or child were not met,  and  as  a  result  of  which  they
        suffered material adverse consequences. It is alleged AD's  partner
        will not be able to cope and that she will commit suicide if AD  is
        deported. There is an assessment of her depressive condition in the
        letter from her GP dated 29th August 2013 and a suggestion that  if
        AD is deported appropriate treatment  will  be  available  for  the
        partner, on an in-patient basis if required. The GP says she should
        be admitted but not whether this will only be voluntarily or  as  a
        result of the statutory criteria in the Mental  Capacity  Act  2005
        being met. There is no reference to the nature or duration  of  any
        treatment she may require or why such treatment is not available in
        the community.


    29. The Panel found that in any  event  the  partner's  condition  will
        improve and if it does there is insufficient evidence to support  a
        claim she will not be able to care for the children and meet  their
        basis  needs  of  food,  heating,  clothing,  housing,   love   and
        affection, protection etc, and so it is a question of  what  impact
        there will be upon her and the  children  if  AD  is  deported  and
        whether  this  has  been  shown  to  be  very  compelling  and   so
        exceptional.


    30. There is no evidence of the children having special needs requiring
        AD to remain per se. I accept that a key  element  in  any  child's
        emotional development is the ability to  be  brought  up  by  their
        father and mother, as stated by  Christine  Brown  and  the  Landes
        Panel, but there are a large number of single  parent  families  in
        the UK and  the  separation  of  families  can  be  the  effect  of
        deportation.


    31. There is evidence of family members  in  the  UK  but  insufficient
        evidence to show they are unable or unwilling to assist and support
        the partner.   Her own mother gave evidence before the Landes Panel
        and brought her to that Tribunal. There is no evidence support from
        agencies such as the GP and/or the  Childrens  Centre  referred  to
        above will not be available and adequate. There is no evidence that
        support cannot be provided though the statutory agencies to  ensure
        the needs of the children are met, if required,  post  removal  and
        during  any  period  of  adjustment  and  the  establishing  of  an
        alternative routine.


    32. If AD  were  to  be  removal  and  his  partner  committed  suicide
        resulting in the loss of both parents and the children having to be
        re-homed with other family or in care, this is  a  relevant  issue,
        but I find it has not been shown that on balance there  is  a  real
        risk of the  same  in  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  partners
        condition, her treatment, and the availability of support, such  as
        to make it the determinative factor. I note there is no mention  of
        the partner claiming to  be  suicidal  if  AD  is  removed  in  her
        evidence given in cross-examination before the  Landes  Panel.  She
        stated she has a depressive state  which  fluctuates  but  she  has
        never been referred to a psychiatrist and that she first saw her GP
        about her depression after her son was born in 2010. The  relevance
        of this evidence is that the situation facing AD at that  time  was
        exactly the same as that facing him before Judge PJM  Hollingworth.
        I also note in her witness statement dated 16th  September  2013  a
        reference to her taking her own life [18]  yet  a  clear  statement
        regarding the needs of the children and the  impact  upon  them  of
        AD's removal. It appears contradictory to  have  such  insight  and
        awareness of the needs of her children on the one hand  yet  to  be
        claiming that she will do something that will create  the  greatest
        threat to the children's wellbeing and future, the  taking  of  her
        own life and deprivation of a mother figure in their lives, on  the
        other; although I accept that in times of extreme emotional  and/or
        psychological difficulties such a logic argument may be temporarily
        lost.


    33. This is a case in which AD  relies  upon  a  claim  of  prospective
        suicide made by his partner and the adverse  consequences  for  the
        children, as well as evidence regarding what he claims  to  be  the
        indispensible role he plays in the children's lives, as  the  basis
        for being allowed to remain in the UK.  The Landes  Panel  felt  in
        necessary to exercise caution in relation to claims made by  AD  as
        noted in  paragraph  46  of  their  determination  where  they  are
        discussing the claim he made about his own  medical  condition  and
        where they state "We find this to  be  another  indication  of  the
        appellant exaggerating the situation to say what he thinks would be
        the most expedient".


    34. Whilst I accept that prospective suicide  is  capable  of  engaging
        both Articles 3 and 8 and a relevant issue in relation to this case
        and the needs of the children,  there  needs  to  be  the  clearest
        possible evidence of a real risk that this would occur which  would
        not otherwise be preventable by appropriate medical supervision  on
        the part of the medical services in the UK which  might  reasonably
        be expected to exist within the NHS. Any claim such facilities  are
        not available is manifestly ill-founded and I find it has not  been
        proved on the evidence that such a real risk of the event  actually
        happening  is  substantiated.  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  failed  to
        consider this element  which  is  material  as  otherwise  a  party
        claiming they will kill themselves on removal or if  a  partner  is
        removed may be treated as being determinative even if there is,  in
        reality,  no  real  risk  of   it   occurring   following   medical
        intervention (if required).


    35. I do not find it shown on the available evidence that the needs  of
        children cannot be met such as to require AD to remain in  the  UK,
        even if his  partner  requires  a  period  of  hospitalisation  for
        assessment and treatment following AD's removal to  enable  her  to
        come to terms with the emotional and psychological consequences  of
        such an event.


    36. In relation to the four elements included in paragraph 390: AD  did
        commit a very serious offence for which he was  sentenced  to  four
        years imprisonment. As a result he is the subject of  an  automatic
        deportation order. It was held in SS (Nigeria) that  the  2007  Act
        attributes great weight to the deportation of foreign criminals. AD
        was  convicted  of  serious  drug  dealing  activities  which   the
        Sentencing Judge's remarks indicate was clearly part of  commercial
        supply activities. The devastating effect drugs have  upon  society
        and a community has been recognised throughout Europe.  The  Landes
        Panel  also  noted  the  following  on  paragraph   28   of   their
        determination:


               28.  The  panel  in  the  first  appeal  commented  that  the
   appellant's  plea  did                   not  sit  comfortably  with  the
   remarks he had made to the probation               service  as  evidenced
   in the OASys report and found that the                      appellant had
   not    been    frank,    minimising    his    involvement.      We    saw
   nothing to change that  view  which  is  well  documented  in  the  OASys
     report.   The  appellant  still  appeared  to  be  minimising  his  own
          involvement when he spoke to the social worker as he told her that
                  the offences had occurred because he became involved  with
   a group                 of other men whom he had met  in  a  nearby  park
   (para 3.10 of her                report)


    37. In relation ot the public interest; in MK  (deportation  -  foreign
        criminal - public interest) Gambia [2010] UKUT 281 (IAC) (Sedley LJ
        sitting) the Tribunal indicated that in cases where deportation  is
        automatic under  section  32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  -
        essentially, where the appellant has been sentenced to at least one
        year's  imprisonment  -  the  Secretary  of  State  must   make   a
        deportation order,  and  neither  she  nor  the  Tribunal  has  any
        discretion as to whether this would conduce  to  the  public  good.
        So, as held here by a panel including Lord Justice Sedley, there is
        no need to argue about whether in an individual case, as  rule  364
        puts it,  "the  presumption  shall  be  that  the  public  interest
        requires deportation."


    38. What constitutes the public interest was discussed in the  case  of
        Masih    (deportation     -     public     interest     -     basic
        principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046(IAC)  in which the Tribunal
        found that the following basic principles can be derived  from  the
        present case law concerning the issue of  the  public  interest  in
        relation to the deportation of foreign criminals:


              (I)      In a case of automatic deportation, full account must
   be taken of  the                   strong  public  interest  in  removing
   foreign  citizens  convicted  of                      serious  offences,
   which lies not only in the prevention of further                 offences
   on  the  part   of   the   individual   concerned,   but   in   deterring
   others from committing them in the first place.


              (ii)     Deportation of foreign criminals expresses  society's
   condemnation of                  serious criminal activity  and  promotes
   public  confidence  in  the                       treatment  of   foreign
   citizens who have committed them.


              (iii)    The starting-point for  assessing  the  facts  of the
   offence of which an                   individual has been committed,  and
   their effect on others, and on the                  public  as  a  whole,
   must be the view taken by the sentencing judge.


              (iv)     The appeal has to be dealt with on the basis  of  the
   situation at the                 date of the hearing.


              (v)      Full account should also be taken of any developments
   since                   sentence was passed, for example  the  result  of
   any  disciplinary                        adjudications   in   prison   or
   detention, or any OASys or licence report.
    39. There is in this case a legitimate  public  interest  in  deterring
        serious crime involving the  supply  of  drugs  and  in  sending  a
        powerful message to foreign nationals who might be minded to commit
        crimes involving drugs.


    40. I accept there have been some  changes  to  AD's  family  life,  as
        identified by Judge PJM Hollingworth, such as the further period of
        time he, his partner, and their son have lived together as a family
        unit.  It is accepted a second child has  been  born  but  if  this
        indicates a further attempt to bolster a weak case in the  hope  of
        avoiding removal as the consequence  of  his  actions,  this  is  a
        reckless act, as both AD and his partner were fully  aware  of  his
        precarious  immigration  situation  as  his  appeal   against   the
        deportation order and the refusal to  revoke  the  order  had  been
        dismissed and it was only the  history  of  repeated  applications/
        representations that prevented removal at that  time,  as  recorded
        above. This is based upon a likely conception date  of  July/August
        2012. The role AD claims to have within the family is also said  to
        have been enhanced.


    41. The above circumstances have been established as a  result  of  the
        delay in removing AD but this is not as a  result  of  matters  for
        which the Secretary of State is responsible but because removal was
        prevented by the repeated applications I have  referred  to  above.
        It is also relevant that such developments  and  the  fact  AD  has
        remained out of trouble have occurred at a time he  is  subject  to
        the risk of deportation and the threat of removal which might  have
        affected his conduct.


    42.  I  do  not  find  it  proved  that  credible  unjustifiably  harsh
        consequences will result from  AD's  deportation  and  that  having
        weighed up those factors found in AD's favour and those  in  favour
        of the Secretary of  State  that  the  errors  made  by  Judge  PJM
        Hollingworth are material to his decision to allow the appeal.  The
        determination  is  set  aide.  It  has  not  been  shown  that  the
        conclusion reached was one properly open to the Judge when all  the
        legal and factual elements are considered with the required  degree
        of care required in an appeal of this nature. As such,  the  weight
        given to the competing elements by the Judge is  susceptible  to  a
        successful challenge.


    43. In substituting a decision to dismiss the appeal I find AD had  not
        established that he is able to succeed under the Immigration Rules.
        The  outcome  of  a  properly  conducted  proportionality  exercise
        supports the Secretary of States argument that this is  a  case  in
        which the deportation order should not be  revoked  and  should  be
        enforced. That  is  a  conclusion  that  is  neither  perverse  nor
        irrational and is in accordance with the  evidence.  Accordingly  I
        dismiss the appeal.


Decision

    44. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.




   Anonymity.


    45. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20th February 2014










