


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01713/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 7 May 2014                               |On : 15 May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 cevat isik
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, instructed by Sentinel Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr  Isik's  appeal  against
the decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and Mr Isik as the appellant, reflecting  their  positions
as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, born on 8 June 1968.  He  entered  the
United Kingdom on 25 June 2001 and claimed asylum on 3 July 2001. His  claim
was refused  on  8  October  2001  and  his  appeal  against  that  decision
dismissed on 20 May 2002. He became appeals  rights  exhausted  on  1  April
2003.

On 21 June 2004 the appellant was convicted at Snaresbrook Crown  Court  for
possessing  prohibited  ammunition  and   was   sentenced   to   12   months
imprisonment.

On 31 October 2005 the appellant's wife and his two sons entered the  United
Kingdom and subsequently claimed asylum. Following various  appeals  against
the refusal of their claims, they were eventually granted  leave  to  remain
as refugees on 30 November 2008. On 5 June 2009 the  appellant  applied  for
leave in line with his wife but his application was rejected as no  fee  was
paid. On 3 July 2009 he submitted a further application for leave to  remain
on the basis of family reunion but no decision was made.

On 4 September 2009 the appellant was issued with a notice of  liability  to
deportation to which he responded. On 3 November 2009 his  wife  gave  birth
to their daughter. Further representations were made  on  his  behalf  on  4
February 2012, in which he made a fresh asylum claim.

On 6 August 2013 the appellant's asylum claim was refused. On 7 August  2013
the respondent made a decision to deport the appellant by virtue of  section
3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, in which  it  was  concluded  that  his
deportation would not breach his Article  8  human  rights.  The  respondent
accepted that the appellant had an established family  life  with  his  wife
and two minor children, but considered that he  nevertheless  did  not  meet
the requirements of paragraphs 399(a) and (b) of the immigration rules,  nor
those of paragraph 399A. It was considered that there  were  no  exceptional
circumstances outweighing the public interest in his deportation.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 19 February 2014. He did not  pursue  his  asylum
claim but appealed only  on  Article  8  grounds.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
allowed his appeal on the grounds  that  exceptional  circumstances  existed
such that his deportation would be  disproportionate  for  the  purposes  of
Article 8.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  three
grounds: that the Tribunal had materially misdirected themselves by  finding
that the provisions relating to automatic deportation under the  UK  Borders
Act 2007 did not apply; that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  give  adequate
reasons for finding that the  appellant's  circumstances  were  exceptional;
and that the Tribunal had erred in its proportionality assessment.

Permission to appeal was granted on 8  April  2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Chohan. Whilst the grant of permission stated that all grounds may  be
argued, Judge Chohan found no error  of  law  in  the  panel's  findings  on
Article 8 but found it arguable only that the panel had erred by  proceeding
with the matter having found that the provisions of the UK Borders Act  2007
did not apply.

At the hearing before me, Mr Saunders accepted that the grant of  permission
had concluded that there was no error of law in the Tribunal's  decision  on
the Article 8 grounds and that that finding  had  not  been  challenged.  He
confirmed that he did not resile from that position. In  such  circumstances
the matter of the Tribunal's findings as to the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  was
irrelevant.

Notwithstanding Mr Saunders' acknowledgment, I sought  clarification  as  to
whether or not the UK Borders Act 2007 applied in the appellant's  case  and
it was agreed by both parties that the Tribunal's finding that  it  did  not
was  correct.  Mr  Collins  referred  me  to  the  UK   Borders   Act   2007
(Commencement No.3 and Transitional Provisions) Order 2008  which  clarified
the position.

Accordingly there was no need for further submissions and  I  dismissed  the
Secretary of State's appeal  and  upheld  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal allowing Mr Isik's appeal.

Consideration and findings.

In granting permission to the Secretary of State to  appeal  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision, Judge Chohan found there to be no  arguable  errors  of
law in the Tribunal's findings in  respect  of  the  appellant's  Article  8
claim. The Secretary of State  has  not  challenged  that  decision  and  Mr
Saunders confirmed that there was no further  challenge  to  the  Article  8
findings. I would agree with Judge Chohan in that respect and consider  that
the  Tribunal  undertook  a   thorough   assessment   of   the   appellant's
circumstances, including his strong and longstanding family life  ties,  and
gave clear and cogent reasons for reaching the conclusion that  it  did.  On
the evidence  before  it,  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
appellant's circumstances were exceptional such  that  they  outweighed  the
public interest in his deportation.

As regards the Tribunal's finding at  paragraph  29  of  its  determination,
that the provisions relating to automatic deportation under the  UK  Borders
Act 2007 did not apply to the appellant's appeal, I find that that  was  the
correct position. The  relevant  provisions  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
relating to automatic deportation came into force on 1 August 2008.  The  UK
Borders Act 2007 (Commencement No.3 and Transitional Provisions) Order  2008
sets out  transitional  provisions  for  the  commencement  of  the  Act  as
follows:

    "Transitional provisions

    3.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), section 32 applies, to the extent to
which it is commenced in
    article 2(a), to persons convicted before the passing of that Act who
    are in custody at the time of commencement or whose sentences are
    suspended at the time of commencement.
    (2) Paragraph (1) does not apply to a person who has been served with a
    notice of a decision to make a deportation order under section 5 of the
    Immigration Act 1971(b) before 1st August 2008."


The appellant's circumstances are that he was convicted on 21 June 2004  and
sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. Plainly, the 2007 Act  did  not  apply
to him. However, as Mr Saunders submitted, even if it did,  that  would  not
have had any material effect  on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal,  given  the
Tribunal's findings on Article 8.

Accordingly I find that the Tribunal did not make any errors of law  in  its
decision. It was entitled to reach the decision that it did.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.














                                Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
