
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 01539 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2013                            |On 30 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                            Demoy Conief Mcintosh
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Parkes, Counsel instructed by Afrifa & Partners
Sols
For the Respondent:    Mr McGirr Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Jamaica  against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  decision  of  the
    respondent not to revoke a deportation order made against him  following
    his conviction for extremely serious criminal offences.

 2. A difficulty with the determination is that the First-tier Tribunal  not
    only failed to consider a statement from the appellant's wife  but  said
    at paragraphs 21 and 23 of the determination that no statement had  been
    prepared, when in fact there was a statement from the  appellant's  wife
    setting out in considerable detail circumstances about the  private  and
    family life of the appellant.  I  think  it  is  right  to  say  I  have
    considerable sympathy with the First-tier Tribunal  judge  missing  this
    statement because it was not in any bundle provided from  the  appellant
    who was then representing himself. Rather, it was in a  bundle  provided
    by the respondent and actually pinned upside down making it even  harder
    to see.  Without the benefit of a representative to draw it specifically
    to the First-tier  Tribunal's  attention  it  is  perhaps  not  entirely
    surprising that it was missed.

 3. I cannot see that there could be any way in which the determination  can
    be salvaged.  It is impossible to say  that  the  matters  listed  there
    could not have made a difference and that is the test  that  has  to  be
    applied.

 4. I considered going ahead to decide the case  today.   Ms  Parkes  argued
    that I should not do that because the case has to be completely reheard.
    If I made a decision as primary decision maker it would  unfairly  limit
    the appellant's appeal rights.

 5. As I have indicated already,  although  there  is  much  to  this  man's
    discredit it is not his fault that the judge did not read the  statement
    that was on the file.

 6. I am therefore satisfied the appeal has to go  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be decided again.

 7. I think it is necessary to emphasise, although I have no doubt that  the
    appellant has been properly advised already, that my decision is not  an
    indication  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  necessarily  reach  a
    different decision when the case is reheard. It merely reflects that the
    First-tier Tribunal ignored evidence that could make  a  difference  and
    the appellant is entitled to a proper decision.

4.   I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and order it to  be
    decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 December 2013               |










