
                                    [pic]
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01969/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 August 2016                             |On 25 November 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr DANIEL [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan
For the Respondent:    Mr Aghayara


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr [B] is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1968.  This case arises  out  of
    the Secretary of State's decision of  14  October  2014  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order.  By a decision promulgated on 12  May  2015
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Coleman  allowed  Mr  [B]'s  appeal
    against that decision under the Immigration Rules  and  in  respect  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. As Judge Coleman makes clear at paragraph 2 of her determination Mr [B]
    has a complex immigration history.  It is not necessary to recount that
    history here, but  I  note  that  he  has  on  various  occasions  used
    different names and identities in his  dealings  with  the  immigration
    authorities.  It appears that he has been in the  country  since  about
    1999.  On 21 September 2007 he was convicted at Southwark  Crown  Court
    of possessing an identity document with intent and sentenced to  twelve
    months' imprisonment.   He  was  subsequently  served  with  notice  of
    liability to deportation.  At that  stage  he  was  using  a  different
    identity.  Using the present identity he was granted  leave  to  remain
    for three years in 2010 and then again in 2013.  On 16 October 2013 his
    whereabouts in the UK came to light and he was no longer regarded as an
    absconder.

 3. Mr [B] is married and has  three  children  born  3  January  2007,  13
    December 2008 and 14 August  2014.   His  wife  and  children  are  all
    British citizens.  The Secretary of State has accepted that Mr  [B]  is
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  wife  and  children.
    She has also accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the children to
    be removed to Nigeria.

 4. The Rules which apply to the revocation of a deportation order are  set
    out by Judge Coleman in paragraphs [17] and [18] of her  determination.
    Paragraph 399 provides that where a person has a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with a child under the age of 18 years, who is in
    the UK and is a British citizen, the Secretary of State  must  consider
    whether (a) it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to  live  in  the
    country to which the person is to be deported;  and  (b)  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the  person  who
    is to be deported.

 5. At [21] Judge Coleman states that the real issue  before  her  in  this
    case was in relation to paragraph 399(a) relating to the children.  She
    then recounts the concession that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to be removed to Nigeria and goes on to  consider  whether  or
    not it would be unduly harsh for the  children  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without their father.  In [22, 23 and 24] she analyses the  actions  of
    Mr [B], his immigration history, his use of different identities and  a
    consideration of whether or not he had for a time returned to Nigeria.

 6. As Judge Coleman notes at [25] none of that really  matters.   At  [26]
    she cites the case of ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4  for  the
    proposition that a very poor immigration  history  should  not  be  the
    cause for punishing or blaming children.  She then  suggests  that  she
    must consider whether the damage to  the  children  to  be  brought  up
    without their father is outweighed by the poor immigration  history  or
    the public interest.

 7. The only assessment of this is made at [32] where Judge Coleman  states
    'The simple question here therefore is whether to break up a family  of
    three young children is disproportionate to the offence in this  case'.
    She then states that she finds it would be disproportionate  or  unduly
    harsh to punish the children by making them either lose their father or
    the benefits of British nationality.

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted on
    1 June 2015.

    Error of law

 9. At the error of law hearing on 8 December 2015 before  myself  and  the
    Right Honourable Lord Boyd of Duncansby the crux of  the  Secretary  of
    State's submissions was that  the  First-tier  Judge  failed  to  place
    sufficient weight on Mr [B]'s immigration  history  and  his  offending
    when coming to the  conclusion  she  reached.   Further,  she  did  not
    explain in her decision why it would be unduly harsh for  the  children
    of Mr [B] to remain in the UK without him.

10. We found material error of law stating in reference to  the  assessment
    made in [32] (referred to above)

         '...

         7.   We considered that this is a quite inadequate consideration of
             the test which the decision  maker  must  apply  at  paragraph
             399(a)(i)(b) of the Immigration Rules.  In considering whether
             it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the United
             Kingdom without the person  who  is  to  be  deported,  it  is
             incumbent on the decision maker  to  look  at  the  particular
             circumstances of the child.  These would  include  whether  or
             not there may be  detrimental  circumstances  to  the  child's
             health or education or the care which  they  may  be  afforded
             without the person who is being deported.  It may  include  an
             assessment of the effect of the economic circumstances of  the
             family unit that is left in the United Kingdom.   For  example
             with young children it may be that a mother may have  to  give
             up work in order to look after  them  thus  impacting  on  the
             family's financial  situation.   It  would  also  include  the
             ability of the parent who is  being  deported  being  able  to
             maintain some contact through modern means of communication as
             well as the other support that is available  to  the  children
             that might assist them in dealing with the separation.

         8.   None of these factors are addressed by Judge  Coleman  in  her
             determination.  Accordingly we find that there is an error  of
             law and a decision falls to be remade.

         9.   Given the concession that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             children to be removed to Nigeria, the only issue that is left
             for determination is whether it would be unduly harsh for  the
             children to remain in the United Kingdom without (Mr [B]) ...'

         Rehearing of the appeal

11. The case was set down for re-hearing before myself on that issue.

12. Following several adjournments the case came before  me  on  16  August
    2016.

13. For the hearing a bundle  containing  statements  by  Mr  [B]  and  his
    partner Ms Ndidi [N] were lodged.  Also, several letters of support,  a
    report by Mr Peter Horrocks an independent social worker dated 22 April
    2016 and a letter (15 February 2016) from Hackney Learning Trust.

14. I heard evidence from Mr [B].  In examination-in-chief he  adopted  his
    statement.  In cross-examination he said his real name was Daniel  [B].
    He accepted that a deportation order had been made against him  in  the
    name Philip Idowu and said he had left the UK under that name.  He  had
    not sought revocation of the deportation order from Nigeria as  he  did
    not know he could do so.

15. He was asked about his family situation.  He has  three  children  aged
    nine, seven and four.  One, [C], who is seven is  autistic.   Asked  if
    there is any medical report confirming such, he said it is in  process.
    It needs several meetings.  An expert is coming to the  school.   Also,
    although they live in Tower Hamlets she  has  to  go  to  a  centre  in
    Hackney, a different borough.

16. In re-examination he was asked further about [C]'s current  needs.   He
    said that apart from the pending assessment the school has provided  an
    additional teacher for her.  Because they live in a  different  borough
    various criteria need to be satisfied.

17. He said that the family all live together.  They pay more attention  to
    [C] because her behaviour sometimes can be erratic and  violent.   They
    are working together with the school to help her.

18. I also heard evidence from Ms [N].  She adopted  her  statement.   They
    live together in family.  She  is  self-employed  doing  work  braiding
    hair.

19. She said she could not cope without her partner if he was  deported  to
    Nigeria.  He is a father figure particularly for  the  youngest  child,
    Isaac.   All  the  children  need  a  father.   [C]  because  she   has
    difficulties needs more attention.  Asked if her partner  provides  any
    financial support she  said  he  is  working  full-time  as  a  parking
    attendant.

20. In cross-examination the witness agreed that there was no diagnosis  of
    autism for [C] and that a GP's letter dated July 2016 made  no  mention
    of it.  She said the school is dealing with it.

21. In submissions, Mr Tufan said  that  'unduly  harsh'  required  a  high
    threshold.  Such was not reached in this case.  Whilst  there  is  some
    indication that [C] has some difficulties  there  is  no  diagnosis  of
    autism.  Even if she is autistic such would  still  not  be  enough  to
    reach the threshold.  There were no other particular factors in respect
    of the other children.  Nor was there  anything  of  substance  in  the
    social worker's report.  It might  well  be  that  the  children  would
    suffer some emotional disturbance if Mr [B] were to be removed but such
    would be the necessary consequence of his criminality.

22. In reply, Mr Aghayara submitted that there was evidence that [C]  could
    be autistic.  It is clear she has special help at home and  at  school.
    She had an appointment pending at Homerton Hospital.

23. Mr Aghayara accepted that if the children were, as he put it,  'normal'
    children the high threshold would not be met.  However,  it  was  [C]'s
    problems which raised it to that level.  The partner needs  extra  help
    in caring for [C].  Mr [B] plays his role as a primary carer.   It  was
    in the best interests of the children for their father to  remain  with
    them rather than in being in phone and  electronic  contact  with  them
    from Nigeria.

         Consideration

24. In considering this matter the sole issue is whether it would be unduly
    harsh for the children to remain in the UK without their father.

25. I look first at the best interests of the children.  I see no reason to
    divert from the conclusion  of  the  First-tier  Judge  that  the  best
    interests of the children are  served  by  being  brought  up  by  both
    parents.  There was no challenge to the evidence that he is living with
    his partner and children as a family and that  with  his  partner  they
    take day-to-day care of them.  Those best interests  remain  a  primary
    factor in the assessment that must  be  conducted  notwithstanding  the
    provisions of section 117A-C and the Immigration Rules.

26. I note the report by the independent social worker and see no reason to
    doubt his assertion that were their father to  be  removed  they  would
    suffer 'trauma, distress  and  sadness'  and  that  they  would  suffer
    'emotional  harm'.  Such  is  supported  by  the  GP  who  states  that
    deportation would have 'definite emotional impact on his family.'

27. Per KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh)  [2015]  UKUT  543:  'Whether  the
    consequences of deportation will be "unduly harsh"  for  an  individual
    involves more than "uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome
    or  merely  difficult  and  challenging"  consequences  and  imposes  a
    considerably more elevated or higher threshold. The consequences for an
    individual will be "harsh" if they are "severe"  or  "bleak"  and  they
    will be "unduly" so if they are  "inordinately" or "excessively"  harsh
    taking into account all of the circumstances of  the  individual'   (at
    [26]).

28. 'All of the circumstances' includes the criminal history of the  person
    facing deportation (per MM (Uganda) & Anr v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  450)
    (below).

29. In considering the situation of the children I conclude that  it  would
    clearly be harsh but do not see that it would be obviously unduly harsh
    for the children to remain without their father.  It seems  that  their
    mother was able to manage without him when he was in prison and when at
    a later stage he returned under a false  identity  to  Nigeria.   Until
    recent years his relationship with his children was fractured.  It  was
    not clear to me the extent of any  practical  difficulties  the  mother
    would face in caring for the children alone.  It  seems  she  has  been
    able to earn a living as a hair braider.  Although it was claimed  that
    Mr [B] is working as a parking attendant  no  documentary  evidence  of
    such was produced, evidence which one would reasonably have thought was
    easily available.  I did not believe that evidence.

30. Nor do I see any evidence that Mr [B]'s presence is needed  to  prevent
    the children from being ill-treated, or  their  health  or  development
    being significantly impaired, or their care being other than  safe  and
    effective.

31. As indicated, Mr Aghayara accepted that he would be in difficulty if as
    he put it the children were all 'normal'.   His  emphasis  was  on  the
    middle child [C] who it was submitted was autistic.

32. In fact there  is  no  diagnosis  of  autism  before  me.   I  find  it
    surprising in that regard a GP's letter (4 July 2016)  which  makes  no
    mention of such.

33. There is some indication (February 2016) that [C]  was  to  receive  an
    Education, Health and Care Needs Assessment.  An appendix 'Observations
    in a school or nursery setting' (June 2016) and  a  Tower  Hamlets  CAF
    form do not add anything of consequence. I found Mr [B] and the witness
    vague in their evidence as to ongoing investigations and why  there  is
    no decision on this matter. On the evidence before me  I  do  not  find
    that [C] has significant developmental issues.

34. It was not suggested that Mr [B] would not be able to keep  in  contact
    by modern means with his children from Nigeria.

35. The Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) stated (at [26]) '... The expression
    "unduly harsh" in section 117C(5) and  Rule  399(a)  and  (b)  requires
    regard to be had to all  the  circumstances  including  the  criminal's
    immigration and criminal history'.

36. The amendments made in July 2014 sought to emphasise  the  strength  of
    the public  interest  regarding  the  desirability  of  deportation  of
    foreign criminals.  As the Court  put  it  in  MM  (Uganda)  'the  more
    pressing the public interest in his removal, the harder it will  be  to
    show that the effect on his child ... will be unduly harsh' [24].

37. The First-tier Judge  referred  to  Mr  [B]'s  'blatant  disregard  for
    immigration law', that he 'has done everything he  could  to  undermine
    immigration control', an 'appalling history', which culminated  in  his
    receiving a sentence of 12 months imprisonment.  Whilst that length  of
    imprisonment is at the lower end of the scale, in  seeking  to  balance
    the strong public interest in the deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal
    against the  family  circumstances,  for  the  reasons  given  above  I
    conclude that it would not be unduly harsh for the children  to  remain
    in the UK without Mr [B] the foreign criminal.

38. As Sedley LJ said in Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348

         'The tragic consequence is that this family ... will be  broken  up
         forever because of the appellant's bad  behaviour.   That  is  what
         deportation does.  Sometimes the balance between its  justification
         and its consequences falls the other way, but when it does so is  a
         question for [the Tribunal]'

39. I therefore dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal is remade as dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

