
[pic]
IAC-CH-SA/LR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01487/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1st February 2016                     |On 18th March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AK
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E. King,  Counsel  instructed  by  Irving  and  Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge  Froom  and  Mr  C  P  O'Brien)
    (hereinafter referred to as "the panel") promulgated on 1st April  2015
    in which the Tribunal allowed the appeal of  AK against the decision of
    the Secretary of State to make a deportation order against him.

 2. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant before the Tribunal, I
    will for ease of reference refer to her as the Respondent  as  she  was
    the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.   Similarly I will refer  to
    AK as the Appellant as he  was  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. There is no dispute between the parties that the Tribunal  should  make
    an anonymity direction pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as  amended)  as  the  case  involves  the
    interests of an Appellant with significant health problems.  Unless the
    Upper  Tribunal  or  a  court  orders  otherwise,  no  report  or   any
    proceedings or any form of  publication  therefore  shall  directly  or
    indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  or  the  minor  children.    This
    prohibition  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties   and   their
    representatives.

Background:

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey.  He appealed against the decision
    of the Respondent who on 8th July 2013 decided to  make  a  deportation
    order against him under Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 on the
    ground that, for the purpose of Section 3(5)(a) of the  1971  Act,  the
    Appellant's deportation is conducive to the public good.


 5. The Appellant's history is not in any dispute.  He came to the UK as  a
    spouse and subsequently obtained indefinite leave  to  remain  although
    his marriage ended months later.  There is  no  dispute  that  he  ever
    resided in the UK unlawfully.  He then started to use drugs  and  began
    to suffer from mental health problems and self-harmed on two occasions.
     His brother decided to send him to Turkey where he remained  for  some
    18 months before returning to the UK.  His problems continued.  In 2004
    he returned to  Turkey  for  a  year.   The  Appellant  received  three
    convictions; on the 4th April 2003 he was convicted of  common  assault
    and ABH for which he was  fined.   On  the  18th  August  2003  he  was
    convicted of harassment and was conditionally discharged for two years.
     On the 14th April he was convicted of battery, possessing cannabis and
    possessing an offensive weapon in public and was sentenced to two terms
    of imprisonment of three months.

 6. In July 2007 he was arrested for waving a  knife  in  public,  pursuing
    members of the public and threatening to kill one of  them.   When  the
    police arrived, he stabbed the roof and windscreen of their vehicle and
    stabbed a police officer (who was fortunately wearing a stab  resistant
    vest).  On 25th February 2008 the Appellant was  found  not  guilty  by
    reason of insanity and hospitalised under the Mental Health  Act  1983.
    On 6th December  2010  the  Mental  Health  Tribunal  set  out  several
    conditions for his release and he was discharged into the community  in
    April 2011.  He was required to reside in a particular local  authority
    nursing home, to be compliant with all medications  prescribed  by  his
    care team, to attend all appointments, to abstain  from  illicit  drugs
    and submit to random drug testing.  He was also  liable  to  recall  to
    hospital for further treatment should that  become  necessary.   It  is
    recorded that he received positive  reports  from  the  staff  and  was
    compliant with his medication and the other supervision required.

 7. The Secretary of State wrote to the Appellant on the 9th  January  2012
    seeking reasons as to why he should not be deported from the UK and  on
    the 1st May 2012, a decision was made to make a deportation order.  The
    appeal against that decision was listed on three  occasions  until  the
    Secretary of State withdrew that decision.


 8. On 8th July 2013 the Respondent made a decision to deport the Appellant
    under section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  She considered that
    his deportation was conducive to the public good and  took  account  of
    the public interest and the presumption in favour  of  deportation  for
    someone liable to same.

 9. The reasons given for that decision are set out  in  a  letter  of  the
    Respondent dated 8th July 2013 (see M1 of the Respondent's bundle)  and
    are summarised in the decision of the panel at paragraphs [7]-[11].

10.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

11. The first appeal came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel  (Judge
    Rothwell and  Mrs  Jordan)  on  22nd  November  2013.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 9th December of that year, the panel allowed the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.

12. The panel found that as the Appellant was  not  criminally  responsible
    for his actions, he "ought not to be considered  for  deportation"  (at
    [45]).  In the alternative, it considered that paragraphs  399(a),  (b)
    and 399A did not apply and so proceeded to  consider  Article  8.   The
    panel found the Appellant had little or no contact with his  family  in
    Turkey, that he was no  longer  in  touch  with  his  brother  who  had
    returned  there  and  that  his  family  would   not   wish   to   take
    responsibility  for  him  (see  [48]).   The  Tribunal  considered  the
    evidence, noted that he had taken several courses,  had  the  tools  to
    ensure he kept well and abided by  the  terms  of  his  discharge.   It
    concluded that he posed little risk to others and that the risk of  re-
    offending was low (at [50]).  Finally, it set out a  list  of  what  it
    considered to be exceptional  circumstances  [51]  and  concluded  that
    deportation was disproportionate.

13. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal  and  the  appeal
    was heard by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic on 8th June  2nd  October  2014
    and in a determination  promulgated  on  14th  October  2014  gave  her
    reasons as to  why  she  considered  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.

14. The judge recorded that the appeal was a decision to deport  which  was
    made under Section 3(5)(a) and further recorded the concession made  by
    Mr Wilding on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  paragraph  398(c)
    was not applicable to the Appellant's  circumstances  for  the  reasons
    given by the First-tier Tribunal panel and that the Appellant  was  not
    an "offender" within the meaning of  the  Rules.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    consider that it may have been open to the Tribunal to  find  that  the
    Appellant's conduct was not serious enough to justify  deportation  but
    only after a full assessment of all the  factors  relied  upon  by  the
    Secretary of State had been considered.  The Upper Tribunal  considered
    that that had not been done and consequently  the  judge  remitted  the
    appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined  de  novo  (see
    paragraph 19 of the determination).

15. Consequently the judge remitted the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to be determined de novo (see paragraph 19 of the determination).

The second hearing before the First-tier Tribunal:

16. In accordance with that decision, the appeal came before the First-tier
    Tribunal panel on the 25th March 2015.  In a determination  promulgated
    on the 1st April 2015 the panel allowed the appeal.  The panel had  the
    advantage of considering the  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and
    further relevant evidence relating to his mental health and his current
    circumstances.  At paragraphs [16 to 23] the panel set out the law.  At
    paragraph [24 to 31] the panel considered the matters set  out  in  the
    decision of Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability to deport) [2012]  UKUT  00196
    and began by considering the issue of whether the Appellant was  liable
    to deportation.  At [24] the panel recorded the decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in which it upheld the decision  of  the  previous  First-tier
    Tribunal panel that paragraph 398(c) could have no application in  this
    appeal.  The panel set out that although permission to appeal had  been
    granted to the Respondent on that point it had not been pursued at  the
    hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  as  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted that the Appellant had not been convicted  and  was  therefore
    not an offender.  Thus the panel recorded that their starting point was
    that the Appellant did not fall within paragraph 398 of its three limbs
    and therefore fell outside the "complete code" of the  Rules  in  which
    deportation is resisted on Article 8 grounds.  They  also  recorded  at
    [25] that the same reasoning applied to the  Appellant  as  not  coming
    within the definition of a "foreign criminal" provided by Section  117D
    of the 2002 Act.  They stated  that  whilst  117D(2)(c)(ii)  and  (iii)
    cover conducive deports not falling within  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions, the Appellant was not an offender.

17. The panel  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  background
    entitled the Respondent to deem his deportation conducive to the public
    good.  The panel set out at length the evidence that  was  before  them
    and in particular the Appellant's mental health problems and summarised
    that  evidence  at  paragraphs  [32  to  44].   This  also  included  a
    consideration of the evidence given by  the  Appellant  concerning  his
    current circumstances and  his  present  contact  with  his  family  in
    Turkey.

18. The panel at paragraphs [45 to 52] set out the relevant law relating to
    Article 8 and began its assessment at paragraphs  [53  to  62]  of  the
    determination.   They  identified  the  legitimate   aim   to   justify
    deportation as being the prevention of  crime  and  the  protection  of
    public from the risk of harm.  The panel recorded that

         "the public interest in securing the deportation  of  offenders  is
         considerable and the public interest in relation to the  particular
         legitimate aim identified in this  case  is  stronger  than  in  an
         ordinary immigration removal case (see JO (Uganda) [2010] EWCA  Civ
         10, paragraph 29).  We have kept in mind that the Rules  contain  a
         presumption that deportation is in the public interest."

19. On that side of the scales,  the  panel  took  into  account  that  the
    Appellant had caused significant harm in the past even  though  he  had
    been found not guilty by  reason  of  insanity.   They  considered  the
    Appellant's circumstances since that conduct had taken  place  in  2007
    and that they had reached the conclusion that nine years on  there  was
    only a minimal risk to the public.  The  panel  did  not  discount  the
    possibility of a relapse noting that if that were to take  place  there
    would be some risk of committing acts which could cause harm.  However,
    they considered their assessment on the basis of the most recent and up-
    to-date  evidence.   They  found  the  Appellant  to  be  living  semi-
    independently, managing his own medication, showing a good insight into
    his illness he was compliant with  his  treatment,  both  in  terms  of
    taking his medication and attending appointments.  He had abided by the
    terms of his conditional discharge from hospital and had stopped  using
    cannabis.  He had also found strategies for coping with stress and  the
    panel gave an example of this at [56].  At [57] the  panel  found  that
    the Appellant had

         "plainly made great strides towards stabilising his condition since
         2007.  Not only did he remain well in the  care  home  but  he  has
         recently moved on to semi-independent  living  in  a  situation  in
         which there are less controls in place.  There is  nothing  in  the
         evidence since 2009 to suggest there is a significant risk  of  the
         Appellant having a relapse.  We  rely  on  the  series  of  letters
         submitted  on  behalf  of   the   Appellant   from   the   relevant
         professionals which are unanimous in this respect.  If  the  expert
         team which monitors and supports the Appellant is satisfied  he  is
         making progress and can be trusted, we can  see  no  reason  to  go
         behind their judgment."

    Thus they reached the  conclusion  that  "the  risk  of  the  Appellant
    causing harm is minimal." [see 57].

20. In reaching that conclusion  the  panel  took  into  account  that  the
    Appellant remained a restricted patient, that  he  had  a  strong  team
    around him  which  monitored  and  supported  him  and  remained  under
    supervision and that he would be subject to recall to hospital  at  any
    time.  They reached the conclusion that in the event that the Appellant
    did relapse, they considered it would be picked up immediately  and  he
    would be returned to hospital.

21. The panel reminded themselves  also  as  a  relevant  factor  that  the
    Appellant was not under the threat of deportation as a  result  of  any
    criminal behaviour but was found not guilty by reason  of  insanity  of
    the index offence which the panel  took  as  meaning  that  he  had  no
    criminal  responsibility  for  his  actions.   They  found   his   last
    conviction was in April 2004 eleven years ago and that was a matter  to
    take into account when making a decision  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    public interest was outweighed.

22. At [60] the panel took into account the list  of  factors  set  out  in
    Section 117B reaching the conclusion that sub-Section (1) did not apply
    as he had indefinite leave to remain and sub-Section (2) the  Appellant
    spoke fluent English.  As regards sub-Section (3) they  found  that  he
    was not ready yet  to  become  financially  independent  but  that  his
    reliance might foreseeably diminish in view of the progress that he had
    made and thus in relation to that factor there was some public interest
    in deportation.  They did  not  regard  that  as  carrying  significant
    weight because the panel reached the conclusion that on the  particular
    facts of the case it would be unreasonable to expect the  Appellant  to
    engage in activities which might halt or  reverse  his  progress.   The
    panel found that sub-Sections 4(4) and (5) were not applicable  because
    the Appellant had always resided in the UK lawfully.

23. At [61] the panel considered the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the Appellant could settle in Turkey  and  that
    he would receive some support  from  his  family  members  who  resided
    there.  The argument advanced by the Secretary of State was that  there
    were mental health services there and medication  would  be  available.
    The panel set out the Appellant's evidence concerning this issue.

The Appeal Before the Upper Tribunal:

24. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on the 26th April 2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Foudy.

25. Mr Clarke for the Secretary of State relied upon  the  written  grounds
    and Ms King, relied upon the Rule 24 response to  those  grounds  dated
    3rd June 2015.

26.  Mr Clarke on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that the First-
    tier Tribunal panel erred in its approach to the public  interest  when
    considering the Section 117D factors at paragraph  [60]  and  that  the
    panel  did  not  properly  consider  the  issue  as  to  his  financial
    independence and that the reasoning was flawed as set out in  Ground  1
    of the written grounds.  He also  relied  on  the  written  grounds  at
    paragraphs [4] and [5].

27. In relation to Ground 2 he submitted that in reliance on  the  decision
    of GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, the United Kingdom was not obliged to
    provide medical treatment and that the circumstances found by the panel
    relating to his medical health was  not  enough  on  a  proportionality
    assessment to outweigh the public interest and that this was  a  matter
    of weight.

28. He further submitted that the panel erred in law by failing  to  assess
    the Appellant's circumstances as at the date  of  the  hearing  and  at
    paragraph [61] the panel should not have considered that his  condition
    may deteriorate on return and that such a finding was not open to  him.



29. Ms Clarke relied upon the written response dated 3rd  June  2015  which
    dealt with Ground 1.  As to Ground 2, she submitted the decision of  GS
    [India]  was  not  on  all  fours  with  the  present  appeal  and  the
    circumstances of this particular Appellant.  In this case the Appellant
    had indefinite leave to remain but for the decision to deport  him  and
    this was an important distinction thus the points raised as to  whether
    there was an obligation to provide medical care did  not  bite  in  the
    same way as it did in the decision of GS [India] and thus it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove him as he was entitled  to  NHS  care  which
    were different circumstances to that  of  the  Appellant  in  GS.   She
    submitted that whilst the question of appropriate medical care was part
    of his case it was not the sole basis of his stay and it  was  a  wider
    aspect of establishing his private life.

30. As to the ground in which it  was  asserted  that  the  panel  did  not
    consider the claim at the date of the hearing she submitted it would be
    wholly artificial of the panel to have considered his circumstances  to
    be "frozen in time" and that it was open to  the  panel  to  take  into
    account the likelihood of what would happen from  the  evidence  before
    them.  She submitted there was sufficient evidence before the panel  at
    [44] and that there were two reports in  the  Appellant's  bundle  each
    report making it plain that there was a need for careful and supervised
    return to independent living.  The panel were  entitled  to  take  into
    account the Appellant's demeanour and the three monthly  reviews.   She
    submitted that whilst the evidence did not make a prediction as to what
    would happen if the treatment ended, and  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant himself were matters that the panel  were  entitled  to  take
    into account.

31. I reserved my decision.

Discussion:

32. Dealing with Ground 1, it is submitted that in  considering  his  claim
    outside of the Rules the panel erred in law as to  whether  there  were
    "exceptional  circumstances"   relying   on   paragraph   10   of   the
    determination.  However that paragraph is taken from  paragraph  50  of
    the refusal letter and following the consideration of paragraph 398 and
    399 which the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  did  not  apply  in  the
    Appellant's case.  As the panel recorded at paragraphs [24 and  25]  of
    the determination,  AK  did  not  fall  within  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons already accepted by the Secretary  of
    State before the Upper Tribunal.  Nor could he be seen  as  a  "foreign
    criminal"  again  an  issue  conceded  by  the  Secretary   of   State.
    Consequently the decision was to be considered outside of those Rules.

33. The grounds also challenge  the  panel's  assessment  and  findings  at
    paragraph [60] (see paragraphs [3 to 5] of the written  grounds  relied
    on by the Secretary of State) whereby the panel considered the  factors
    listed in Section 117B.  Whilst  it  is  asserted  that  there  are  no
    findings made at [60] as to whether he might be able to support himself
    (relying on Section 117(3) of the NIA Act 2002),  the  panel  did  make
    findings on this particular issue.  They found  that  he  was  not  yet
    ready to become financially independent but that the evidence was  that
    his reliance on benefits might foreseeably diminish if he continued  to
    make progress but that this was some  way  off  at  present.   On  this
    issue, the panel weighed in  the  balance  that  he  had  not  been  in
    employment since the year 2000 and therefore when applying the criteria
    under Section  117B(3)  this  was  a  factor  that  was  in  favour  of
    deportation on the public interest side of the scales.

34. I do not accept the submission made on behalf of the Secretary of State
    that the panel's reference to this at [60] where it was said  "to  this
    extent there is some public interest in deportation" to be puzzling  or
    unclear.  The grounds do not appear to recognise that at [60] the panel
    were considering the specific factors listed in Section  117  and  that
    the factors relating to financial independence was only  one  of  those
    factors.  The panel were therefore entitled to reach the conclusion  on
    this particular issue that  they  did  not  consider  that  it  carried
    significant weight on the particular facts  of  this  case  because  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the Appellant to engage  in  activities
    which might halt or reverse his current progress.  This was  a  finding
    that was open to the panel on the evidence before them.   At  [44]  the
    panel recorded the Appellant's evidence as to his ability to  work  and
    then become financially independent and that he  had  wanted  to  begin
    with voluntary work and gradually build this up to paid work  but  that
    this would be a gradual  process.   It  is  correct  that  the  medical
    evidence before the panel did not provide  a  timescale  for  any  such
    progression but given his past history, it was reasonable for the panel
    to reach the conclusion that it would be likely to be a slow process to
    ensure that progress made thus far was maintained.

35. The grounds also failed to take into account that  the  panel  properly
    considered the other factors relevant to Section 117 and that they  did
    not apply on  the  circumstances  of  this  particular  Appellant;  the
    Appellant had indefinite leave to remain  (117B(1)),  he  spoke  fluent
    English (Section 117B(2)) and also sub-Sections (4) and  (5)  were  not
    relevant as he had always resided in the UK lawfully.  Thus  the  issue
    financial independence was only one of the factors  and  the  panel  at
    [60] were seeking to consider them when reaching an overall view as  to
    where the balance lay.  Contrary to the written  grounds  at  paragraph
    [5], the panel did give adequate and sustainable reasons  for  reaching
    the view that he could not currently work in  some  capacity  but  that
    there was a prospect of that.  It was a matter for the panel as to what
    weight they attributed to each factor.

36. Dealing with Ground 2, it was submitted on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant's "medical  claim"  was  "beset  with  errors"
    seeking to rely on the decision of GS (India) [as cited] and  that  the
    test of whether the claim succeeded should have focused on  whether  he
    would be able to form relationships on return quoting paragraph [56 and
    87] of GS (India).  Thus it is submitted on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State that the Article 8 claim must reflect on "the  capacity  to  form
    and enjoy relationships."

37. In my view that submission ignores the basis of the appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal could not simply  be  described  as  a
    "medical claim" but dealt with what Ms King described  as  the  broader
    considerations of deportation in  the  light  of  all  the  Appellant's
    circumstances including his mental health but  also  his  previous  and
    hitherto lawful residence  in  the  UK  for  a  significant  period  of
    seventeen and a half years (see [53]).  The panel  were  considering  a
    proportionality balance by reference to the principles set out  by  the
    Grand Chamber in Uner v The Netherlands [2006] ECHR 873 which the panel
    set out at [51] and the Appellant's medical circumstances are only part
    of that proportionality balance.  In this context they were entitled to
    take into account the Appellant's lawful residence and the  significant
    period of that residence of seventeen and a half years [53] and at [54]
    and that he was not at risk of deportation due  to  criminal  behaviour
    [at 59].  Furthermore they took into account his risk  of  re-offending
    and his conduct since the last incident which was relied  upon  by  the
    Secretary of State in 2007.   In  this  respect  the  panel  took  into
    account the evidence recorded at [36 to 41].  Their  findings  on  this
    issue at [55] when considering the public interest side of  the  scales
    concluded that there was only a minimal risk to the public and that  he
    had made great strides towards stabilising his  condition  since  2007.
    Thus they reached the conclusion that the risk of the Appellant causing
    harm was "minimal".

38. There is also no merit in the grounds at which it is asserted that  the
    panel misdirected itself in law  by  failing  to  have  regard  to  the
    evidence as at the date of the hearing.  It was open to  the  panel  to
    consider the issue of return and the possible outcome of his return  to
    Turkey.  In this context, the panel was entitled to take  into  account
    the evidence of the Appellant as to his last stay  in  Turkey  and  the
    reaction of his family in the light of his mental health  difficulties.
    Thus the panel said at [61] that they had made an assessment of how the
    family might react to his return taking into  account  the  Appellant's
    subjective fear which  they  considered  would  undermine  his  current
    stability as would  the  "abrupt  loss  of  the  team  which  currently
    provided the Appellant  with  treatment  and  support."   Against  this
    background, it was open to the panel to consider the likelihood of  the
    stresses that might occur on return to Turkey.

39. The fact that the  Appellant  had  contact  with  the  family  did  not
    undermine the findings that were made by the panel at  [61].   That  it
    was open for the panel to consider on the evidence  and  to  take  into
    account the likely reaction to him were he to be returned.

40. The parties agreed that this was an "old style deportation" and it  was
    expressly conceded before the Upper Tribunal and the second  First-tier
    Tribunal panel that paragraph 398(c) had no application to  the  appeal
    and this Appellant was  not  subject  to  the  provisions  relating  to
    automatic deportation.  Consequently the panel were required  to  carry
    out an evaluation of the evidence and to carry  out  a  proportionality
    balance. In any given case an evaluative  exercise  of  this  kind  may
    admit of more than one answer.  If so,  provided  all  the  appropriate
    factors have been taken into account, the decision cannot  be  impugned
    unless it is perverse or irrational, in a sense of falling outside  the
    range of permissible  decisions.  The  panel  properly  considered  the
    relevant  factors in the balance and gave weight to the presumption  in
    favour  of  deportation  (see[54])  but  nonetheless  after  a  careful
    consideration  of all those relevant factors  reached a  decision  open
    to them that the public interest was outweighed on the particular facts
    identified in this appeal. Whilst it may be  said  it  was  a  generous
    decision, it cannot be said that it was a decision  that  fell  outside
    the range of permissible decisions and was one  open  to  them  on  the
    evidence presented before them.   Therefore  the  grounds  advanced  on
    behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  are  not  made  out  and  do  not
    demonstrate any  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Notice of Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of  law
and the decision stands.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

