

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA 01611-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Royal Courts of Justice                 |             Decision signed:|
|                                              |08.05.2014                   |
|on    03.02.2014 & 28.04.2014                 |                    sent out:|
|                                              |12.05.2014                   |

Before:
                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN
                   Ms VS STREET (lay member - on 28 April)

Between:
                               Gillian WILSON
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mrs Mavelyn Vidal (working under the supervision of
                    Duncan Lewis & Co, Harrow)
For the respondent: Mr Gregor Jack (on 3 February); Mr Steve Walker (on 28
April)

                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ruth Sullivan and a lay member),  sitting  at  Kingston
    Crown Court on 22 November 2013, to  a deportation appeal by a  citizen
    of Jamaica, born there  on  30  January  1976,  here  since  2001,  and
    sentenced to four years' imprisonment for wounding with intent to cause
    grievous bodily harm on 27 March 2012.

ERROR OF LAW

 2. Permission to appeal was given on two points: one concerned the  first-
    tier panel's treatment of the appellant's son  J2,  born  23  September
    2009. They were blamed for treating his best interests as  the,  rather
    than a primary consideration; but they expressly said at  paragraph  57
    that they were a  primary consideration, and the writer saw nothing  to
    suggest that they did not mean what they said.

 3. The other ground involved the panel's approach to the public  interest.
    Here, without citing it, they  correctly  set  out  the  effect  of  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at paragraph 16: "The Rules are intended
    to provide a complete code and in practice it will be exceptional for a
    case to fall outside the Rules, but within Article 8 protection".  Then
    they alluded again to 'exceptional circumstances', in dealing with  the
    presenting officer's submissions at paragraph 23.

 4. Mr Jack blamed the panel for not noting  that  this  appellant,  having
    been sentenced to four years' imprisonment, fell  under  paragraph  398
    (a) of the Rules, so that she could not in any event benefit  from  the
    routes to article 8 protection set  out  in  paragraph  399A.  However,
    since the panel took the view, not challenged in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    that those routes were not available to the appellant on the  remaining
    facts of her case, the writer did not regard this as a  material  error
    of law, if it was one at all, since, whatever happened,  the  appellant
    needed to show  some  exceptional  circumstances  before  MF  (Nigeria)
    allowed her to succeed under article 8 generally.

 5. It was on that need for 'exceptional circumstances'  that  the  panel's
    decision is open to challenge. They  seem  to  have  realized  that  it
    existed, as shown by the points quoted at 3; but Mrs  Vidal  was  quite
    unable to refer the writer to anything in their decision  which  showed
    how they regarded the requirement as satisfied on the individual  facts
    of this case. They considered those clearly and  with  some  care;  but
    this was an essential point in their decision, on which they needed  to
    explain to the losing side (the Home Office) why they had lost. In  the
    writer's view they did not do so, and this was a material error of law,
    which required their decision to be re-made, though their review of the
    facts was to provide the basis for that.

DECISION RE-MADE

 6. History   The appellant first  got  together  with  Freddie  Lobban  in
    Jamaica in 1995: he already had two children, now about 27 and 25,  and
    settled in this country, and  she  one,  who  remains  in  Jamaica.  In
    Jamaica they had their elder son, whom I  shall  call  J1,  for  short,
    though it seems he is just 18: he remains there, with  the  appellant's
    mother and her family. In 1998 Mr Lobban came to this  country  on  his
    own, and in 1999  got  married  here:  his  then  wife  and  their  two
    children, now about 14 and 12, are both here as British citizens, as is
    Mr Lobban himself.

 7. On September 2001 the appellant came here and was given 28 days'  leave
    to enter as a visitor on arrival,  Jamaican  citizens  not  being  visa
    nationals at that time: after that ran out, she stayed on without doing
    anything to regularize her stay till October 2010, when she applied for
    leave to remain under article 8.  This  application  was  rejected  for
    being on the wrong form, and she applied again  that  December.  Before
    the Home Office got round to taking any action on that,  the  appellant
    committed the offence which was to lead to these proceedings.

 8. Meanwhile, in about 2005 Mr Lobban and his wife fell out, and he  moved
    out to live with the appellant. Their renewed relationship led  to  the
    birth of J2 on 23 September 2009; but they were  living  apart  at  the
    time the appellant committed her offence. This happened on 6 May, in  a
    room where she and J2 were living, between her and Carol Simpson,  whom
    she described to us as "not just a  very  good  friend,  but  a  family
    friend".

 9. Something led to an argument between the appellant and Mrs Simpson, and
    in the course of it the appellant inflicted  serious  injuries  to  Mrs
    Simpson's face with a glass, which  broke. The appellant  was  arrested
    soon after, and went back to live with Mr Lobban and  J2,  till  on  17
    February 2012 she was convicted by a jury  of   s.  18  wounding  (with
    intent to cause grievous bodily harm). At that point she was taken into
    custody, where she has remained ever since, while Mr  Lobban  has  been
    looking after J2.

10. On 27 March 2012 the sentencing judge described what the appellant  had
    done in this way, after describing  how  the  argument  had  led  to  a
    struggle between her and Mrs Simpson:

       During that struggle you took  hold  of  a  glass  that  was  on  the
       draining board ... and you hit Mrs Simpson over her  eye,  with  that
       glass, which broke and cut her forehead and temple. Mrs  Simpson  has
       been left with visible scarring above her  eye,  but  thankfully  her
       sight was not damaged. Although you said you only struck once in self-
       defence, it follows from the verdict of the jury that  they  accepted
       the evidence of Mrs Simpson and ... her landlord ...  that  this  was
       not simply a case of a single blow,  but  that  you  did  strike  Mrs
       Simpson deliberately a second time,  with  the  broken  base  of  the
       glass. That caused her a further 3 or 4 cm cut  to  the  top  of  her
       head, which, as well as the other cuts, required stitches. This was a
       nasty attack on a woman with whom, until  then,  you  had  been  good
       friends, and whoever started the struggle it was totally wrong of you
       to use the glass during the fight. Not only did you hit her with  the
       intention of causing her some serious harm, but  you  used  a  broken
       glass to do so and the use of a broken glass to the head or face  can
       cause horrendous injuries. It is very lucky that Mrs Simpson was  not
       more seriously injured than she was.

11. The judge took into account the assessed low risk of the appellant's re-
    offending, her previous good character, and her having  been  the  sole
    carer for J2, though he noted that J2, then only  16  months  old,  had
    been present during this incident, and within range of breaking  glass;
    and that he was in the care of Mr Lobban by the time of sentencing.

12. The appellant spent the custodial part of her sentence in HMP Downview,
    where she completed a number of courses, and got good reports, such  as
    one from a PO Wade, who described her as "a very polite and  respectful
    person which has resulted in achieving enhanced status. [She] works for
    DHL, a job reserved for only the most  trusted  inmates".  During  this
    time the appellant was given notice of automatic deportation on 11  May
    2012, to which she responded, and on 3 July 2013 served with the  order
    under appeal. The appellant served the last part of her sentence in HMP
    Holloway, where she got another good report on 17 March this year  from
    the supervisor of the kitchen, where she was working, and  on  8  April
    2014 she was transferred under immigration powers to  the  Yarl's  Wood
    detention centre.

13. The current OASys report on the appellant is dated 17  April  2014:  it
    records her describing her offence in the same way as the  account  the
    judge had pointed out was rejected by the jury; so, when it goes on  to
    describe her as accepting full responsibility for what had happened, it
    does not seem that this went any further than that. The risk assessment
    is low throughout, except for a 'known adult', presumably Mrs  Simpson,
    where it is rated as high.

14. The appellant   in her evidence confirmed her statements, the first  of
    which had been before  the  panel.  In  it,  she  describes  abuse  she
    suffered from her mother, even as a grown-up person,  after  Mr  Lobban
    left Jamaica. Going on to the history of their life  together  in  this
    country, she explains how Mrs Simpson,  who  was  J2's  godmother,  had
    asked if she could come to live with them, late in 2010. The  appellant
    refused, as there was no room, which caused a rupture; so  in  February
    2011 she let Mrs Simpson come. At first  she  had  had  the  landlord's
    room; but, when he returned from Jamaica, she had  moved  in  with  the
    appellant. Not surprisingly,  that  had  caused  difficulties  with  Mr
    Lobban, who had moved out for a while, but without  their  relationship
    breaking down. The appellant then puts forward the version of the 6 May
    incident between her and Mrs Simpson which the judge said the jury must
    have rejected, though she goes on to express regret for it.

15. The appellant goes on to describe her life before and after being  sent
    to prison. She had been bailed to Mr Lobban's house, but moved  out  of
    there in August or September. However their relationship went  on,  and
    Mr Lobban has remained a  great  support  to  her  throughout;  but  he
    sometimes finds J2 tiring to deal with. She describes the accommodation
    available to them at her mother's in Jamaica: a  house  with  only  two
    rooms, where her sister and three children live too.

16. In the second statement, not dated, but clearly  taken  shortly  before
    the present hearing, the appellant describes J2's changing attitude  to
    her absence. Whereas he had previously been told simply  that  she  was
    working away from home, and apparently accepted that, even when brought
    to see her in prison, in the last few  weeks  he  had  shown  signs  of
    particularly missing her, telling her he had kept all the toys she  had
    given him, and asking whether, rather than when she is coming home.  He
    had hoped she might be able to come "after work" to an uncle's party on
    21 April, and had wanted to share his ice-cream with her at  home.  The
    appellant's verdict  on  Mr  Lobban's  care  for  him  was  that  their
    relationship was good, but Mr Lobban didn't understand little  children
    very well. J2 had also been having trouble sleeping.

17. In oral evidence the appellant described how she had met Mrs Simpson on
    a bus about a month after the incident, and asked if she could look  at
    her scars: Mrs Simpson, perhaps understandably, had declined, and there
    had been no further contact between them since then. She declared  that
    never in a million years would anything  similar  happen  between  them
    again.

18. As for J2, the appellant said she had never expected him to  be  in  Mr
    Lobban's sole care in the long  term.  Presumably  she  realized,  when
    sentenced, that he would have him for the next  two  years,  already  a
    long time in the life of a small child, but meant that she didn't  know
    that she faced a longer separation till  she  received  the  notice  of
    intention to deport in May 2012. The appellant said  she  had  no  idea
    where she would live in Jamaica; not  in  her  mother's  house  in  any
    event, owing to the abuse she had suffered from her mother as a  child.
    (This was a point considered and rejected by the first-tier panel,  for
    reasons  they  gave:  we  shall  give  our  own  view  on  it  in   our
    conclusions.)



19. Cross-examined, the appellant said she had always been  in  touch  with
    her mother since she came here in 2001. She had always been beaten when
    young, but hadn't realized till she came to this country that this  was
    wrong. She had phoned her mother every week or two weeks from Holloway,
    to re-assure J1 that all was well; but it cost  money  to  do  so  from
    Yarl's Wood, and she hadn't yet been in touch from there. J1  had  been
    five when she had left him with her mother: sometimes he  had  gone  to
    stay with her eldest son,  his  half-brother  [C  for  short]  and  C's
    father. Mr Lobban did see J1 when he went to Jamaica,  but  she  didn't
    know how often. Lately there had been some trouble  between  J1  and  a
    smaller boy locally, as a result of which J1 had had to spend more time
    away from her mother's, and those who had taken  it  on  themselves  to
    protect the boy; but he had not had to leave her house for good.

20. The appellant said J1 had been living with her, not  her  mother,  when
    she left Jamaica for this country in 2001; but she had had no idea  she
    would be away so long. When it was time for  her  to  return,  she  had
    "struggled with the decision" whether to do so, or to "stay and try  to
    achieve something for my children". This can only have referred to  the
    time (16 October 2001) when her only period of leave  in  this  country
    ran out.

21. As for the appellant's actual achievements in  this  country,  she  had
    worked for a time  with  Lambeth  Mencap,  including  a  spell  with  a
    cleaning firm with whom she had been directly employed. She agreed  she
    had been doing  part-time  work  in  2005,  as  recorded  in  her  2010
    application  form.  Besides  her  experience  helping   with   disabled
    children, she had worked in a restaurant, and been able  to  send  some
    money home for J1, as had Mr Lobban.

22. There is a very good reference for her from Yvonne Pennant-Taylor,  the
    Leisure Project Co-ordinator of Lambeth Mencap: dated 22 May  2012:  as
    well as praising  her  work  with  the  organization  since  2006,  and
    mentioning that she had gone on to complete an NVQ in Social Care "with
    a view to a career in this field, when possible", the letter goes on to
    say

       Over the years we have become friends and as a result my husband  and
       I have become Go-Parents to  her  son.  We  had  the  opportunity  of
       meeting her mother and two older  boys  who  are  both  charming  and
       sensible young men; and a real credit to [the appellant].

    The writer ends  by  calling  the  appellant  "a  truly  lovely  woman,
    trustworthy, fun loving, honest,  supportive  and  importantly  a  God-
    fearing individual who  takes  her  faith  very  seriously".  There  is
    nothing to show she was aware  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was
    already serving a sentence of  four  years'  imprisonment  for  causing
    grievous bodily harm with intent to the writer's  co-godmother  to  J2.
    Nor did Mrs Vidal, when she referred to this letter in passing, give us
    any explanation of how the writer had come  to  have  such  a  pleasant
    meeting with the appellant's mother, and two older boys, most likely to
    have been C and J1.

23. Mr Lobban       in his first statement (19 August 2013) explains how he
    wouldn't be able to go to Jamaica  with  the  appellant,  if  she  were
    deported, because of his other families here. He says he  is  close  to
    all of them, but could not take them  to  Jamaica  "...  because  their
    mothers live in the UK and are unlikely to give me permission  to  take
    them out of the UK": this last can only refer to  the  14  and  12-year
    old, not the older children in their 20s. J2 would not get proper  care
    for his eczema in Jamaica; nor would  Mr  Lobban  himself  be  able  to
    afford the insulin he takes for his  diabetes.  He  also  suffers  from
    glaucoma, epilepsy  and  chest  pains.  Separation  he  says  would  be
    devastating for all of them.

24. In his oral evidence, Mr  Lobban  confirmed  what  he  had  said  about
    separation from the appellant and J2. We were anxious to know what  his
    plans were, in the event of the appeal being dismissed: it had  clearly
    not occurred to him that, as J2's father, named as such  on  his  birth
    certificate, he would be entitled  to  take  proceedings  to  stop  the
    appellant taking her out of this country with her. Rather  reluctantly,
    but understandably without having been given any  opportunity  to  face
    this question before, Mr Lobban said he would do that, if  it  came  to
    it.

25. Cross-examined, Mr Lobban said he had brought his older  sons  to  this
    country, but had never had the money to do so with J1, who  was  "there
    just by the help of God", given the violent crime  there  was.  He  had
    last been there in about 2011, and two years before that: when he  went
    over, he always saw J1, the appellant's mother, and her grown-up son C,
    though he himself stayed with his own sister an hour's drive away.

26. Dealing with the present situation, Mr  Lobban  said  that,  since  the
    appellant had been in custody, he had been looking after J2, with  help
    from his sister (in Crystal Palace, 20 minutes away) and  paid  carers:
    his other sisters, apart from the one in Jamaica, are in Birmingham and
    the United States. He  paid  someone  to  take  J2  to  school  in  the
    mornings, so he could get to work; but he didn't work full-time, so  as
    to be able to pick him up himself in the afternoons. His diabetes  left
    him feeling "a bit drained", and sometimes he  was  unable  to  put  J2
    through his homework: this  had  embarrassed  him,  when  he  heard  J2
    telling the appellant about it on the phone. Mr Lobban  said  he  would
    find it hard to look after J2 on his own.

27. J2's school report      was,  with  one  exception,  the  only  further
    evidence about the family to which we were referred in  the  course  of
    the hearing, or by its being  marked  as  'essential  reading'  in  the
    appellant's bundle. It is a special 'progress report', addressed to the
    appellant's solicitors, who would have requested it in response to  the
    directions given after the February hearing, and a very  helpful  piece
    of evidence. It is signed by both J2's headmistress, Jane Elliott,  and
    his nursery teacher Jo Salter. They are clearly not fully aware of  the
    appellant's situation, since, writing on 23 April 2014, they  refer  to
    her having been "absent for a period last term": of course she has been
    in custody since 17 February 2012,  well  before  J2  even  started  at
    school.

28. However, apart from that, J2's teachers are the best possible people to
    give an independent view of his  progress,  and  do  so  very  clearly,
    referring back to past reports, as well as  dealing  with  the  present
    situation. In October 2013, soon after he had  started,  at  only  just
    four years old, he was "a confident chatty member  of  the  class,  who
    settled well into Nursery. He is keen to  join  in  ...".  In  February
    2014,  he  "remains  cheerful  and  enthusiastic  ...  tries  out  most
    activities ... is a steady learner who listens well and interacts  well
    with children and staff". As of April, his  speech  and  language  were
    well developed, his literacy skills in line with expectations, and  his
    mathematics showing signs of exceeding them. He "has  a  good  attitude
    towards learning and enjoys coming to school. He is keen to please  and
    enjoys receiving praise for his achievements ... a  popular  member  of
    the class who has made friends and relates well to adults and  children
    ... always takes part in school events ... is consistently  clean,  and
    appears well  looked  after.  [J2's]  personal,  social  and  emotional
    development meets age-related expectations."

29. Dealing with the effects of the appellant's absence "for a period  last
    term", the report goes on to say that J2 "... showed signs of  distress
    ... was  unusually  tearful  and  sensitive  ...  needs  a  consistent,
    familiar environment in which  he  feels  secure  and  this  relies  on
    security and consistency in his home situation also. We  are  concerned
    that [J2] remains at school  and  continues  to  progress  in  a  safe,
    familiar environment".

30. Further evidence about J2     This came by way  of  witness  statements
    from Cheryl Paine, dated 21 November 2013 and 22 April 2014. Mrs  Payne
    describes herself as a "Keyworker of  Kids  Company,  a  charity  which
    provides intensive support to around 18,000 children and  young  people
    in London ...". She says she has known the appellant since early  2010,
    when she started getting help from Kids Company:

       Before her detention, I would meet [the appellant] at least once on a
       weekly basis. We would talk as and when she needed it and  often  the
       conversations would be around how difficult she was  finding  things,
       emotionally and financially, especially her housing situation.  Since
       Gillian has been in prison, our meeting[s] have been few, but  ...  I
       have discovered how difficult [the appellant's] childhood  and  young
       adult life in Jamaica was, and how these difficulties prompted her to
       accept the offer to come to England to build a better life ...

31. Mrs Payne goes on to describe the appellant as "an honest and generally
    passive woman who clearly displays that she has [J2's]  best  interests
    at heart. She would protect [J2] with her life, hence  finding  herself
    in this situation. The bond between mother and son is extremely  strong
    and ... [the appellant] would never have put herself in a position that
    would be detrimental to [J2] and this  incident  has  been  exceedingly
    unfortunate for them both. She describes the appellant as  hard-working
    and determined, and keen to  do  better  for  herself  if  she  had  an
    opportunity.

32. In her recent statement, Mrs Payne once more describes the appellant as
    "a very good and caring individual who got into a bad situation  trying
    to protect her child", and is nevertheless "deeply  remorseful  of  her
    actions. She is humble about the incident and agrees that she ought  to
    have reacted differently". Mrs  Payne  has  visited  the  appellant  in
    custody about every three months, and describes her worries about  J2's
    future if she were removed to Jamaica, citing  her  own  abuse  at  the
    hands of her mother.

33. General situation in Jamaica        On this, Mrs Vidal referred  us  to
    several sources of background evidence. UNICEF on the  Jamaica  section
    of  their  web-site  referred  under  'Education'  to  high  levels  of
    enrolment of children at all stages of schooling,  but  relatively  low
    educational achievements; and under 'Protection' to high rates of crime
    and violence that "significantly impact" the lives of children. Amnesty
    International in their report on Jamaica for 2013 to  "high  levels  of
    gang-related murder and killing", with 1087 killings having taken place
    on the island that year. The State Department, in the summary of  their
    Jamaica report for 2013 refer to these and other human rights problems,
    including, though not among the most serious  ones,  "violence  against
    and sexual abuse  of  children,  violence  and  discrimination  against
    women".

34. Submissions      Both  sides  recognized  the  need  for  there  to  be
    'exceptional reasons' before this appeal could be  allowed.  Mr  Walker
    suggested that J2 could return to Jamaica with the appellant,  or  not:
    the choice was for her and Mr Lobban. He pointed out that the appellant
    had been prepared to leave J1 with her mother in Jamaica in 2001,  when
    he was only five, until now, when he is 18, and referred  to  her  poor
    immigration history in this country, besides the crime  for  which  she
    faces deportation.

35. Mrs Vidal recognized that the exceptional reasons required  could  only
    be found in J2's best interests. Mr Lobban wanted to help as much as he
    could, but lacked the energy to cope with a 4�-year old. We  asked  her
    whether help would not be available from the social services, which she
    acknowledged, but suggested that, with a mother available to  give  him
    love and care, J2 should not be deprived of  it.  Mr  Lobban's  looking
    after him had only been  intended  as  a  temporary  measure,  and  the
    appellant's prolonged absence  had  been  affecting  him.  Mr  Lobban's
    hesitation in dealing with our question about  whether  he  would  take
    legal steps, if necessary, to keep J2 in this  country  with  him  must
    have been the result of his being torn between his appreciation of  the
    appellant's motherly qualities, and of the difficulties  posed  by  the
    situation in Jamaica.

CONCLUSIONS

36. Law       There has been so much judicial  discussion  about  cases  of
    this kind that there is no need to do more than note (see 3 -  4)  that
    it is now recognized, under the  Rules  approved  by  Parliament,  that
    there is so strong a public interest in deporting  those  sentenced  to
    four years' or more imprisonment that the Rules themselves  provide  no
    route for them to be given leave  to  remain  under  article  8.  There
    remains of course the possibility of such 'exceptional' or 'compelling'
    features in the case as to require  a  free-standing  consideration  of
    article 8. One example of this might lie, as argued here, in  the  best
    interests of any child  or  young  person  under  18  involved  in  the
    decision: as Lady Hale said in  ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, their best
    interests are neither  paramount,  nor  the  primary,  but  a   primary
    consideration.

37. J2        J2 is the only child likely to be affected by our decision in
    this case: Mr Lobban's first family are well grown-up; C and J1 are  in
    Jamaica as things stand, and Mr Lobban has announced his  intention  of
    staying in this country to be with his second family (now  14  and  12)
    whatever happens. J2 has a really  good  school  report,  such  as  any
    parent of a child that age might wish for, and his progress is a  great
    credit to Mr Lobban, who has been his main carer for the last two years
    and more.

38. Of course that report contains a reservation (see 29) about the  "signs
    of distress" J2 showed, during what it describes as a period of absence
    on the part of the appellant during the last term. We do not doubt that
    this was the genuine personal observation of those in  charge  of  him;
    but we have to bear in mind that they had described him, no doubt  just
    as accurately, as  bright  and  cheerful  on  both  their  October  and
    February assessments. He cannot have been suffering unduly, up to  that
    point, from his mother's absence for the last two years. The  reference
    to children needing "a consistent, familiar environment" is  of  course
    right; not only in J2's case, but for all children.

39. We recognize too that, as children get older  and  more  aware  of  the
    world around them, they are likely to ask more questions, and no longer
    to accept without question whatever  explanation  they  may  have  been
    given of anything unusual in their family  situation.  We  accept  that
    this has begun to happen with J2, and, sooner or later,  if  he  is  to
    remain apart from his mother, he will have to be told the real  reason,
    with which up till now it might have been hard  for  him  to  cope.  Of
    course that would be very difficult and upsetting for him; but  he  has
    an excellent father, and very good teachers, and no doubt  some  expert
    help would be available from the social services if he needed it.

40. On the practical level, Mr Lobban is able to get some  paid  help,  and
    some from his sister not far away. His various  conditions,  especially
    perhaps his diabetes, are a worry for him, and potentially a matter  of
    concern for us too: however, his undigested medical records before  us,
    going only to October 2013, suggest that there is  no  immediate  cause
    for such concern. However, he has done a splendid job of looking  after
    J2, and without any official help so far. While J2 will  of  course  be
    getting even more active as time goes on, he is likely also to be  more
    rational, and less dependent on Mr Lobban, who we do not doubt would be
    able to cope with him for the foreseeable future, given suitable help.

41. We do not think it would be at all in J2's best  interests  now  to  be
    removed from this  very  supportive  environment,  where  he  has  been
    getting on so well, so as to go with his mother to Jamaica. That is not
    because of the claims she has made about abuse from her own mother:  as
    the first-tier panel quite rightly pointed out  at  paragraph  46,  not
    only had she told the  compiler  of  the  OASys  report  that  she  had
    positively enjoyed her childhood; but she had been content to  leave  C
    and J1 with her while she came to this  country  on  what  has  so  far
    turned out to be a 13 years' absence, on the strength of  nothing  more
    than 28 days' leave to enter on arrival.

42. There is also the unexplained reference by Mrs Pennant-Taylor (see  22)
    to her having met the appellant's mother and two older  boys,  and  the
    appellant's own regular phone calls to her (19) to keep in  touch  with
    J1. We do not accept that  there  was  any  significant  abuse  of  the
    appellant by her mother in the past, or any real  estrangement  between
    them now.

43. So far as the background evidence (see 33) is concerned, while  Jamaica
    is a country with very real problems,  especially  by  way  of  violent
    crime, and with a less than perfect educational system, it is far  from
    being a failed state where no child would be safe, even with  a  family
    around him. While J1 has had his problems, they seem  to  have  stemmed
    from his own actions, and not to have prevented his spending  at  least
    some of the time at home. If he were absent for some of the time,  that
    would at least leave more room for the appellant and, if he  went  with
    her, J2.

44. It is precisely because of the good situation that J2 enjoys here,  and
    not the less good, though not intolerable one which would await him  in
    Jamaica, that we take the view that his best interests require  him  to
    stay here. On the other hand, subject to any exceptional reason to  the
    contrary, the public interest requires the  appellant  to  go  back  to
    Jamaica. If he is not to go with her,  then  they  will  have  to  live
    apart, with only phone calls (as while the appellant has been in prison
    here) and other long-distance means of keeping in touch, till such time
    as Mr Lobban is able to take him there on another visit, or he  is  old
    enough to go on his own.

45. While that would be sad for both the appellant and J2, not  to  mention
    Mr Lobban himself,  Mrs Vidal wisely recognized, when we put it to her,
    that there is now no reason in principle why a tribunal should  take  a
    different approach to separating a child of this age from  his  mother,
    from that taken in the much more common situation, where he faces being
    separated from his father.

46. In this case, Mr Lobban has been looking after J2  exceptionally  well,
    with a little paid help, and some from his sister. With suitable  help,
    he is likely to be able go on doing so for as long as necessary.  While
    it would certainly be much nicer for J2 to have his mother, as well  as
    his father living with him, that is not because he has the kind of day-
    to-day dependency on her that most children of his age  do:  his  daily
    wants have been met by his father, for the last  two  years  and  more.
    While both Mr Lobban and the appellant may have been left in some doubt
    as to the need for  that  arrangement  to  be  permanent  at  the  time
    sentence was passed, the service of the notice of intention  to  deport
    soon after (May 2012: see 12) should have removed it.

47. We do not think there is anything against the appellant as a mother  on
    the day-to-day level; and she is of course  J2's  own  mother,  who  he
    ought  to  have  with  him,  if  that  can  be  lawfully  and  properly
    accommodated with the public interest in her deportation. On the  other
    hand, we do not see  any  reason  to  regard  her  as  in  any  way  an
    exceptional  mother.  Unlike  the  school  report,  both  Mrs   Payne's
    statements (see 30 - 32)  and  Mrs  Pennant-Taylor's  letter  (22)  are
    clearly written very much on the appellant's side. However, the  latter
    makes no reference at all to the crime  for  which  the  appellant  was
    already serving four years' imprisonment; and the former  puts  forward
    an explanation going beyond even the one rejected by the  jury  at  her
    trial, to the effect that she was acting in  defence  of  J2  when  she
    committed it. That can only have come from the appellant herself: using
    J2 in this way does her no credit as a mother, and we do not regard her
    as genuinely remorseful.

48. There is certainly nothing in the appellant's own  interests  which  we
    could possibly regard as so exceptional a circumstance as to allow  her
    to stay in this country by virtue of article 8;  nor  was  that  argued
    before us. Though there are good reports on her  from  the  prison  and
    elsewhere,  it  is  clear  that  there  would  need  to  be   something
    exceptional  in  her  personal  situation  to  outweigh  the  view  the
    sentencing judge, and we have taken of her crime, and her  attitude  to
    it.

49. We are very much more sympathetic to Mr Lobban, who has  coped  with  a
    difficult situation quite admirably, and who will no  doubt  have  more
    difficulties to face in future. If  the  appellant's  deportation  goes
    ahead, he will have to make the choice as to whether to  keep  J2  with
    him, which we see no reason why any family court should prevent; to let
    him go with her, which he has told us, and we believe he genuinely does
    not want to do; or to get further help from  the  authorities  in  this
    country.


50. However, we believe that Mr Lobban has J2's best interests very much at
    heart, and as things stand will look after them  by  keeping  him  with
    him. While that will be difficult for Mr Lobban, so long as it  can  be
    done while keeping J2's best interests in mind, as we are confident  it
    can, we do not see anything so exceptional in that situation for either
    of them,  but  particularly  for  J2,  as  would  justify  letting  the
    appellant stay, despite what she has done.

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
