
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01826/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 23rd July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR O W W
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondents:   Mr A Gilbert (instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State with regard to a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Dineen and Mr M E Olszewski) promulgated on 25th  November  2014
    by which it allowed the Respondent's appeal against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to deport him to Jamaica.

 2. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted are lengthy but
    essentially assert that in  finding  that  it  ought  to  consider  the
    Immigration Rules in force at the time  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision the Tribunal erred. It is clear since YM (Uganda) [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1292 and that the Tribunal's duty was to consider  the  Immigration
    Rules at the date  of  its  decision.  Accordingly  it  considered  the
    incorrect version of the rules.

 3. Furthermore it is asserted that the Tribunal erred in failing  to  take
    into account s.117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    brought into force by section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.

 4. It is unfortunate in this case that the Tribunal heard  the  appeal  on
    18th June 2014 but did not promulgate its decision until 25th  November
    2014.  The  Immigration  Rules  changed  between  the  two  dates.  The
    Tribunal's decision is dated 25th November 2014 therefore not the  date
    of hearing and thus the appeal should have been  considered  under  the
    Rules as they were in force at that time. Furthermore,  section  19  of
    the 2014 Act which brought in section 117A-D of the 2002 Act came  into
    force on 28th July 2014. That also therefore should have formed part of
    the First-tier Tribunal's deliberations requiring as it does a Tribunal
    to take its provisions into account. It is a mandatory requirement  and
    thus the Tribunal was obliged to take it into account.

5.   Both representatives before me accepted  that  in  those  respects  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred.

6.   The question then, and  again  accepted  by  both  representatives,  is
    whether the error is material or indeed whether if I were  to  redecide
    the appeal taking into account the current Immigration Rules and s.117A-
    D, the result would have been any different.

7.   In the remainder of this determination, for the sake of continuity  and
    clarity, I shall continue to refer to Mr OWW as the  Appellant  and  to
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

8.   The Secretary of State's decision to deport the  Appellant  to  Jamaica
    arose following a conviction on  2nd  December  2011  of  possessing  a
    prohibited weapon and a sentence of five years imprisonment.

9.   As the Appellant was sentenced to more than  five  years  imprisonment,
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules provides  that  where  a  person
    claims that the deportation is contrary to the U.K.'s obligations under
    Article 8 of ECHR and  that the deportation of the person from  the  UK
    is conducive to the public good and in the public interest because they
    have been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  a
    period of imprisonment of at least four years, the Secretary  of  State
    in assessing that claim, will consider whether paragraphs 399  or  399A
    apply and, if they does not, the public interest  in  deportation  will
    only be outweighed by other factors where  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A.

10.  Paragraphs 399 and 399A do not apply this  case  because  they  do  not
    apply where a person has been convicted and sentenced to  a  period  in
    excess of four years. It is therefore necessary in this case for  there
    to be very compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A if the Appellant is  to  succeed  in  resisting
    deportation on Article 8 grounds.

11.  However in deciding whether there are factors over and above  those  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A, those paragraphs must be considered. Paragraph
    399 has application if:-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i) the child is a British citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the  seven  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
             immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b) the person has a genuine subsisting relationship with a partner
         who is in the UK and is a British citizen or settled in the UK, and

             (i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling  circumstances  over  above  those   described   in
             paragraph Ex .2 of Appendix FM; and

             (iii) it will be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain  in
             the UK without the person who is to be deported.

12.  At this stage it is therefore appropriate to  consider  the  provisions
    of paragraph Ex.2 of Appendix FM. Ex.1 contains the same provisions  as
    paragraph  399  set  out  above.  EX  .2  provides   the   meaning   of
    "insurmountable obstacles" as "the very significant difficulties  which
    would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in  continuing  their
    family life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome  or
    would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner".

13.  Additionally paragraph 399A is  also  relevant  and  provides  that  it
    would not be in the public interest to deport someone if:-

         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in UK  for  most  of  his
         life; and

         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c) there will be very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

14.  Paragraphs 399 and 399A cannot of themselves assist this  Appellant  as
    he was sentenced in excess of four years. What has  to  be  decided  is
    whether there are "very compelling circumstances" over and above  those
    matters.

15.  Additionally section 117A-D has to be taken into account.  Section  117
provides:-

         (1) This part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether the decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section  6  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether interference with a person's right  to  respect
         for private and family life is justified under Article 8 (2).

16.  Section 117B which applies in all cases provides as follows:-

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by person at a time when the person is  in
             the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of person who is not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the persons removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
         the United Kingdom.

17.  As this is a deportation case the provisions of section 117C  are  also
    relevant and that provides:-

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (2) The more serious the offence committed by the foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the
         public  interest  requires  deportation  unless  Exception   1   or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of his life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration to the country  to  which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5) Exception 2 applies C has a genuine and subsisting relationship
         with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with  a  qualifying  child,  and  the  effect  of  C's
         deportation  on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision is the offence or offences for which the criminal  has
         been convicted.

18.  S.117D defines a qualifying child as a person under the age of  18  and
who is:-

         (a) a British citizen or

         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
         seven years or more.

    It also defines a qualifying partner as a partner who is:-

         (a) a British citizen or

         (b) settled in  the  United  Kingdom  within  the  meaning  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971.

19.  The provisions of the Immigration Rules and the provisions  of  section
    117A-D mirror each other. They make it clear that in  the  case  of  an
    Appellant, such as in this appeal, where the sentence is for four years
    or more, there has to be something about the case over  and  above  the
    exceptions which apply to those convicted and  sentenced  to  a  lesser
    term. It is also true  to  say  that  the  various  provisions  in  the
    Immigration Rules and s.117 are in line with jurisprudence in  relation
    to the deportation of  foreign  criminals  and  in  particular  to  the
    European line of cases, in particular Uner v  Netherlands  [2006]  ECHR
    46410/99 and Maslov v Austria 1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546.

20.  In terms of what constitutes very compelling  circumstances  as  quoted
    in both the Immigration Rules and section 117 there is  as  yet  little
    guidance  although  the  Secretary  of  State  has   herself   provided
    caseworkers with guidance in the form of  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions, Chapter 13: Criminality Guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases,
    version 5.0 dated 28th July 2014. Ms Holmes confirmed  that  these  are
    the relevant and up-to-date guidelines. Section 6 of the IDI refers  to
    very compelling circumstances. Paragraph 6.4 is  a  reminder  that  the
    foreign criminal must show very compelling circumstances over and above
    the circumstances described in the exceptions  to  deportation  and  it
    also reminds that the best interests of a child in the UK  affected  by
    the decision are a primary consideration  but  are  not  the  paramount
    consideration. The child's best interests must be not  only  compelling
    but very compelling to outweigh the public interest.

21.   Paragraph  6.5  reminds  the  caseworker  that  decision  makers  must
    consider whether family life can continue outside the UK and the impact
    on the partner or child if the foreign criminal is  deported  and  they
    have to remain.

22.  Paragraph 6.6 provides that when considering whether or not  there  are
    very  compelling  circumstances,  decision  makers  must  consider  all
    relevant factors that  the  foreign  criminal  raises.  It  then  gives
    examples of relevant factors as including:

           . The best interests of any children who will be affected by the
             foreign criminal's deportation,

           . The  nationalities  and  immigration  status  of  the  foreign
             criminal and his family members;

           .  The  nature  and  strengths   of   the   foreign   criminal's
             relationships with family members;

           . The seriousness of  the  difficulties  (if  any)  the  foreign
             criminal's partner and/or child would be likely to face in the
             country to which the foreign criminal is to be deported;

           . How long the foreign criminal has lived in  the  UK,  and  the
             strength of his social, cultural and family ties to the UK;

           . The strength of the foreign criminal's ties to the country  to
             which he will be deported and his ability  to  integrate  into
             society there;

           . Whether there are any factors which might increase the  public
             interest in deportation -see section 2.3;

           . Cumulative factors, e.g. where the foreign criminal has family
             members in the UK but his family life does not provide a basis
             of stay and he has a  significant  private  life  in  the  UK.
             Although under the rules family  life  and  private  life  are
             considered separately, when considering whether there are very
             compelling circumstances, both private and family life must be
             taken into account.

23.  Section 2.3 referred to above re-states the  provisions  in  the  Rules
    and in s.117 in terms of  the  public  interest  being  served  by  the
    deportation of foreign criminals and the more serious the  offence  the
    greater the public interest in deportation and it also sets out a  list
    of factors which are capable of adding weight to  the  public  interest
    including;

           . Is considered to have a high risk  of  reoffending;  does  not
             accept responsibility for his offending or express remorse;

           . has an adverse immigration history or  precarious  immigration
             status;

           . Has a history  of  immigration  related  non-compliance  (e.g.
             failing to co-operate fully and in good faith with the  travel
             document process) or frustrating the removal process in  other
             ways;

           . Has previously obtained or  attempted  to  obtain  limited  or
             indefinite leave to enter or remain by means of deception;

           . Has used deception in any other circumstances (e.g. to  secure
             employment, benefits or free NHS healthcare to  which  he  was
             not entitled);

           . Has entered the UK in breach of a deportation order.

24.  It is important to stress at this juncture that the grounds  of  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal did not challenge the factual  findings  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal. So much  was  confirmed  by  Miss  Holmes  who
    accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had carried  out  a  careful  and
    thorough analysis of Article 8.

25.  It is also important to note the nature of the offence and the  Judge's
    sentencing remarks as set out in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

26.  The nature of the offence  is  that  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of
    possessing a prohibited weapon. That was a cut-off firearm  adapted  to
    fire blank rounds which resembled the appearance of a  sub  machinegun.
    It did only fire blank rounds. In  his  sentencing  remarks  the  judge
    indicated that the defendant's evidence  was  far  from  convincing  or
    satisfactory; it was vague, inconsistent and mostly incredible  ranging
    to  the  bizarre  and  that  he  had  been  unable  to  answer   simple
    straightforward questions in a simple straightforward manner. The Judge
    clearly was unimpressed by the defendant and did not accept the various
    excuses he gave for being in possession of and using the weapon.

27.  The Appellant had two prior  convictions.  In  September  2006  he  was
    convicted of 12 counts of obtaining property by deception and sentenced
    to a 12 month community order and supervision. A mere two months later,
    on 7th November  2006  he  was  convicted  of  handling  stolen  goods,
    possessing a false instrument, driving uninsured and otherwise  without
    a licence and sentenced to 8 weeks imprisonment and fined.

28.  The Appellant was released on licence from his sentence in March 2014.

29.  The Appellant's history is that he is a Jamaican national who  came  to
    the UK in December 1999, aged 14 and was granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a dependent of his mother on 23rd October 2001.  He  retained
    that indefinite leave to remain until the deportation  order  was  made
    which, if upheld, has the effect of cancelling it.  The  Appellant  was
    born on 6th May 1985 and is thus now aged 30.

30.  The  First-tier  Tribunal   heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant,  his
    current partner to whom he is engaged and with whom he has two children
    and his former partner with whom he also has two children. Additionally
    the First-tier Tribunal heard from the Appellant's  employer  and  from
    his mother. It also had before it a report from an  independent  social
    worker, Ms Dymphna Pearce. It also  had  an  OASys  report  dated  19th
    September 2013 which concluded that he was at low risk  of  reoffending
    but a medium risk due to the nature  of  the  offence.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal also noted the Appellant had not committed any offences  since
    being released from custody.

31.  The First-tier Tribunal referred to  a  letter  from  London  Probation
    Trust dated June 2014 which indicated that  he  had  been  assessed  as
    posing a low risk of harm and since being released into  the  community
    he had adhered to his licence conditions  without  fault.  He  had  not
    missed one appointment despite  his  employment  commitments  sometimes
    making his ability to do so challenging and he had always fully engaged
    in examination of his offending behaviour. It  indicated  that  he  had
    been subject to  weekly  reporting  until  it  was  reduced  given  the
    progress that he had made and the fact that  he  was  also  subject  to
    weekly reporting to the immigration authorities.

32.  The First-tier Tribunal found there to be an  absence  of  violence  in
    the Appellant's history and that he had no  connection  with  organised
    crime or drugs culture. He had not used the weapon in question for  the
    purposes of unlawful intimidation in public; rather he discharged it in
    his girlfriend's flat because he believed the police to be intruders.

33.  The First-tier Tribunal found there to be no evidence  to  suggest  the
    Appellant had made any attempt to convert the weapon for the purpose of
    firing live rounds.

34.  The First-tier Tribunal noted  he  had  no  drugs,  alcohol  or  mental
    health issues and no pattern of misbehaviour during his sentence.

35.  The Appellant had shown  genuine  remorse  and  had  had  an  exemplary
    attitude since his conviction.

36.  The Appellant had remained on  bail  after  his  arrest  and  prior  to
    conviction during which time he complied with the terms of his bail.

37.  The Appellant worked on victim awareness  while  serving  his  sentence
    and had shown a high level of remorse.  That was the conclusion of  the
    OASys report.

38.  The Appellant had no behaviour warnings  during  his  sentence  and  no
    issues with anger management.

39.  The First-tier Tribunal, at paragraph 34 found his record in  detention
    to be impressive. He had taken on significant pastoral responsibilities
    and engaged with the prison chaplaincy  department.  He  had  undergone
    various courses and obtained various certificates while in  prison  and
    he was also the equalities representative and an orderly.

40.  The First-tier  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  director  of  the
    executive car company which employs the Appellant.  He  confirmed  that
    he held the Appellant in high regard. The Appellant was  a  key  holder
    for the company premises and he oversees another member  of  staff.  He
    had been working as a driver for  a  production  assistant  with  media
    clients  and  is  regularly  requested  by  such  clients  due  to  his
    affability and calmness which are key qualities in what is a specialist
    and stressful role.

41.  So far as the Appellant's family life is concerned, he  is  engaged  to
    be married to a young lady with whom he has been in a relationship  for
    eight years.

42.  The Appellant has four children in all, two born in 2005  and  2006  to
    his former partner and two born in  2006  and  2011  with  his  current
    partner.  All are British and all save the youngest have lived  in  the
    UK continuously for more than seven years.

43.  The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from  both  women  and  accepted
    that the overall relationship is rather like an extended family. The ex-
    partner lives quite close to the Appellant and his current partner  and
    the entire family regularly have outings together. The two  women  have
    an amicable  relationship  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  clearly
    impressed by the evidence of both and  accepted  the  relationships  as
    claimed.

44.  The third child, the eldest with his current partner  born  in  October
    2006, has been diagnosed with autism. Throughout the period in  custody
    the Appellant contacted her  by  telephone  every  day  and  there  was
    evidence from her teacher that it was noticeable during one week in the
    autumn term of 2011 when the child was much more lively and cheerful at
    school.  That coincided with a period when the Appellant  was  home  on
    bail. She would be taken to and collected from school by her father and
    she talked about him with fondness.

45.  The report by the independent social worker reported that the  children
    would suffer adverse consequences if the father  were  to  be  deported
    particularly the child with autism.

46.  So far as the Appellant's wider family  is  concerned,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal heard evidence from his mother and accepted that there  exists
    a close family relationship particularly between them and  between  the
    Appellant and his 15-year-old brother.

47.  Having come to the UK from Jamaica aged 14 he has no  connections  with
    that country whatsoever and no family members there. All of  his  wider
    family are in the UK. As far as the Appellant's relationship  with  his
    mother is concerned the First-tier Tribunal found that she had a strong
    attachment to him and that he was a dutiful son and in the absence of a
    husband she is very close  to  him  and  is  receiving  medication  for
    depression.  The First-tier Tribunal found there  to  be  a  degree  of
    emotional dependence between the two such that their  relationship  did
    constitute family life for the purposes of Article 8 and  it  similarly
    found family life to exist between the Appellant  and  his  15-year-old
    brother.

48.  Taking into account the IDIs and  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and s.117 it is clear that the Appellant  meets  each  and  every
    requirement. All of the factors referred to in the IDIs apply  to  him.
    It is not a case where it could be said that he meets only one  or  two
    of the requirements; he meets all of them.

49.  True it is that the offence was  very  serious.  However,  it  was  the
    first offence of its kind and there  has  been  no  suggestion  of  any
    criminality since. He holds down a responsible job in relation to which
    he is held in high regard. He is fully integrated into  the  UK  having
    spent more than half of his  life  here  and  has  no  ties  left  with
    Jamaica. The entirety of his family in terms of his  immediate  partner
    and his children and his wider family are all in  the  United  Kingdom.
    One of his children is autistic and is very  close  to  him.  There  is
    evidence  that  the  children  would  be  adversely  affected  by   his
    departure. His partner and all of his children are British citizens. He
    has been praised by the probation service  as  well  as  in  the  OASys
    report and there is no suggestion that he will reoffend. He is in full-
    time employment and therefore not a burden on the UK  financially.  His
    first language is English.

50.  Having taken  all of the above matters into account  and  the  findings
    carefully set out and reasoned by the First-tier Tribunal it cannot  be
    said that even had it applied the new version of the Immigration  Rules
    and section 117 as it ought to have done, ,that it would  have  reached
    any other conclusion.  This is one of the rare cases where, despite the
    gravity of the offence, the Appellant's circumstances and those of  his
    family outweigh the public interest in deportation.

51.  Miss Holmes did not seek to persuade me otherwise.

52.  Accordingly, although the First-tier Tribunal  did make errors of  law,
    seemingly as a direct consequence of  the  extreme  delay  between  the
    hearing and promulgation of its decision, the errors were not  material
    and would not, had they not been made, have led to a different result.

53.  The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

54.  As a result of the nature of this case  and  that  there  are  innocent
    parties, in particular four children, I make an anonymity order.


Signed   Date 22nd July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed   Date 22nd July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
