
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01345/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th November 2013                           |On 13th December 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             HI RUY HAGOS BEYENE


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Hulse, Counsel instructed on behalf of Duncan
Lewis &  Company Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but for convenience I will
    refer to the original Appellant, Mr Hi Ruy Hagos Beyene, a  citizen  of
    Ethiopia born on 14th January 1989, as the Appellant herein.

 2. The Secretary of State has been given permission to appeal against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel  (Judge  Adio  and  Mrs  S  I
    Hewitt JP) who in a determination promulgated on  19th  September  2013
    allowed his appeal against the Respondent's decision that Section 32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom using his own  passport  on
    19th December 2004 and claimed asylum as a dependant  on  his  mother's
    claim.  The application was  refused  on  2nd  February  2005  and  the
    family's appeal against this decision was dismissed on  5th  May  2005.
    The family's appeal rights against the refusal of asylum were exhausted
    on 11th November 2005.  On 3rd  April  2008  the  family  were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain outside the Rules.

 4. On 2nd  April  2009  at  Blackfriars  Crown  Court  the  Appellant  was
    convicted of an offence of robbery and 30th April 2009 he was sentenced
    to two years' imprisonment.  The Appellant had been  on  bail  for  the
    previous eighteen months.

 5. On 14th July 2009 the  Appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    automatic deportation and on 6th August 2009  the  Appellant  submitted
    representations against deportation which amounted to a fresh claim for
    asylum in his own right.  He was interviewed in  connection  with  that
    claim and further representations were submitted.  A second  notice  of
    liability to automatic deportation was issued to the Appellant on  27th
    June 2011.  Further submissions were made on behalf of the Appellant.

 6. On 18th June 2013 a deportation order was signed against the  Appellant
    and a decision was made that  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    applied.

 7. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal panel, consisting of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Adio and Mrs S I Hewitt JP, at Hatton Cross on  5th
    September 2013.  The panel heard oral evidence form the Appellant,  his
    family members and his partner in respect of his  claim  that  he  fell
    within one of the  exceptions  identified  in  the  legislation.  In  a
    determination promulgated on the 19th September 2013, the panel allowed
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 8. Permission to appeal was sought on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.
    On  7th  October  2013  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers   refused
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:-

         "The grounds on which the Respondent seeks permission to appeal  do
         not establish that a grant of permission would be appropriate:

         The primary argument in the grounds seem to be that  if  an  appeal
         cannot succeed pursuant to  the  'new  Article  8  Rules',  then  a
         Tribunal cannot properly allow an appeal on  'classical  Article  8
         principles.'  But whether the Respondent  likes  it  or  not,  that
         argument is contrary to the current  case  law  in  the  area,  and
         probably contrary to this country's obligations under the ECHR.

         The secondary argument in the grounds seems to be that if this sort
         of appeal does not succeed pursuant to the 'new Immigration Rules',
         the Tribunal must  identify  some  exceptional  circumstances  that
         would result in an unjustifiably harsh outcome before it can  allow
         this sort of appeal.  Again, that suggested approach is contrary to
         existing case law.

         Referring to specifically to (b) and (c) on the second stage of the
         Respondent's grounds, it may be true  that  the  Tribunal  made  no
         specific finding as to there being insurmountable obstacles to  any
         relocation of the Appellant, his girlfriend and his family  members
         to Ethiopia.  But there is  no  material  error  here  because  the
         'insurmountable  obstacle  test'  is  relevant  only  to  the   new
         Immigration Rules, and not to the application of classical  Article
         8 principle.

         Referring  specifically  (to  (d))  on  the  third  page   of   the
         Respondent's grounds, the likely consequences of undue delay on the
         Respondent's part are self-evident (as  explained  in  EB  (Kosovo)
         [2008] UKHL 41) and the Tribunal did not  need  to  spell  out  the
         particular consequences of delay in  this  particular  case  before
         taking that delay as a factor weighing in the Appellant's favour.

         The Tribunal took into account the seriousness of the only  offence
         the Appellant has been convicted for in this country (see paragraph
         35).  Overall, the  Tribunal  is  entitled,  by  reference  to  the
         factors  explored  at  paragraphs  33  to  57,  to  find  that  the
         Respondent's decision represented a disproportionate breach of  the
         Article 8 rights of  the  Appellant  and  others  affected  by  the
         Respondent's deportation decision of 18th June 2013 (as per  Beoku-
         Betts [2008] UKHL 39).

         The grounds do not identify any arguably  material  error  of  law.
         There was no basis upon which to interfere with the decision of the
         First-tier Tribunal."

    A renewed application for permission to  appeal  was  made  before  the
    Upper Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on  23rd  October  2013
    granted permission stating:-

         "It is arguable that in allowing the appeal the First-tier Tribunal
         failed to give adequate reasons why they considered the Appellant's
         circumstances  were  such  that,  although  he  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraphs 399  or  399A,  there  were  nonetheless
         exceptional circumstances such that  he  should  not  be  deported.
         Whilst there is less merit  in  the  Respondent's  reliance  on  HH
         [2012] UKSC, particularly in the light of the observations in MF at
         [34], [37] and [39], all grounds are arguable."

 9. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. The Secretary of  State
    was represented  by  Mr  Melvin,  Senior  Presenting  Officer  and  the
    Appellant by Miss Hulse, who appeared on his behalf before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Mr Melvin relied upon the grounds as drafted  that  the
    panel erred in law by  applying  a  two  stage  test  and  should  have
    considered whether "exceptional circumstances" applied.  In this  case,
    he submitted that the Secretary of State mounted a "reasons  challenge"
    against the determination of the panel that they  had  failed  to  give
    adequate  reasons  for  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant
    succeeded  in  establishing  "exceptional  circumstances"  or  in   the
    alternative "outside the Rules" under Article 8.   In  particular,  the
    private life/family life aspect of the case he did not give reasons  as
    to why the family life and private life existed and in respect  of  his
    partner/girlfriend, the evidence was that she would return with him  to
    Ethiopia.

10. The next challenge on behalf of the Secretary of  State  was  that  the
    panel had failed to give weight to the  legitimate  aim  of  preventing
    crime and disorder and had failed to take into account that it was  not
    a matter of risk of  reoffending  but  the  issue  of  deterring  other
    foreign nationals.  He submitted that the panel gave  scant  regard  to
    the public interest and the panel  therefore  erred  in  law  in  their
    consideration of the weight that  should  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest.

11. As to the issue of delay, the grounds acknowledged that there had  been
    "handling errors" on the part of the  Secretary  of  State  however  he
    submitted that delay was not  determinative  and  that  the  panel  had
    failed to address the effects of delay when considering  the  facts  of
    the appeal.  He submitted that there was nothing on the facts  of  this
    case to show any compelling circumstances; he could not  meet  the  new
    Immigration Rules and this was an unreasoned judgment of the panel  and
    they erred in law.  e  submitted  He  He  He   He  submitted  that  the
    decision was approaching that of irrationality and  thus  the  decision
    should be set aside.

12. Miss Hulse relied upon the Rule 24 response that  had  been  issued  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  She submitted that the determination  of  the
    panel did not disclose any error of law and that whilst  they  did  not
    have the advantage of the Court of Appeal decision in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, they could  not  have  been  criticised  for
    following the approach of Izuazu and the two stage approach  which  was
    the law at the time.  In any event, as noted in the Rule  24  response,
    the decision of MF did not change the substance of what  needed  to  be
    done in assessing an Article 8 claim in  the  context  of  deportation.
    For those reasons she submitted that the first ground raised on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State was not made out.

13. She submitted that the grounds were  simply  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of fact made and the conclusions reached by  the  panel.   She
    submitted that they had gone through any aspect of the  facets  of  the
    appeal and applying the decision of R  (Iran)  this  being  a  "reasons
    challenge", it was easy when reading the determination to see  how  the
    panel had reached their conclusions and on what evidence.  This  was  a
    very careful determination she submitted and what they have done is  to
    arrive a decision which is not in accordance with the Home Office view.
     She submitted that the  question  the  Tribunal  should  consider  was
    whether or not the panel had considered all the  evidence  before  them
    and that the answer to that question was that  it  appeared  that  they
    had.  As to the issue of  delay,  the  panel  did  not  treat  this  as
    determinative and it was only one factor that they took into account.

14. As to the ground in which it is suggested that the panel failed to give
    consideration to  the  public  interest  and  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence, the panel made specific reference to the  seriousness  of  the
    offence in the determination not only in  the  light  of  the  risk  of
    reoffending but also taking account the issue of deterrence.  The panel
    took into account that whilst he had  a  troubled  adolescence,  having
    abused drinks and drugs, they did not find that to be an excuse for his
    conduct.  However, they took into account the evidence before them that
    he had turned his life around since the offence  during  the  pre-trial
    period of eighteen months but also in the last three  years  since  his
    release from prison.  They noted that he had undertaken a degree (which
    he completes in January), that he had been of previous  good  character
    having committed only one  offence  although  it  is  plain  that  they
    considered it to be a  very  serious  offence  indeed.   There  was  no
    minimisation of this offence and looked at it in the light of  all  the
    other aspects.

15. As to the issue of the family life/private life relating to his  family
    relatives  and  his  girlfriend,  it  was  not  necessary  to  show  an
    exceptional degree of dependency.  On the facts of the case the  family
    had left Ethiopia together, he had come as a minor and during that time
    they had never been separated and had a strong bond.

16. In summary  she  submitted  that  the  determination  was  careful  and
    reasoned and that they had looked at all the factors and had  not  left
    anything out of account.  They did not find it to be proportionate  for
    the Appellant to return to Ethiopia.  She therefore submitted that  the
    appeal by the Secretary of State should be dismissed and  the  decision
    stand.

17. Mr Melvin by way of reply reiterated  that  the  panel  had  failed  to
    consider the public interest sufficiently and that in  respect  of  his
    relationship, he had entered into the relationship at a  time  when  he
    knew that he was liable for deportation.

18. I reserved my determination.

Discussion and decision:

19. The first ground advanced on behalf of the Respondent  relates  to  the
    panel having erred in law by applying  a  two  stage  test  (which  had
    derived from the principles set out in MF (Nigeria) [2012]  UKUT  00393
    (IAC).  Since the appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal panel, MF
    (Nigeria) has been the subject of further hearing before the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The court stated  that  the  question  being  addressed  by  a
    decision maker applying the new Rules set out at paragraph  398  of  HC
    395 in considering a claim founded upon Article 8 of the ECHR and  that
    being addressed by the judge who carries out what was referred to in MF
    (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria as the  second  step  in  a  two  stage
    process, is the same one that, properly executed, will return the  same
    answer.  Furthermore it was stated  that  the  new  Rules  relating  to
    Article 8 claims  advanced  by  foreign  criminals  seeking  to  resist
    deportation are a complete code and the exceptional circumstances to be
    considered in the balancing  exercise  involve  the  application  of  a
    proportionality test as required by the Strasbourg  jurisprudence  (see
    MF (Nigeria) at paragraph 43.  Furthermore, the court,  observing  that
    whether a case satisfies the requirements of paragraph 398 and 399,  is
    a question partly of hard-edged fact and  partly  of  evaluation.   The
    court noted  that  Rule  398  expressly  contemplates  weighing  "other
    factors" against the public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals and these necessarily included all the other factors relevant
    to proportionality.  By reference  to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in
    Rule 398 did not herald a restoration of the exceptionality test.

20. Thus in those circumstances the panel in carrying out a proportionality
    assessment either "inside the Rules" or "outside the Rules," could  not
    be categorised as erring in law.

21. In the context of the proportionality assessment  it  is  submitted  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that the panel failed to give adequate
    reasons for its decision and further, failed to weigh  in  the  balance
    the  public  interest  identified  in  the  Rules  and  the  issue   of
    deterrence.

22. The starting point is  to  consider  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The panel heard from a number  of  witnesses  including  the
    Appellant.  His mother Hamanot Tesfamariam Haile gave evidence  as  did
    his brother Abl Hagus Beyene and his partner, Sheren  Hibu,  who  is  a
    recognised refugee from Eritrea.  The panel set out the evidence  heard
    from the witnesses at paragraphs 4 to 21  of  the  determination.   The
    panel also had regard to submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State by the Presenting Officer and also by Miss Hulse, who appears  on
    behalf of the Appellant before the panel as she  does  today  in  these
    proceedings.

23. The findings of fact made in respect of  the  appeal  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 33 to 57.  The first issue that the panel  was  required  to
    consider  related  to  the  certificate  under  Section   72   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  As the panel set out  at
    paragraph 34, the Section states that a person  shall  be  presumed  to
    have been convicted of a final judgment of a particularly serious crime
    and to constitute a danger to the community of the United Kingdom if:-

    (a)  he is convicted in the UK of an offence, and

    (b)  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.

    In this case, the  Secretary  of  State  took  the  view  that  as  the
    Appellant had a conviction for robbery he had not been  able  to  rebut
    the presumption that his continued presence in the UK would  constitute
    a danger to the community.  The panel considered  the  evidence  before
    them and made a number of findings  in  relation  to  the  issue  under
    Section  72  of  the  2002  Act.   The  panel  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's background that had been elicited from the evidence of  his
    family members.   As  recorded  in  the  determination,  the  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom as a minor dependant child with  his  mother
    and brother.  His father had died six months before he had come to  the
    UK and the evidence before the panel related to the  difficulties  that
    the Appellant  had  in  settling  in  the  United  Kingdom,  which  was
    exacerbated by the family being dispersed to Newcastle and having  been
    the subject of attacks on three occasions during this period  of  time.
    The panel however did  not  find  that  to  be  an  excuse  for  having
    committed the crime for which he was convicted.  Nonetheless they  took
    into account  his  antecedent  history  in  relation  to  his  criminal
    background noting that this had been the only offence for which he  had
    appeared before a court and whilst he had been on bail for the previous
    eighteen months before his sentence, he had  not  committed  any  crime
    during that period.  They also took  into  account  that  he  had  been
    released from prison on 22nd June 2010 and that  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing there had been a period of over three years that the  Appellant
    had been at large in the  community  and  had  not  committed  or  been
    convicted of any other offence.

24. The panel had documentary evidence from the probation services relating
    to this Appellant and they noted at paragraph 36 that he had made

         "a conscience and positive change to his lifestyle and had overcome
         his previous substance misuse issues.  He appeared to have embarked
         on a new and social way of life and seemed determined not  to  have
         any further  contact  with  the  criminal  justice  system  in  the
         capacity of a perpetrator of crime."

25. The panel also noted from the probation service records that  when  the
    Appellant  was  on  licence  he  had  attended  all  his   appointments
    punctually and had taken an active part in all the rehabilitative  work
    that was carried out with him (see [36]).

26. The panel considered the oral  evidence  they  had  heard  against  the
    background of the probation service's involvement and in particular,  a
    letter from the probation officer dated 11th July 2011.  They  observed
    at paragraph 37, that having heard the evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    brother, who had noted a lot of changes in  the  Appellant,  they  also
    took into account that the Appellant was now studying for a degree  and
    thus having considered  all  of  those  matters  the  panel  stated  as
    follows:-

         "We are prepared to find without any reservation that the Appellant
         has rebutted the presumption that his  continued  presence  in  the
         United Kingdom will constitute a danger to the community."

    Thus the panel did not uphold the certificate under Section 72 for  the
    reasons that they gave at paragraph 33 to 37.

27. The panel then turned to the Appellant's asylum claim and observed that
    the Appellant originally had been a dependant on his mother's claim but
    had now made a claim in his own right.  The basis of his claim was that
    he had left Ethiopia as a minor due to  his  mother's  support  of  the
    political party known as the Oromo Liberation Front  ("OLF").   It  was
    noted that the Appellant himself did not attend OLF meetings  with  his
    mother, who had not only done so in Ethiopia but did so in  the  United
    Kingdom, but that he did not support or have any interest in  political
    parties.  They also found  that  he  had  no  contact  with  anyone  in
    Ethiopia.  The panel  were  referred  to  the  background  evidence  in
    respect of Ethiopia and were prepared to accept that in  view  of  that
    evidence and in the country guidance decision of MB (OLF and  MTA-risk)
    Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 0030 that those who were perceived to  be  OLF
    members or sympathisers will be at risk upon return to  Ethiopia.   The
    panel therefore considered the Appellant's background in the  light  of
    the country material that that been placed  before  them.   They  noted
    that the Appellant had not participated in any OLF  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom and  had  never  been  arrested  or  threatened  by  the
    authorities when a minor in Ethiopia.  Whilst his mother  had  attended
    meetings  in the United Kingdom, the panel reached the conclusion  that
    they were not satisfied that there was a reasonable likelihood that the
    Appellant would be perceived by the authorities as an OLF member.  They
    reached the conclusion that there  would  be  no  indication  that  the
    authorities would know that the Appellant's mother was carrying out OLF
    activities in the UK.  Therefore they did not accept that he  would  be
    at risk of persecution on the grounds of imputed political  opinion  if
    returned to Ethiopia.

28. The panel then turned to the issue under the UK Borders  Act.   As  set
    out earlier  the  panel  reminded  themselves  this  was  an  automatic
    deportation case and applying the case  of  Masih  the  panel  directed
    themselves in such case, "Account must be taken of  the  strong  public
    interest in removing foreign citizens convicted of  a  serious  offence
    which lies not only in the prevention of further offences on  the  part
    of the individual concerned but in deterring others from committed them
    in the first place."  The panel  began  as  their  starting  point,  an
    assessment of the facts of the offence for which the appellant had been
    convicted of as set out on the remarks of  the sentencing  judge.   The
    panel at [47]  observed  that  the  sentencing  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant's offending was  persistent, that he  targeted  a  vulnerable
    man and that there was also the spectre of the use of a knife (although
    the Appellant did not have a knife).  The trial judge also  noted  that
    the Appellant was of previous  good  character  and  that  he  had  not
    committed any offence in the course of  the  previous  eighteen  months
    after the offence had been committed but before he had been  sentenced.
    As the panel noted the judge in the sentencing remarks  made  reference
    to this and reduced his sentence accordingly.

29. The panel then considered the Immigration Rules.   At  [50]  the  panel
    applied paragraph 396 which states that "Where a person  is  liable  to
    deportation the presumption shall be that the public interest  requires
    deportation.  It  is  in  the  public  interest  to  deport  where  the
    Secretary of State must make a deportation  order  in  accordance  with
    Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007."  The panel correctly identified
    that paragraph 398 of Rules stated that

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention
         paragraph 399 or 399A has to be considered.  If that does not apply
         it will only be exceptional circumstances that the public  interest
         in deportation will be outweighed by others factors."

30. It is common ground that the Appellant could not satisfy the provisions
    of either paragraph 399 or paragraph 399A on the facts of  the  appeal.
    The panel set out their findings in this regard at  [51].   Whilst  the
    panel did not state in terms that they were considering the Appellant's
    appeal  under  paragraph  398  (exceptional  circumstances)  the  panel
    considered his claim on the principles of Article 8 (outside the Rules)
    in line with the jurisprudence at the time, namely Izuazu  (Article  8-
    new Rules) [2013] UKUT 0045.  The panel  therefore  applied  the  well-
    established five stage test in Razgar.  In doing so they found that the
    Appellant had family life in the UK with his mother and brother  noting
    that they had left Ethiopia together as a  family  and  that  they  had
    always lived together as a family since that date.  They  accepted  the
    evidence that the Appellant and his siblings whilst young adults had  a
    close and "inclusive family life with their mother."  The panel  stated
    that the Appellant's mother had been taking care of  the  two  children
    since the Appellant's father died and  that  they  had  lived  together
    since they arrived in the United Kingdom.  The  panel  also  took  into
    account the Appellant's relationship with his girlfriend/partner Sherin
    Hibu, who had also given oral evidence before them.  They accepted  his
    relationship with his girlfriend and this  constituted  "private  life"
    and that the interference would have such consequences of gravity  that
    removal would mean  that  the  Appellant  would  live  apart  from  his
    siblings, his mother as well as his  girlfriend.   The  panel  observed
    that had it not been for the current situation of the Appellant, he and
    his girlfriend might have been engaged with plans with  to  marry  each
    other.  The evidence of the Appellant was set out at [12] was that when
    he was released from prison he was told that he could not marry  anyone
    otherwise it would look as if he was doing so to support an entitlement
    to stay in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant had met his girlfriend at
    university after he began his second year.

31. The panel then dealt with the  issue  of  proportionality.   The  panel
    reminded themselves again that they found as a fact in  favour  of  the
    Secretary of State that "Is the strong case that this is a very serious
    crime committed by the Appellant.  He attacked a vulnerable elderly man
    who he  also  threatened.   There  is  a  strong  public  interest  for
    deterrence in this kind of case."  The panel then turned to  the  other
    factors that they had indentified in the balance namely that  prior  to
    the offence he was of good character and  he  had  only  committed  one
    offence and that he had been of "exemplary character" since the time he
    had been bailed for the offence of robbery before conviction, a  period
    of eighteen months.  The panel reminded themselves of the evidence that
    they had read  from  the  probation  officer  whom  they  described  as
    "speaking of him in very glowing  terms"  and  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's "numerous letters of support".  They  paid  regard  to  the
    oral evidence they had heard from  the  Appellant's  brother  who  they
    found to be a credible and convincing witness as  regards  the  changes
    made by the Appellant and also accepted the evidence of his  girlfriend
    as credible, that she intended to have a family with the  Appellant  in
    the future.  They took into account that the Appellant had  turned  his
    life around that he was now studying for a degree, had  stopped  taking
    any drugs which was what they considered to have fuelled  his  previous
    offending behaviour and also paid regard and weight noting  "There  are
    numerous points in favour of the Appellant which satisfy us that he  is
    not likely to commit an offence of  this  nature  again  or  any  other
    offence.  All the indicators before  us  show  that  the  Appellant  is
    living a crime free life and intends to do  so  for  the  rest  of  his
    life."  (see [56]).

32. The panel also took into account the issue of delay, noting that it had
    taken the Secretary of State over three years to issue the  deportation
    order.  As to the effects of the delay the panel stated  at  [57]  that
    whilst it had given the Appellant the advantage of time to  reintegrate
    himself into the community and to  show  that  he  was  a  law  abiding
    citizen, it also demonstrated that  the  public  interest  factors  had
    diminished.  They recorded that they had already found him no longer to
    be a danger to  the  community  by  dismissing  the  certificate  under
    Section 72 of the 2002 Act.  The panel reached the conclusion  that  it
    would be a breach of the Appellant's  rights  under  Article  8  to  be
    deported from the United Kingdom.  Thus the panel allowed the appeal.

33. I do not consider that the panel failed to give appropriate  weight  to
    the public interest when addressing the issue of the proportionality of
    the decision. In this appeal the panel reminded  themselves  that  this
    was an automatic deportation  case and that it was not in dispute  that
    the Appellant was a foreign criminal within the meaning of  Section  32
    of the UK  Borders  Act  2007,  whose  deportation  was  deemed  to  be
    conducive of the public good  and  that  the  Respondent  must  make  a
    deportation order in respect of him unless one of  the  exceptions  set
    out in Section 33 of the Act applied.  In  this  case  there  were  two
    exceptions identified on behalf of the  Appellant,  firstly  his  claim
    under the Refugee Convention and secondly his claim under Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

34. At paragraph [50]  the  panel,  in  its  application  of  the  relevant
    paragraphs stated:-

         "Paragraph 396 states that where a person is liable to  deportation
         the  presumption  shall  be  that  the  public  interest   requires
         deportation.  It is in the public  interest  to  deport  where  the
         Secretary of State must  make  a  deportation  in  accordance  with
         Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Paragraph 398  states  that
         where a person claims that their deportation would be  contrary  to
         the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention
         paragraph 399 or 399A has to be considered.  If that does not apply
         to only be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

35. The panel in considering this issue further referred themselves to  the
    Tribunal decision in Misih [2012] UKUT 0046 at [46] and  in  particular
    where they stated:-

         "We note that in a case of automatic deportation full account  must
         be taken of the strong public interest in removing foreign citizens
         convicted of serious offences which lies not only in the prevention
         of further offences on the part of the individual concerned but  in
         deterring others from committing them in the first place."

36. Later at [47-48] they properly dealt with  the  facts  of  the  offence
    committed by the Appellant and set out the judge's sentencing remarks:-

         "47. The Tribunal went on to state  that  in  that  case  that  the
             starting point for assessing the facts of the offence of which
             an individual has been committed and their  effect  on  others
             and on the public as a whole must be the  view  taken  by  the
             sentencing judge.  In  the  present  case  we  note  that  the
             sentencing judge noted that the Appellant's offending  betrays
             not only persistent but betrays the fact that  he  targeted  a
             vulnerable man and there is also the spectre of the use  of  a
             knife here.

         48.  We also note that the trial judge  noted  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant is of effective good character and that the fact  he
             has not committed any offences in the course  of  the  ensuing
             eighteen months before the offence enables a moderate sentence
             to be given."

37. The panel had already noted at [35]  that  whilst  this  was  the  only
    offence he had committed  and  that  they  had  accepted  his  evidence
    concerning his background and the difficulties that he had settling  in
    the UK (including attacks upon his family members),  the  panel  stated
    "We find this no excuse for robbing a vulnerable victim."

38. They later concluded at [54]:-

         "We find as a fact that in favour of the Secretary of State is  the
         strong case that this is a very  serious  crime  committed  by  the
         Appellant.  He attacked  a  vulnerable  elderly  man  who  he  also
         threatened.  There is a strong public  interest  in  deterrence  in
         this kind of case.  However we have considered on  the  other  side
         that this is the only offence the Appellant has been convicted  of.
         We find that the Appellant has been of  exemplary  character  since
         the time he had been bailed for the offence of  robbery  before  he
         was convicted."

    The panel in the determination went on to note what they  found  to  be
    "numerous points in favour of the  Appellant"  when  considering  other
    factors weighing in the balance.

39. In reaching those findings, it cannot be said that the panel failed  to
    consider the public interest.   They  clearly  had  regard  to  it  and
    attached weight to what they described as a "strong public interest  in
    deterring foreign criminals."  It is unarguable that the legitimate aim
    of the prevention of crime is confined to those who are likely  to  re-
    offend and the case law indicates that in those cases affecting  public
    confidence  in  the  criminal  justice  and  immigration  system,   the
    deportation of offenders has a legitimate role  in  the  deterrence  of
    others.  Whilst the grounds challenge the determination  on  the  basis
    that the panel only considered the risk of re-offending rather than the
    issue of deterrence, that is not a justified criticism.   It  is  plain
    that the panel had firmly in mind and paid regard to the fact  that  as
    part of the public interest and the legitimate aim of the prevention of
    crime, that  this  necessarily  involved  the  need  to  deter  foreign
    criminals by leading them to understand that  a  consequence  of  their
    actions would be deportation.  The panel expressly  made  reference  to
    this at [46] and [54] where they identified "there is a  strong  public
    interest for deterrence in this  kind  of  case."   The  panel,  in  my
    judgment did not seek to minimise the circumstances of the offence  nor
    did they seek to downplay what was the  serious  nature  of  the  crime
    committed by this Appellant when carrying out the balancing exercise.

40. I now turn to the challenge mounted by the Respondent  that  the  panel
    failed to give adequate reasons in reaching their conclusions that  the
    decision to remove was a  disproportionate  one.   In  this  context  I
    remind myself of the words of Lord Phillips MR in English at  paragraph
    19:-

         "I[f] the Appellant process is to work satisfactorily, the judgment
         must enable the [IAT] to understand why the  [Adjudicator]  reached
         his decision.  This does not mean that every factor  which  weighed
         with the [Adjudicator] in his appraisal of the evidence has  to  be
         identified and explained.  But the issues the resolution  of  which
         were vital to the [Adjudicator]'s conclusion should  be  identified
         and the manner in which he resolved  them  explained.   It  is  not
         possible to provide a template  for  this  process.   It  need  not
         involve a lengthy judgment.  It does require the  [Adjudicator]  to
         identify and record  those  matters  which  were  critical  to  his
         decision.  If the critical issue was one of fact, it may be  enough
         to say that one witness was preferred to another  because  the  one
         manifestly had a clearer recollection of the material facts or  the
         other gave answers which demonstrated that his  recollection  could
         not be relied upon."

41. The factors identified by the panel that were weighed in the balance in
    favour of the Appellant can be summarised as follows:

      i) The Appellant had committed one offence of  robbery  and  albeit  a
         serious offence as the panel noted, he had been  of  hitherto  good
         character and in the period between the commission of  the  offence
         and before sentence (a period of eighteen months) the Appellant was
         on bail and had not committed any further offences.  Further at the
         date of the hearing a further three year period  had  elapsed  when
         the Appellant had led a crime  free  life  and  had  not  committed
         offences (see [34], [35]).

     ii) The panel reached the  finding  that  he  had  been  of  "exemplary
         character since the time he was bailed for the offence  of  robbery
         before he was convicted." (see [54]).

    iii) In this respect the panel accepted the evidence  of  his  probation
         officer that he had made an "conscious and positive change" to  his
         lifestyle and overcome his previous substance misuse.  He  appeared
         to have embarked on a  new  and  social  way  of  life  and  seemed
         determined not to  have  any  further  contact  with  the  criminal
         justice system in the capacity of a perpetrator of crime.   It  was
         noted that  the  Appellant  when  on  licence  attended  all  these
         appointments  punctually  and  took  an  active  part  in  all  the
         rehabilitative work that was carried out with him (see [36]).

     iv) The evidence of the probation officer was  supported  by  the  oral
         evidence  of  the  Appellant's  brother,  who  the  panel  had  the
         advantage of seeing and hearing from.  The panel found him to be  a
         "credible and convincing witness" in respect of the changes made by
         the Appellant (see [55]).  They noted that he was now studying  for
         a degree [37].

      v)  They  made  a  finding  that  his  continued  presence  would  not
         constitute a danger to the community [34-37].

     vi) At paragraph 56 the panel concluded that there were

             "numerous points in favour of the Appellant which  satisfy  us
             that he is not likely to commit  an  offence  of  this  nature
             again or any other offence.  All the indicators before us show
             that the Appellant is living a crime free life and intends  to
             do so for the rest of his life."

    vii) As to family life/private life, the findings made by the panel  are
         challenged by the respondent.  The panel had the benefit of hearing
         from  the  Appellant's  close  family  members  and  his   partner,
         including  his  mother  and  brother.   It  is   plain   from   the
         determination  that  the  panel  accepted  the  evidence   of   the
         Appellant's brother as "credible and  convincing"  [55].   In  this
         context, whilst the Appellant was over 18, the  panel  reached  the
         conclusion on the evidence before them that he had entered  the  UK
         as a dependent minor with his mother and sibling, his father having
         died and having no relations in Ethiopia.  Since that time  he  had
         had a  "close  and  inclusive  family  life  with  his  mother  and
         brother".  Whilst the panel did not make reference to the level  of
         dependency, it is implicit in the findings of the panel where  they
         went on to state that the Appellant, despite his age  continued  to
         enjoy family life with his  family  members.   In  respect  of  his
         partner/girlfriend, the panel concluded that he had  established  a
         private life with her by virtue of their relationship and that  but
         for the current situation, which they had explained evidentially at
         [12],  they  might  have  been  engaged  with   plans   to   marry.
         Additionally  the  panel  accepted  that  she  had  given  credible
         evidence that she intended to have a family with the Appellant (see
         [55]).

42. I consider that the weight to be given to the evidence was  essentially
    a matter for the panel having heard the oral evidence of the  witnesses
    before  them.   They  gave  sustainable  reasons   for   reaching   the
    conclusions concerning the extent of family and private life  in  their
    decisions.

43. The panel considered the issue of delay.  It was common ground that the
    Respondent had taken three years to sign the deportation order  and  in
    this regard the panel noted that the effect of  this  had  led  to  the
    situation whereby the  Appellant  had  reintegrated  himself  into  the
    country further and that the imperative to deport on the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State had diminished in the light of the delay (see [57]).
     In the grounds filed on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  it  was
    acknowledged that "such handling  errors  took  place  and  these  were
    regrettable"  but  submitted  the  issue  of  delay   should   not   be
    determinative.  Such a submission  is  misplaced.   It  is  plain  from
    reading the determination at paragraph [57]  that  the  panel  did  not
    treat the issue of delay as determinative but treated it quite properly
    as a factor  to  be  placed  in  the  balance  in  the  proportionality
    exercise.

44.   Having considered the grounds advanced on behalf of the Respondent  I
    do not find that they have been made out.  I have  concluded  that  the
    weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the panel  who  had
    the benefit and advantage of hearing the oral evidence before them.  It
    is plain from the determination that they found  that  evidence  to  be
    both compelling and credible not only concerning the extent  of  family
    and private life but also the changes made by the Appellant  since  the
    commission of  his  crime,  which  was  supported  by  the  independent
    evidence of the probation officer.  In the well-known case of Piglowska
    v Piglowski [1999] UKHL 27, Lord Hoffmann said this:

            "...the appellate court must bear in mind the  advantage  which
            the first instance judge had in  seeing  the  parties  and  the
            other witnesses.  This  is  well  understood  on  questions  of
            credibility and findings of primary fact. But it  goes  further
            than that. It applies also to the judge's evaluation  of  those
            facts. ..."

Then there is a quotation from his own  decision  in  Biogen  Inc  v  Medeva
Ltd [1997] RPC 1:

            "The need for appellate caution in reversing the trial  judge's
            evaluation of the facts is based upon much more  solid  grounds
            than professional courtesy. It is because specific findings  of
            fact, even by the most  meticulous  judge,  are  inherently  an
            incomplete statement of the impression which was made upon  him
            by the primary evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are  always
            surrounded  by  a  penumbra  of  imprecision  as  to  emphasis,
            relative weight, minor qualification and nuance  ...  of  which
            time and language do not permit exact expression, but which may
            play an important part in the judge's overall evaluation.

45. The panel carefully weighed the evidence and gave  sustainable  reasons
    for reaching the conclusions that they did.  I have considered  whether
    the findings were perverse or irrational, that is to say no  reasonable
    panel would have concluded as they did on  the  evidence  before  them.
    However I do not consider  that  such  criticism  can  be  successfully
    advanced  in  this  case.   The  grounds  amount  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the findings and the conclusions  reached.   Contrary
    to the assertion made in the grounds, the panel did  not  fail  to  pay
    regard and attach due weight to what was a very serious offence and the
    strong weight that should be attached to the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   They  acknowledge  this  in  the
    determination and they did not seek in any way to downplay the  serious
    nature of  the  crime  committed.  I  would  acknowledge  that  another
    constitution of the Tribunal might have  resolved  matters  differently
    and it may well be that this was not the only outcome possible  on  the
    facts of this particular case and may  be  categorised  as  a  generous
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  However that does  not  establish
    that the panel made an error of law and the question for this  Tribunal
    is a different one from that before the First-tier Tribunal.   As  Lord
    Carnwath LJ (as he then was) said in Mukarkar v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1045:-

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not made much easier or better by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis.  It is of the nature of  such  judgments  that  different
         Tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same  case...   That  the  mere  fact  that  one
         Tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view  of
         the facts of a particular case does not mean that it  has  made  an
         error of law, so as to justify an appeal under the old  system,  or
         an order for reconsideration under the new.  Nor does it create any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the  future.
         However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of  the
         specialist Tribunal should be respected."

46.  The panel directed themselves correctly and plainly had regard  to  the
    proper  exercise  of  proportionality,  including  the  strong   public
    interest identified by them but found that on the particular  facts  of
    this case that the balance lay in favour of the  Appellant.  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is on a point of law only.  In this  appeal  I  have
    reached the conclusion that the panel did give proper consideration  to
    the material before it and reached findings that were open to  it  even
    if a differently constituted Tribunal might have concluded otherwise.

46.   Drawing those matters together, the panel did not make  an  error  of
    law and the conclusion reached  does  not  disclose  an  error  in  the
    assessment that the panel took on the facts of this case.

Decision

47. The First-tier Tribunal panel did  not  make  an  error  of  law.   The
    decision shall stand.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

