
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01782/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 October 2015                            |On 12 November 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                Osayi Omozee
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale, instructed by Bar Pro Bono Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent was born on  26  November  1976  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.  The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judges
    Brunnen and Bruce; Mr Getlevog) against a decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 17 September 2014 to refuse to revoke a  deportation  order  made
    against him on 6 July 2012.  In a decision promulgated  on  9  February
    2015, the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal to the limited  extent
    that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.  The
    First-tier Tribunal directed that the respondent make a lawful decision
    in respect of  the  respondent's  application  for  revocation  of  the
    deportation order on the basis of the facts as the Tribunal found  them
    to be.  The Secretary  of  State  appealed  and  Judge  Parkes  granted
    permission on 4 March 2015.  I shall hereafter refer to the  respondent
    as the appellant and to  the  appellant  as  the  respondent  (as  they
    appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The background to the appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  is
    set out in the Tribunal's decision at [5 - 14]:

    The Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK in 2004.  In  July  that
    year he was found by the police to be in possession of a Dutch  driving
    licence that was not his.  He claimed asylum.  This claim  was  refused
    and his appeal was dismissed.  By February 2005 his appeal  rights  had
    been exhausted.  He then ceased to comply with the requirement that  he
    report to the Immigration Service.

    In October 2008 the Appellant applied for a residence card on the basis
    that he was married to a  Dutch  national,  Geraldine  Reena,  who  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  In January 2009 a  residence  card
    was issued, valid until January 2015.   However  in  January  2012  the
    Appellant was convicted  in  the  Crown  Court  of  offences  involving
    entering into  a  sham  marriage  for  immigration  purposes.   He  was
    sentenced to 21 months' imprisonment.  His appeals  against  conviction
    and sentence were dismissed.

    In February 2012 the Appellant's residence card  was  revoked  and  the
    Respondent  initiated  consideration  of  whether  he  was  subject  to
    automatic deportation pursuant to Section 32 of UK  Borders  Act  2007.
    The Appellant made representations including a new  claim  for  asylum.
    However  he  subsequently  withdrew  this  claim  and   expressed   his
    willingness to be deported.  On 6th July 2012  the  Respondent  decided
    that  the  Appellant  was  subject  to  automatic  deportation  and   a
    deportation order was made.  He was deported to Nigeria  on  17th  July
    2012.

    The Appellant petitioned the Customary Court of  Lagos  State  for  the
    dissolution of the marriage he had contracted in the UK and that  court
    made an order dissolving the marriage on 10th September 2012.

    Whilst still in the UK the Appellant had  formed  a  relationship  with
    Stephanie Orubor, who is a citizen of Britain and of Sierra Leone.  She
    visited him in Nigeria and they were married there on 8th April 2013.

    In July 2013 the Appellant and his wife travelled to  Spain  where  she
    claims to have established herself as a self-employed hairdresser.   In
    due course the Appellant was  issued  with  a  residence  card  by  the
    Spanish authorities, valid until 23rd January 2019.

    Mrs Omozee returned to the UK in October 2013 and on 15th October  gave
    birth to a son.  The Appellant  is  the  child's  father.   Mrs  Omozee
    returned with her son to Spain in November 2013.

    The family left Spain in July 2014.   They  went  to  the  Republic  of
    Ireland  and  were  able  to  enter  using  their  passports  and   the
    Appellant's Spanish residence card.  They then went to Belfast  and  on
    7th July 2014 attempted to fly to England.  However the  Appellant  was
    prevented from doing so as he was subject to the deportation order.  He
    was detained.

    On 8th July 2014 the solicitors then  acting  for  the  Appellant  made
    representations  to  the  Respondent  which  she  has  treated  as   an
    application to revoke the deportation order.  On  17th  September  2014
    she made a decision to refuse to revoke the order  and  it  is  against
    that decision that the Appellant now appeals.

    Whilst the matter has been under consideration the Appellant  has  been
    granted bail and temporary admission and he  is  living  in  Manchester
    with his wife and son.

 3. Ground 1 asserts that the Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons  for
    a material finding.  The Tribunal had found that the Customary Court of
    Lagos State dated 10 September 2012 dissolving  the  appellant's  first
    marriage to Geraldine Reena failed to be recognised  as  valid  in  the
    United Kingdom [23 - 27].  The Tribunal considered that recognition was
    required pursuant to Section 46(1) of the Family Law Act 1986:



    (1)The validity of an overseas divorce, annulment or legal separation
    obtained by means of proceedings shall be recognised  if-

    (a) the divorce, annulment or legal separation is effective under the
    law of the country in which it was obtained; and

    (b) at the relevant date either party to the marriage-

    (i) was habitually resident in the country in which the divorce,
    annulment or legal separation was obtained; or

    (ii) was domiciled in that country; or

    (iii) was a national of that country.


 4. The respondent submits that the words "law of the country"  in  Section
    46(1) should be construed as referring to the national or  federal  law
    of the country in which the divorce was obtained.   She  asserts  there
    was no evidence to show that the divorce decree issued in  a  Customary
    Court in Lagos State would be recognised nationally across Nigeria.  In
    consequence, the respondent argues that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    prove that he was validly divorced from his  first  wife  and  able  to
    marry his current spouse.  Mr Neale, for the appellant,  had  submitted
    that there was no dispute that, for the  purposes  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006, a marital  relationship  must  be  examined  in
    accordance with the laws of the  Member  State  from  which  the  union
    citizen obtains nationality (TA and  Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana
    [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC).  In the present case,  the  appellant's  current
    wife (Stephanie Omozee) is a British citizen.  Mr Neale submitted  that
    the Tribunal was correct to apply Section 46(1) of  the  1986  Act  and
    that, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, a competent  Nigerian
    court of law had acted within  its  own  jurisdiction  to  pronounce  a
    decree of divorce in respect of the appellant's first marriage; without
    evidence, it was not for the panel to go behind  the  Nigerian  court's
    interpretation of Nigerian law.

 5. I agree with Mr Neale's submission.  There is, in my opinion, no  basis
    whatever for the assertion made in the grounds of appeal that "......at
    its highest, the divorce decree is on its face  valid  under  customary
    law in Lagos State rather than nationally across Nigeria as appears  to
    have been found by the judge".  [7].  The Secretary of  State  did  not
    dispute that the document produced regarding the divorce was a  genuine
    document and that it had  been  issued  by  the  Nigerian  court  which
    purported to have issued it.  The Presenting Officer before the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not raise any issue whatever regarding the competence
    and jurisdiction of the Customary Court to issue the divorce.   Rather,
    as the Tribunal noted [25], "the  only  point  taken  by  Mr  Tan  [the
    Presenting Officer] concerning this court order was to question whether
    the court proceedings were valid  as  Geraldine  Reena  may  have  been
    unaware of them."  On that point, the Tribunal observed that the  court
    in Nigeria had been  satisfied  the  service  of  the  order  had  been
    effected as required by  its  own  procedures.   The  point  now  being
    advanced in the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  that  the  appellant
    should have adduced expert evidence to show that a divorce  certificate
    issued by a Customary Court in Lagos "is effective under  the  law  of"
    Nigeria for the purposes of  Section  46(1).   I  do  not  accept  that
    argument.  First, as I have noted, it was never raised before the First-
    tier Tribunal and, secondly, I agree with Mr Neale's  submission  that,
    where no point is taken as  to  the  authenticity  of  such  a  divorce
    document, it was open to the Tribunal to find that the Customary  Court
    in Lagos was competent to determine the limits of its own jurisdiction.
     I have to say that I find it would be extraordinary if  the  Customary
    Court issued a divorce certificate which, on its face, appears to  have
    no geographical limitation but which would, according to the  Secretary
    of State's argument, be valid only within Lagos State and  not  Nigeria
    as a whole.  The Tribunal was entitled to  make  its  findings  on  the
    basis of the evidence before it;  it  was  not  required  to  reject  a
    validly issued divorce  decree  simply  because  there  was  no  expert
    evidence to show the geographical extent of its validity,  an  argument
    which was never even advanced before the Tribunal.

 6. As Mr Neale explained, Ground 2 raises the same  issues  as  Ground  1.
    The Secretary  of  State  asserts  that  the  Tribunal  misapplied  the
    relevant burden of proof at [26]:

         However we see no reason in the absence of evidence on  the  point.
         I find that this would make the order [pronouncing the  appellant's
         divorce from Mrs Reena] invalid in Nigeria.

 7. Ground 2 fails to give any context for  the  quotation  at  [26].   The
    Tribunal had been concerned with an apparent  discrepancy  between  the
    appellant's evidence (that his wedding had taken place according to the
    rites of the Church of England) whereas the order had referred  to  the
    wedding having taken place "under native and custom  law."   First,  it
    appears that the Tribunal itself raised this  issue  (rather  than  the
    Presenting Officer).  It was plainly open to the Tribunal  to  conclude
    that, notwithstanding the discrepancy, the order was valid in  Nigeria.
    There is nothing in the decision of the Tribunal which  indicates  that
    it reversed the burden of proof in the manner asserted by the grounds.

 8. Ground 3 asserts that the Tribunal made a material misdirection of  law
    in  respect  of  its  application  of  Regulation  24(3)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  To set the context of that challenge, I set out below the
    Tribunal's reasoning [47 - 53]:




    The Respondent has raised a further argument in her  skeleton  argument
    based on Regulation 19(1A) of the 2006 Regulations which states:

         "A person is not entitled to be admitted to the United  Kingdom  by
         virtue of Regulation 11 if that person is subject to a  deportation
         or exclusion order."

    The  Respondent  contends  that  as  the  Appellant  is  subject  to  a
    deportation order he has no right to be  admitted.   This  argument  is
    misconceived.  For the purposes of this provision  "deportation  order"
    must be understood in accordance with the definition in Regulation 2:

         "'Deportation order' means an order  made  pursuant  to  Regulation
         24(3)."

    In the present case the deportation order was not made under Regulation
    24(3) but under the  Immigration  Rules  and  Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  Regulation 19(1A) is therefore of no  relevance.



    For all these reasons we find that the Appellant has a derived right of
    residence in the  UK  and  is  entitled  to  be  admitted  without  any
    additional documentation.  His removal from  the  UK  pursuant  to  the
    existing deportation order would breach his rights under the  Community
    treaties and Exception 3 in Section 33(4) of  the  2007  Act  therefore
    applies.  It follows that this is a situation  in  which,  pursuant  to
    Section 32(6) the Respondent may revoke the deportation order.

    The manner in which the Respondent should deal with a situation such as
    the present is described in her published policy guidance:

         "If a person who benefits from the right of free movement under the
         EEA Regulations is deported under Section 3(5)(a) of the  1971  Act
         (conducive to the public good) ... the decision is  not  comparable
         to public policy or public security considerations  under  the  EEA
         Regulations.  For example, if a person was deported before becoming
         an EEA national or family member of an EEA national.

         Such deportation orders must be revoked.  You must  assess  if  the
         person can be excluded under the EEA Regulations."

    It should be noted that the automatic  deportation  provisions  in  the
    2007 Act lead to the  making  of  a  deportation  order  under  Section
    3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act and this policy is therefore  applicable  here.
    In view of our findings the Respondent's policy requires the revocation
    of the deportation order.

    It remains open to the Respondent, at the same  time  as  revoking  the
    existing deportation order, to consider whether the Appellant should be
    excluded or deported under the 2006 Regulations.  Although  it  appears
    from paragraph 81 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter, to which  we  have
    referred above, that the Respondent may not think there are grounds for
    exclusion or deportation under those Regulations, no  express  decision
    to that effect has apparently been made.  It is not for us to make such
    a decision as that issue is not before us.

    We consider that the appropriate course for us to take is to allow  the
    appeal to the extent that the Respondent must apply her above policy on
    the basis of the facts as we have found them to be.  Mr Neale concurred
    with this course.

    In view of the above it is not necessary for us to consider or to  make
    findings  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  claim  under  Article   8.
    Immigration Act 1971 is capable of being  an  order  made  pursuant  to
    Regulation 24(3) of the 2006 Regulations.  The respondent submits  that
    the Tribunal erred in law by failing to treat the deportation order  as
    having been made pursuant to Regulation 24(3) or, in  the  alternative,
    by failing to give adequate reasons for treating the order as not  made
    pursuant to that Regulation.  Mr Neale submitted that Regulation  24(3)
    whilst specifying that a person to  be  deported  under  Regulation  19
    should be treated as if he were a person to Section 35A of the 1971 Act
    applies does not indicate that any deportation  order  made  under  the
    1971 Act is an order made "pursuant  to"  Regulation  24(3).   Such  an
    interpretation of  the  Regulations  would  deprive  an  individual  of
    protection under Article 27 of Directive 24/38/EC which protects  union
    citizens against expulsion except in circumstances laid  down  by  that
    provision.  When the deportation order was made  in  the  present  case
    (2012) the appellant was not a family member of an EEA national and had
    no rights deriving from  the  Treaties.   However,  the  appellant  has
    subsequently acquired such rights as a family member of an EEA national
    and the Directive would be infringed if the course of action ordered by
    the First-tier Tribunal (remittal to the respondent to  make  a  lawful
    decision as regards  revocation  of  the  deportation  order)  was  not
    followed.

 9. I find I agree with Mr Neale's submission.  Support for his argument is
    provided by the respondent's own Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
    (Chapter 7, Section 3, in particular at 7.4.3).  The instructions deal,
    inter alia, with the

         case of a person ... previously  deported  on  grounds  other  than
         public policy or public security at a time when he was  neither  an
         EEA national nor family member of an EEA  national  but  has  since
         required a right of admission and residence in the  United  Kingdom
         under EC law.

    The Instructions go on to provide that

         persons who are subject to deportation orders 'on non-public policy
         or non-public security grounds ... should not be refused  admission
         on the basis of this deportation order if  they  have  subsequently
         acquired a right of admission and residence in the  United  Kingdom
         under EC law.

10. The argument now being advanced by the  Secretary  of  State  Ground  3
    appears to be entirely at odds with her own guidance based on  her  own
    interpretation of the Regulations.   Further  support  for  Mr  Neale's
    argument is provided by the Tribunal itself in the passage quoted above
    [49].  I find that Ground 3 is without merit and agree  with  Mr  Neale
    that the Tribunal made the correct  decision  in  this  instance.   The
    respondent cannot avoid looking at the matter again in the light of the
    appellant having acquired subsequent to the making of  the  deportation
    order the protection afforded to a family member of an EEA national.

11. In the circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.





Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 11 November 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



