
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No: DA/01546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 March 2016                      |On 11 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                                   Between

                              MR KWEKU ADOBOLI
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Bonavero, Oracle Solicitors
For the respondent:    T. Melvin, Senior Home office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal from a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on  6 October  2015.   The  appellant  appeals  against  a
    deportation order made against him by letter of 8 July 2014 in terms of
    section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.    The appellant has been lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom  since  1992,
    having entered this country when he was 12.  He  left  his  country  of
    birth, Ghana, when four years old and thereafter followed his parents
    to various parts of the world since his father worked  for  the  United
    Nations.  They returned to Ghana  in  about  1990  whereupon  he  spent
    several semesters at school there before returning to the Middle East.
    In 1992 he came to the United Kingdom on a Student Visa.  He  completed
    a BSc Honours degree at Nottingham University in Computer  Science  and
    Management.   Thereafter,  in  2002,  he  obtained  employment  at  UBS
    investment Bank, where he worked as an operations analyst between  2003
    and 2005.  In 2007 he became a trader.

3.    In November 2011 the appellant was convicted of 2 counts of  fraud  by
    the abuse of his position as a trader and  was  sentenced  to  7  years
    imprisonment.   The  sentencing  judge  described   these   crimes   as
    representing "the largest trading loss in British banking history."  He
    said that the appellant had been  involved  in  unhedged  trading  well
    beyond his risk limits and that he  concealed  what  he  was  doing  by
    booking fictitious hedging trades.  The actual loss which  his  trading
    had caused came to $2.25 billion.  He had no previous convictions  but
    the sentencing judge described him as being profoundly  unselfconscious
    of his own failings, having a strong gambling streak and being arrogant
    enough to think that the bank's rules for traders did not apply to him.
     In sentencing the appellant to a total  of  seven years,  he  imposed
    concurrent sentences on the two charges on which he was convicted.

4.    On 8 July 2014 the respondent  issued  a  letter  which  set  out  the
    grounds for  her  decision  that  the  appellant  should  be  deported.
    Although the appellant had consistently maintained since February  2013
    that he had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom since 1992 and
    that he had not been settled in Ghana since 1984 (when he was aged  4),
    the respondent's letter contained the assertions that he had arrived in
    the United Kingdom 1998 aged 18, had overstayed for three  and  a  half
    years between August 1999 and March 2003 and had  spent  his  formative
    years in Ghana.  It was common ground before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that these assertions were incorrect and the position was as set above.
     On the first day of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  8
    September   2015,   the   respondent's   representative   produced    a
    supplementary refusal letter, which bore the date 2 March 2015.   Under
    immigration history on page 1 of 8 it was narrated that  the  appellant
    had been granted a student visa from 4 September 1995.  This was  again
    incorrect since he had been first granted such a visa in  August  1992.
    Further, it was stated again, at page 4 of 8, that  he  had  spent  his
    formative years in Ghana.  These matters are noted at  paragraph  4  of
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  It was accepted  by  the
    respondent's representative that the appellant  had  first  obtained  a
    student visa in 1992 and not 1995.

5.    It was argued before the First-tier Tribunal that, although  convicted
    of a serious offence which had attracted a sentence of more  than  four
    years, there were very compelling circumstances which should result  in
    a finding that the deportation was  not  proportionate.   It  was  also
    argued that the respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    law, since it proceeded upon the factual errors detailed above.

6.    From paragraph  81  of  the  determination  the  judge  sets  out  his
    findings in fact and acknowledges that the  appellant  had  established
    his genuine remorse. He accepted that the appellant genuinely wished to
    work with  experienced  financial  professionals  to  combat  financial
    crime.  He would play an  important  role  in  workshops  and  seminars
    describing his own personal experiences and what had  led  him  to  the
    commission of the offences of which he was convicted.  It was  accepted
    that private life had been established on  a  substantial  basis  since
    1992 and that he had been lawfully resident in the UK for 23 of his  35
    years.

7.    All his ten witnesses were accepted as credible and reliable  speaking
    to his character and the pressures which the appellant had  been  under
    while working at UBS Bank.  None of this evidence was contested by  the
    respondent.

8.    At paragraph 90 the judge turns to the family life of  the  appellant
    but found on balance that he had not established any continuing  family
    life with his former  partner.   It  is  noted  that  his  parents  and
    siblings were all resident in Ghana.

9.    The judge  considered  the  future  intentions  of  the  appellant  at
    paragraphs 93 onwards.  He had expressed a wish to study for a  PhD  in
    the United Kingdom.  His claim that a PhD studied anywhere  other  than
    London  would  not  have  the  same  value  was  rejected.   While  the
    appellant's evidence and that of his father was that he  would  not  be
    able to play an effective role in the proposed seminars  and  workshops
    to combat financial crime if in Ghana, the judge found that  there  was
    no objective evidence establishing communication  difficulties  between
    Ghana and  the  United Kingdom  and  considered  that  electronic  and
    computer contact would be adequately possible by those means.

10.   The judge turned, at paragraphs 95 and following, to  the  appellant's
    future in Ghana if deported there.  He noted  that  the  appellant  had
    returned there on a regular basis between the ages of  12  and  19  and
    occasionally thereafter.  The judge pointed out at paragraph  96,  that
    while  he   was   socially   and   culturally   integrated   into   the
    United Kingdom, his family was in Ghana.  The judge acknowledged  that
    it would not be easy for him to integrate into Ghanaian society but  he
    would have the benefit of his family, who had the  ability  to  provide
    sound  initial  personal  and  financial  support.   The  appellant  is
    described as  having  natural  talent,  being  highly  intelligent  and
    articulate.  He  had  substantial  relevant  qualifications  to  obtain
    employment there.  However,  the  judge  considered  overall  that  the
    appellant had not established that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles in his reintegration into life in Ghana.   He  accepted  also
    that deportation to Ghana would result in a  substantial  lessening  of
    the close private life ties the appellant had in the United Kingdom but
    that he would be able to  continue  meaningful  contact  with  them  by
    electronic means or by his friends visiting Ghana or elsewhere.

11.   The judge took note of the sentencing judge's comments in  respect  of
    the appellant, accepted the appellant's genuine remorse but also  noted
    that in evidence the appellant had not been able to accept the  judge's
    comments about his character.

12.   The judge addressed paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules and  noted
    that in the appellant's case the public interest in  deportation  would
    only be outweighed by very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    those described in paragraph 399 and 399A.   He  concluded  that  there
    would not be very significant obstacles to integration into  Ghana  and
    that the circumstances described in those paragraphs did not  exist  or
    had not been established.  The question  therefore  was  whether  there
    were other very compelling circumstances over and above those described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  He notes at paragraph 126 that a critical
    aspect in this assessment was the period of the time the appellant  had
    resided in the UK since the age of 12.  He referred to Maslov v Austria
    [2008] EHRR 546 and concluded that the serious nature  of  the  offence
    committed by the appellant justified his expulsion,  particularly  when
    considered against the public interest  factors  he  required  to  take
    account of.   He  emphasised  at  paragraph  128  that  the  length  of
    residence in the United Kingdom and all the related factors  which  he
    had analysed at length were aspects to which  he  had  given  the  most
    anxious consideration.  After that  consideration  he  found  that  the
    serious nature of the offence and the  requirement  to  give  the  most
    careful consideration to the public interest overrode other factors  to
    which he had referred.

13.   At paragraph 134 he sets out his approach  in  relation  to  the  five
    steps in Razgar.  He noted at paragraph 140 the appellant's  contention
    as to whether the decision was in accordance with the  law  because  of
    the respondent's failure to take proper account of the facts.  However,
    the judge did not consider this matter rendered  her  decision  not  in
    accordance with the law.  He was satisfied overall  that  the  proposed
    interference  with  the  appellant's  article 8  rights  would  be  in
    accordance with the law.  He  also  found  that  the  interference  was
    proportionate to the legitimate public ends sought to be achieved.

14.   Before this tribunal Mr Bonavero made two principal submissions.   The
    first was that the First-tier tribunal had erred in law in  failing  to
    find that the decision of the respondent was "not  in  accordance  with
    the law".  That was because the errors in fact made  not  only  in  the
    letter of refusal of July 2014 but perpetuated in the  letter  dated  2
    March  2015  were  material  to  the  respondent's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's article 8 rights.   Accordingly  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in not recognising that.  It ought  to  have  allowed  the
    appeal  in  accordance  with  section  84(1)(e)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The First-tier tribunal's findings at
    paragraph  140  were  inadequate,  since  no  reasons  to  support  the
    conclusion that the decision was in accordance with the law were given.
    Mr Bonavero submitted that this  was  a  very  compelling  circumstance
    within the meaning of section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act and in  terms  of
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.

15.   Secondly Mr Bonavero argued that the  First-tier  tribunal  materially
    erred in law in failing to give proper consideration to the  contention
    that if the appellant were not deported it might  have  the  effect  of
    deterring disorder and crime  due  to  his  ability  to  educate  other
    financial professionals thus prevent fraud  and  financial  misconduct.
    In addition, at paragraph 82, the judge had described  the  appellant's
    risk of reoffending as low.  However, since the First-tier tribunal had
    been given evidence in the form of an affidavit from  Sarah  George,  a
    barrister and partner of firm of solicitors, to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant  was  liable  to  be  prohibited  by  the  Financial  Conduct
    Authority from performing any  controlled  function  in  the  financial
    industry, his risk categorisation should have been  placed  much  lower
    than that.  It was not suggested that  he  would  be  at  any  risk  of
    indulging in other forms of  crimes  and  his  risk  should  have  been
    categorised as de minimis.  Mr Bonavero  also  referred  to  the  other
    grounds of application for permission to appeal and  pointed  out  that
    permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

16.   Mr Melvin for the respondent submitted that any error in fact  in  the
    decision letters were not of any materiality in this case.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal had had regard to the correct length of time in which the
    appellant  had  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United Kingdom  at
    paragraphs 118 and 128.  In any event, standing the powerful element of
    risk these factors did not override the public interest the deportation
    of a foreign criminal such as the appellant.

17.   Similarly, in relation to the assessment of  the  public  interest  in
    respect of the possible contribution that the appellant could  make  in
    the form of seminars and courses, the First-tier  tribunal  came  to  a
    conclusion which it was entitled to reach on  this  matter,  especially
    having regard to the findings at paragraph 94. This  consideration  did
    not amount  to  a  very  compelling  circumstance  and  the  First-tier
    tribunal was entitled to treat it in that way. In the  written  grounds
    of appeal the appellant had relied on the case of UE (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2010] EWCA Civ 975 at paragraph 18 where Sir David Keene had said that
    there could be public interest in the  retention  in  this  country  of
    someone of considerable value to the community and that could  be  seen
    as relevant to the exercise of immigration control.  However that  case
    was not a deportation case and, in any event, took place before the new
    rules came into force.

Discussion

18.   There was no dispute that the first letter of  refusal  dated  8  July
    2014 contained factual errors in relation to the length of stay in  the
    United Kingdom of the appellant and the assertion that  the  appellant
    had spent his formative years in  Ghana.   The  letter  dated  2 March
    compounded the error in so far as stating that the first  student  visa
    had been granted in 1995 rather than 1992 and  repeated  the  error  in
    respect of the formative years. Mr Melvin did not dispute that  section
    84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act governed the rights of  appeal  in  this  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Section 86(3)(a) of that Act  provides
    that the tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks that  "a
    decision against which the appeal is brought or  is  treated  as  being
    brought was not in accordance with the law (including  the  immigration
    rules)". At paragraph 140 of its determination, the First-tier tribunal
    is dealing with the third step  in  Razgar  rather  than  the  specific
    ground of appeal advanced before it in relation to section 84(1)(e) but
    Mr Bonavero took no point about that.  In  any  event,  the  First-tier
    tribunal's approach is evident.  It  found  that  the  errors  of  fact
    identified were not such as to render the respondent's decision "not in
    accordance with the law".

19.   The question for this tribunal is whether that constitutes a  material
    error of law.  The errors referred to in the letter of 2 March 2015 can
    be summarised thus.   The first is that the appellant had been resident
    in UK since September 1998 aged 18 whereas he had been in UK since 1992
    aged 12.  So he had spent 23 years here not 15 as stated.   The  letter
    of 2 March 2015 did not correct the error since it was stated  that  he
    had come to the UK in 1995 and later that he had been in the UK for  15
    years.  The second is that he had  overstayed  from  August  1999  till
    March 2003 but this was corrected in the letter of 2 March.  The  third
    is that he had lived his formative years in Ghana, whereas he had  left
    Ghana at the age of 4 in 1984.  These matters require to be set in  the
    context of the other evidence to which the respondent had regard.   The
    appellant had been born in Ghana  and,  as  noted  at  page  5  of  the
    decision letter, he knew the language and culture of  Ghana  and  would
    not encounter a language barrier.  His parents were in Ghana and he had
    returned there on a number of occasions to visit family  members.   His
    qualifications and  work  experience  would  assist  him  in  obtaining
    employment there.  Connections and friendships could be maintained from
    Ghana using modern means of communication.

20.   While factual error may result in a decision not being  in  accordance
    with the law, it is necessary,  in  my  view,  to  examine  the  errors
    involved and to consider whether they were such that  the  decision  is
    vitiated thereby to the extent that there was,  in  effect,  no  proper
    decision at all.  In the context of judicial review it  has  been  said
    that the error has to be material and decisive and "not susceptible  to
    correction by alternative means" (see E v SSHD [2004] EWCA  Civ  49  at
    paragraphs 46 and 51).  An analogy can be drawn to  a  case  where  the
    respondent failed to have regard to the correct statutory framework  or
    applied the incorrect legal tests.  In such circumstances it  might  be
    said that there was no proper decision at all.  If so, it could be said
    that it was not in accordance with the law and the appeal ought  to  be
    allowed so that the decision could be taken again  by  the  respondent.
    Here the errors were restricted  to  a  7  year  underestimate  of  the
    appellant's residence in the UK and an overestimate of his residence in
    Ghana.  But the respondent had proper regard to the fact  that  he  had
    maintained connections with Ghana, that he spoke the language, that his
    parents were there to support him and his qualifications and experience
    would assist him in obtaining employment there.  I consider the  First-
    tier Tribunal's conclusion that the nature of the errors did not render
    the decision not in accordance with the law to be one it  was  entitled
    to reach and which was open to it.  Its conclusion does not  constitute
    a material error of law. It hardly needs to  be  said  that  not  every
    error of fact amounts to an error of  law,  otherwise  the  distinction
    between them would be of little, if any, importance.

21.   Furthermore, the  First-tier  tribunal  did  not  simply  refuse  this
    appeal.  It legitimately exercised its fact  finding  role  as  it  was
    asked to do.  It heard from the appellant's witnesses and made its  own
    assessment of the level of interference with  the  appellant's  private
    life, applying the correct factual matrix.  It cannot be said that  the
    appellant suffered unfairness or prejudice by the  First-tier  tribunal
    proceeding as it did.  This is not a case where the First-tier Tribunal
    was unable to ascertain the correct basis for its decision. It was able
    to correct the errors by the "alternative means" of the appeal  process
    under section 85 of the 2002 Act.

22.   In relation to  the  second  substantive  ground  of  appeal  advanced
    before me, the consideration that, if he were to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom, he could  participate  in  seminars  and  courses  which  were
    designed to reduce the risk of fraud and financial misconduct  was  one
    to which the First-tier tribunal  had  careful  regard.   However,  the
    weight of this consideration was properly to be assessed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  At paragraph  94  it  pointed  out  that  the  accepted
    benefits of the  appellant's  contribution  could,  at  least  to  some
    extent, be extended by electronic means from Ghana or another  country.
    The  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  that
    participation would not be adequately possible by  the  use  of  modern
    computer and electronic means is one which was open to  the  First-tier
    tribunal and which was capable of undermining the weight to be attached
    to the consideration. That is how the First-tier tribunal  viewed  this
    matter and it was entitled to proceed in that way.

23.   As to the consideration that the First-tier tribunal failed to have  a
    proper regard to the real level of risk which the  appellant  posed  of
    reoffending, it is of course correct that in the First-tier  tribunal's
    narration of the evidence of Sarah George, the barrister  who  provided
    an affidavit explaining the legal and regulatory frameworks surrounding
    a prohibition order that was liable to be imposed upon  the  appellant,
    there is no reference to the effect of that order on  the  question  of
    risk.  At paragraph 122 the First-tier tribunal describes the risk  of
    reoffending as  low.   That  is  not  an  inaccurate  description.   Mr
    Bonavero accepted that  that  was  the  level  of  risk  at  which  the
    appellant had been assessed in the OASys report.   I  do  not  consider
    that the classification of low reoffending constitutes a material error
    of law. The  fact  that  the  appellant  would  be  the  subject  of  a
    prohibition order preventing him from acting in the sort  of  financial
    capacity he did prior to his conviction, does not necessarily mean that
    he presents no risk at all to the public.  The appellant was  found  by
    the sentencing judge to be somebody who abused his position of trust as
    a senior  trader.   He  was  in  the  words  of  the  sentencing  judge
    "profoundly unselfconscious of  his  failings".   There  was  a  strong
    streak of the gambler in him and he was arrogant enough to  think  that
    the bank's rules for traders did not  apply  to  him.   These  failings
    would be transferrable to any employment which the appellant  would  be
    able to obtain outwith the banking  sector.   The  First-tier  tribunal
    proceeded on the basis that the  appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain
    alternative employment.  The fact that the prohibition  order  has  now
    been imposed does not remove any risk that this appellant posed to  the
    public.  The First-tier Tribunal correctly had regard to the opinion of
    Wilson LJ at paragraph 15 of OH (Serbia) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  694
    where he pointed out that the risk of reoffending is one facet  of  the
    public interest  in  deportation  and  deterrence.  The  expression  of
    society's revulsion at serious crimes and building  confidence  in  the
    treatment of foreign offenders  are  other  important  elements.   When
    regard is had to the seriousness of this offence and the need to  deter
    other foreign nationals from such serious criminal conduct,  it  cannot
    be said that the First-tier Tribunal's analysis represents  a  material
    error of law.

24.   Since Mr Bonavero also advanced the other grounds of appeal  contained
    in his application, I turn to those.  In the first ground  it  is  said
    that the First-tier Tribunal made significant findings all  which  were
    in the appellant's favour and 18 of these are set  out.   Criticism  is
    then made of the  characterisation  of  the  appellant's  risk  of  re-
    offending as low, with which  I  have  dealt  above.   It  goes  on  to
    highlight the First-tier tribunal's finding at paragraph 94 that  there
    was no objective evidence establishing that  electronic  communications
    in Ghana would not permit the appellant's involvement  in  seminars  in
    the UK.  It is argued that,  in  the  context  of  the  evidence  of  a
    financial expert specialising in the prevention of financial crime, the
    appellant's presence  at  these  seminars  would  be  of  "considerable
    importance" (paragraph 65) since that would give managers of  financial
    institutions  and  traders  the  opportunity  to  interact   with   the
    appellant, a convicted  trader,  who  had  experienced  the  pressures,
    expectations and risk management challenges which they faced daily.  At
    paragraph 94 the judge concludes that there was no  objective  evidence
    that the appellant's participation could  not  adequately  be  provided
    from Ghana by electronic means. The  ground  states  that  "it  clearly
    followed from this that, at the lowest, there was a substantial barrier
    to the optimal means of addressing an extremely  important  problem-the
    risk to the UK economy from future abusive market  behaviour".   It  is
    not entirely clear what point  is  being  made  here.   The  First-tier
    tribunal has carefully noted  the  evidence  on  this  matter  and  has
    reached the conclusion, upon the evidence presented  to  it,  that  the
    appellant's deportation would not  prevent  his  participation  in  the
    seminars.  It  may  be  true  that  such  participation  would  not  be
    "optimal" but nevertheless,  the  appellant  would  still  be  able  to
    interact  with  the  other  participants  and  thus  work  towards  the
    prevention of crime.  In that situation, the  First-tier  tribunal  was
    entitled to conclude that deportation would not result in the  loss  of
    the appellant's participation in the seminars and was not a  factor  of
    significance weighing against deportation.  I do not consider that  any
    material error of law has been identified in this respect.

25.   It is then said that, if weight was  attached  to  the  absence  of  a
    statement by the appellant that he  was  dishonest,  that  was  unfair.
    This refers to the judge's comments at paragraph 109. But the judge  in
    this passage accepts that the appellant is  remorseful  and  is  simply
    commenting that there was nowhere any explicit acknowledgment that what
    he did was dishonest.  That was factually correct since he had pled not
    guilty, had appealed unsuccessfully  against  his  conviction  and  the
    terms of his statement quoted at paragraph 103  do  not  amount  to  an
    unequivocal acceptance of dishonesty.

26.   The second ground is  that  the  decision  of  the  respondent,  being
    factually incorrect, was "not in accordance with the law" in  terms  of
    Razgar.  I have dealt with this matter in the context of section 84  of
    the 2002 Act.  At paragraph 140 the First-tier tribunal concluded  that
    the factual errors "could not be  regarded  as  establishing  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law".  This was  at  the  stage
    that the First-tier tribunal was assessing the proportionality  of  the
    interference with the appellant's article 8 rights.   For  the  reasons
    already given, I consider that the First-tier tribunal was entitled  to
    come to the view that the materiality of the  factual  errors  was  not
    such as to render the decision discordant with the law.  At this  stage
    of its decision making process the First-tier tribunal  is  considering
    the legal framework supporting the decision. In that  context,  factual
    error would require to be so fundamental as to mean  that,  in  effect,
    there was no lawful decision at all.  It was  open  to  the  First-tier
    tribunal to conclude that  the  errors  identified  were  not  of  that
    nature.  Furthermore, there is an additional safeguard provided by  law
    in the form of  an  appeal  against  the  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which can hear evidence and reach its own factual conclusions.
     It is also contended that factual error rendering a decision to be not
    in accordance with the law can itself be  "a  very  compelling  reason"
    under paragraph 398 of the immigration rules.  Since I have found  that
    the First-tier tribunal made no  error  in  this  respect,  it  is  not
    necessary to deal with this aspect of the second ground.

27.   The third ground criticises the First-tier tribunal's approach to  the
    content of the public interest.  The First-tier  tribunal  is  said  to
    have failed to have regard to  particular  issues  which  affected  the
    nature of the public interest in this case.  It is said that deterrence
    and the reflection of public revulsion of the offence had already  been
    satisfied by the sentence imposed and that the appellant would be  able
    to contribute to the deterrence and detection  of  financial  crime  by
    participation in seminars.  It is recognised that there may  be  public
    interest in retaining someone of "considerable value to the  community"
    (UE (Nigeria) & Others v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 975 paragraphs 18-19).  I
    do not consider this criticism to be well founded.   An  appellant  who
    has been sentenced to 4 years or more imprisonment could always be said
    to have satisfied the requirements of  deterrence  and  that  society's
    repugnance had been reflected thereby.  But it  is  the  deterrence  to
    immigrants and asylum seekers and society's repugnance demonstrated  by
    the deportation that are the  issues  at  the  stage  of  weighing  the
    proportionality of such a step.  As  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant remaining in the UK because of his  value  in  assisting  the
    reduction of financial crime, such a factor might in some  cases  be  a
    significant one but in this case it cannot be said to be so because  of
    the conclusion that he could participate from Ghana.

28.   The fourth ground  states  that  the  First-tier  tribunal  failed  to
    appreciate that the burden of proof lay on the respondent to show  that
    the interference with  the  appellant's  private  life  was  justified.
    Again I do not agree.  At paragraph 145 the First-tier tribunal  states
    "I find that considered on that basis  and  against  those  authorities
    that the respondent has established, on the balance  of  probabilities,
    that the interference in the appellant's private  life  caused  by  his
    removal would not be disproportionate to  the  respondent's  legitimate
    interest".  The judge also referred to Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546
    at paragraph 127 and noted that very serious reasons  are  required  to
    justify expulsion.  There can be no doubt that the judge did not invert
    the onus in this case.

29.   The fifth ground criticises the First-tier tribunal's approach to  the
    proportionality assessment.  It is said that it applied too stringent a
    test in applying paragraph 398 of the rules as demonstrated by its  use
    of the phrase "the tightening of the law in regard  to  article  8  and
    deportation over the last few years".  It is contended that the  First-
    tier  tribunal  has  fettered  its  assessment  of  proportionality  by
    excluding from its consideration factors such as  the  high  degree  of
    integration in the UK after many years, which outweighed  the  ties  to
    Ghana.  Having read the First-tier  tribunal's  decision  a  number  of
    times, I do not detect  anywhere  a  fettering  of  its  assessment  of
    proportionality or any restriction in  the  factors  to  which  it  had
    regard in relation to what could amount  to  compelling  circumstances.
    The findings of fact from paragraph 81 onwards show that it had  regard
    to all the elements of the evidence presented to it by  the  appellant.
    At paragraph 83 the private life is found to be "most substantial"  due
    to his residence of 23 years.  The witnesses  led  to  speak  to  their
    involvement in his life are mentioned at paragraph 84 and are all  said
    to be credible and reliable at paragraph 85 and 86.  As  against  that,
    the  difficulties  in  the  appellant  returning  to  Ghana  are  fully
    canvassed at paragraphs 95 to 98 and an analysis of the  findings  made
    at  paragraph  99  where  the  First-tier  tribunal  acknowledges   the
    substantial lessening of his "close private life ties"  caused  by  his
    return to Ghana.  But use of modern communication methods  would  allow
    him to maintain his relationships.  The First-tier tribunal  emphasises
    at paragraph 128 that "the length of residence of the appellant in  the
    UK and all the related factors  I  have  analysed  at  length  are  the
    aspects in respect of which I have  the  most  anxious  consideration".
    But it reaches the conclusion that the serious nature  of  the  offence
    and consideration of  the  public  interest  overrides  those  factors.
    Looking at the decision in the round, it cannot realistically  be  said
    that the First-tier tribunal applied any restriction or fetter  to  the
    scope or breadth of the elements to which it had regard in the exercise
    that it performed.  There is no warrant for  any  suggestion  that  the
    First-tier tribunal applied the relevant test wrongly or shut its  mind
    to any relevant factors.  Nor is there any indication that  it  applied
    any sort of exceptionality test contrary to the guidance  contained  in
    such cases as MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

30.   The sixth ground contends that the First-tier tribunal failed to  have
    proper regard to the appellant's unique contribution  at  the  seminars
    directed to prevention of financial crime referred to above.  This,  it
    is said, is a factor that was a compelling circumstance capable,  along
    with the other factors  set  out  at  paragraph  44h  of  the  skeleton
    argument advanced to the First-Tier tribunal, of outweighing the public
    in interest in deportation, which the  First-tier  tribunal  failed  to
    address.  Again, reading the decision as a whole, it cannot  fairly  be
    said that the First-tier tribunal did not  deal  adequately  with  this
    issue.  The terms of paragraph 94 show  that  the  First-tier  tribunal
    decided not to place any significant weight on the appellant  remaining
    in the UK for  this  purpose.   It  took  the  view  that  it  was  not
    demonstrated that this work could not adequately be  carried  out  from
    Ghana.  Such a conclusion was one which  the  First-tier  tribunal  was
    entitled to reach on the  evidence  before  it.   It  is  notable  that
    paragraph 44h of the skeleton argument couches this factor in  somewhat
    equivocal terms as being "relatively unique (sic) in  that  he  is  not
    easily replaceable by another worker".

31.   Ground 7 states that the  First-tier  tribunal  failed  adequately  to
    address  the  question  of  the  best  interests  of  the   appellant's
    godchildren in assessing the proportionality of deportation.  Reference
    is made to section 55 of the Borders Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009 and to ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] 2  AC  166.   I  doubt  whether
    Parliament intended to impose upon the Secretary  of  State  duties  in
    relation to the welfare of godchildren in  the  sphere  of  immigration
    unless, conceivably, the godparent was also in a parental  relationship
    with the child.  Section 117C(5) creates an exception where  a  foreign
    criminal sentenced to less that 4 years has  "a  parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child".  There appears to have been no evidence about
    this other than the  appellant  was  a  godparent  to  several  of  his
    witnesses' children.  No such evidence is pointed to in the grounds  of
    appeal or in the skeleton argument.   It does not appear to  have  been
    asserted before the First-Tier Tribunal that  the  interests  of  these
    children would be materially  prejudiced  by  the  deportation  of  the
    appellant.  All that  is  said  at  paragraph  44h  that  he  "plays  a
    substantial role as godfather to  the  children  of  several  friends".
    There is no indication that the appellant ever suggested that he was in
    a parental  relationship  with  his  godchildren.   ZH  (Tanzania)  was
    concerned with parents of children. It may be that  in  an  appropriate
    case the relationship between a  godparent  and  godchild  will  be  an
    important  facet  of  family  or  private  life,   depending   on   the
    circumstances, but it is the nature of the relationship, not the  label
    attached to it, which will be of significance. In this case there is no
    evidence as to the precise relationship between the  appellant    I  do
    not consider this ground to be well founded.

32.   I therefore refuse this appeal on all grounds advanced.

Decision

33.   The appeal is refused.


Signed      Date: 11th July 2016

Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal



No anonymity order is made.


Signed:     Date: 11th July 2016

The Hon Lord Burns
