
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01328/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 18th June 2013                             |On 18th June 2013            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED SAIID YUSUF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Pipe instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Heath Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel for the First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler  and  Dr
        Okitiker (hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel') who dismissed the
        appellant's appeal against the decision  to  deport  him  from  the
        United Kingdom made on  the  12th  December  2012.   Permission  to
        appeal was granted on 13th March 2013.



Discussion



     2. The appellant is a Dutch national born on the  9th  June  1984.  On
        30th June 2011 he was convicted of  robbery  and  sentenced  to  32
        months imprisonment. The sentencing remarks of HHJ Thomas  are  set
        out at paragraph 15 of the determination. In addition he has  three
        adjudications whilst in detention.


     3. The appellant has acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK
        [14] and so it was accepted he could only  be  removed  on  serious
        grounds of public policy  or  public  security.   Guidance  on  the
        correct approach to be taken in cases of this nature is to be found
        in BF (Portugal) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2009] EWCA Civ 923. In that  case  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
        Portugal, had acquired permanent residence.  He  was  convicted  of
        battery  against  his  partner   and   sentenced   to   42   months
        imprisonment.  He could only  be  removed  on  serious  grounds  of
        public policy or  public  security.   The  Tribunal  first  had  to
        determine  the  claimant's  relevant  personal  conduct;   secondly
        whether the conduct represented a genuine present and  sufficiently
        serious threat; thirdly whether that threat  affected  one  of  the
        fundamental interests of society; and fourthly whether  deportation
        would be disproportionate in all the circumstances.   The  Tribunal
        noted the evidence that the claimant had a high propensity  to  re-
        offend against the same victim and any new partner, but went on  to
        find that the Secretary of State for the Home Department had failed
        to prove that there  were  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
        security which made deportation proportionate.   In  remitting  the
        appeal, the Court of Appeal said the Tribunal should have reached a
        conclusion as to whether the threat, which was clearly  present  at
        the time of the offence, was still present  at  the  hearing.   The
        Tribunal had to decide whether there was a present  serious  threat
        and if so the extent of that threat.


     4. The Panel determined the appellant's personal conduct  in  relation
        to the offence and developments since. The  first  element  of  the
        test was undertaken and no error is proved in relation to the same.
        The second part of the test required the Panel to determine whether
        the  appellant's  conduct  represented  a   genuine   present   and
        sufficiently serious threat at the date of the hearing. It is  this
        element which is specifically challenged by the  appellant  through
        Mr Pipe. The claim the decision was 'not  in  accordance  with  the
        law' was formally withdrawn by Mr Pipe.


     5. The appellant has  been  assessed  as  presenting  a  low  risk  of
        reoffending in the NOMS report [A's bundle pages 72  and  77].  The
        sentencing judge treated the appellant as a man  of  previous  good
        character. The Panel were aware of these factors but when assessing
        this second element found that the risk of re-offending was greater
        by reason of the appellant's proposed return to his former address,
        bearing in mind  that  he  was  susceptible  to  gang  pressure  in
        relation to the index offence whilst living there before.


     6. There is reference to gang pressures in his home area which  it  is
        said the appellant resisted until he committed the robbery. He  has
        not discussed his offending with his Offender Manager in detail and
        this has been held against him by the Panel. In a letter dated  4th
        February 2013 the appellant's Probation Officer,  Ms  Yorke,  notes
        concerns about the appellant returning to his mother's house due to
        its  location,  especially  as  the  appellant  was  coerced   into
        offending by the negative peers living in  the  same  vicinity.  Ms
        Yorke states: "Therefore, should he be released to this address, it
        would be his responsibility to avoid negative associations to avoid
        the risk of re-offending."


     7. The Panel found this relevant to their finding that the risk of re-
        offending was greater than that assessed but with  no  analysis  in
        the determination of whether this was a factor taken  into  account
        in the NOMS assessment or why the risk should be greater than  that
        assessed by experienced professionals in this are of work. Ms Yorke
        highlights the issue but  there  is  no  indication  the  Probation
        Service have revised the risk upwards as a result of his  returning
        to his mother's address.


     8.  Mr  Pipe  also  submitted  that  the  appellant's  intention   was
        originally not to return to his mother's but to his girlfriend's so
        they could live together. That address was not suitable as  a  bail
        address but if released and  the  appellant  lives  elsewhere  this
        element may be addressed in any event.


     9. The Panel also seem  to  have  placed  weight  upon  the  fact  the
        appellant will be released and monitored at Level 1  of  the  MAPPA
        Scheme which they find reflects the risk assessment on the part  of
        those responsible for public protection [36]. In paragraph 38  they
        state:


              "......The  risk  of  re-offending,  while  assessed  as  low,
   appears to us to be a            significant risk  for  all  the  reasons
   which we have listed above (the               appellant's attitude to his
   offending, his unchanged  flawed  thinking                processes,  his
   susceptibility  to   gang   pressure   and   the   assessment   that   he
   presents a medium  risk  of  serious  harm  and  needs  to  be  on  MAPPA
     Level 1)."


    10. The Panel do not record that all those  convicted  of  robbery  are
        automatically placed on MAPPA Level 1 which is the  lowest  of  the
        levels. This is  not  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's  specific
        attributes but because of the offence he committed.  The  Panel  do
        note that an EEA national cannot be deported on the basis  of  past
        conduct even though they seem  to  have  focused  on  his  previous
        offending.  In MG and VC (Ireland) [2006] UKAIT 00053 the  Tribunal
        said that "where regulation 21(3) applies to an individual (because
        he is an EEA national with a permanent right of residence but not a
        minor or along term resident) he may be removed  as  previously  on
        the grounds  that  there  is  a  risk  of  his  committing  further
        offences, with the proviso that the risk of  harm  must  constitute
        serious grounds of public policy for his removal."


    11. I find the Panel have legally erred in the determination in failing
        to make proper findings on  the  higher  "serious  ground"  and  in
        failing to provide adequate reasons, supported by the evidence,  to
        justify their conclusions in light of the assessment as to risk  of
        future harm. I accept the offence was serious and involved violence
        and was connected to gang pressures but the evidence was  that  the
        appellant had been subjected to other pressures from  the  gang  in
        the past to sell drugs but had resisted. The  Panel  fail  to  give
        reasons for why he will no longer resist if released when he has in
        the past on all  bar  one  occasion.  I  accept  the  fact  he  has
        adjudications whilst in detention may be indicative of an  attitude
        to authority which may be relevant to a propensity to re-offend and
        that his lack of empathy and refusal to discuss his  offending  has
        been noted, although he claims this is as a result of his shame  at
        what he did. The determinative factor in the Panel's  mind  appears
        to be that fact he is returning to  his  mother's  house  where  he
        lived when he committed the offence. I accept this is relevant  but
        the evidence does not show that he will re-offend  if  there,  just
        that circumstances may exist which could increase the risk  of  him
        doing so if he associates with the gang members and fails to resist
        pressure  from  them.  The  Panel  needed  to  be   satisfied   the
        appellant's conduct represented a genuine, present and sufficiently
        serious threat. The fact something may happen in  the  future  does
        not mean it will. The weight of professional evidence  shows  there
        is such a possibility without the appellant himself  resisting  but
        the risk of such conduct is not shown on the evidence to be genuine
        or present, without more, especially in light  of  his  ability  to
        avoid criminal acts resulting in conviction in the past.


    12.  I therefore set the determination aside. Both  advocates  accepted
        that if this was the case the appeal must be allowed which I accept
        is the only logical conclusion.  I  find  the  respondent  has  not
        discharged the burden upon her to show on  the  facts  there  is  a
        genuine present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat.  As  such  the
        decision cannot be proportionate either.

    13. It is now up to the appellant. He resisted the  pressure  from  the
        gangs in the past bar one the occasion when  he  offended.  He  has
        shown he has the ability to stand firm and if he wishes  to  remain
        in the United Kingdom he must do so in the future.


Decision

    14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 18th June 2013
