

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
DA/01274/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th June 2017                        |     On 30th October 2017            |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     BN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, instructed by Elder Rahimi solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as BN. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. In a decision issued on 9th May 2014 the Upper Tribunal (the  Hon  Mrs
      Justice Andrews DBE and UTJ O'Connor) set  aside  the  decision  of  a
      First-tier Tribunal panel promulgated on 3 March 2014 dismissing  BN's
      appeal against a deportation order on asylum and human rights grounds.
      The Upper Tribunal concluded that there had been a material  error  of
      law by the First-tier Tribunal panel (First-tier Tribunal Judge Corben
      and Mrs R M Bray JP) in failing to have  regard  to  the  judgment  of
      Phillips J in R(P(DRC)) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  3879  compounded  by  a
      failure to have regard to the guidance given by the Supreme  Court  in
      SSHD v RT (Zimbabwe) [2013] 1AC 152 ("a person cannot be  expected  to
      lie in order to avoid persecution") and that it was irrational for the
      First-tier Tribunal panel to find that the only way in which  the  DRC
      authorities could learn that a person had committed  a  serious  crime
      was if the conviction had attracted significant media attention.


   2. The Upper Tribunal did not take a decision on the remaining grounds of
      appeal pleaded save to indicate that they were troubled by the way  in
      which the First-tier Tribunal panel  dealt  with  the  application  of
      Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 1638/03 to the  factual  matrix  of  this
      appellant; that there was some force in the criticism by the appellant
      of the way in which the risk of his reoffending was assessed  and  the
      rejection  of  the  probation   officer's   views   without   adequate
      explanation. The Upper Tribunal said that although they considered the
      Article 8 claim to be weak they did not "shut him  out"  from  arguing
      it.

   3. The Upper Tribunal stated (paragraph 33) that other than  the  finding
      that the appellant

             "was unlikely to be detained  for  a  lengthy  period  on  his
             return to the DRC (which is inextricably  bound  up  with  the
             question whether he faces a risk of persecution as a  criminal
             deportee), the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  of  fact  and
             credibility will stand undisturbed."

   4. The Upper Tribunal decision  setting  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision is lengthy. A copy is attached  but  I  summarise  below  the
      outline background of BN and the findings of fact and credibility made
      by the First-tier Tribunal.


   5. BN is a citizen of the DRC born on 28th September 1992.  BN arrived in
      the UK in 2005 to join his mother, an unsuccessful asylum  seeker.  BN
      would have been aged 12 or 13 on arrival. He  was  granted  indefinite
      leave to remain on 14th November 2008, aged 16.

   6. On 19th April 2011 BN was convicted of two offences  of  assaulting  a
      police  officer  for  which  he  received  a  Community   Order   with
      requirement of curfew for 2 months, which he  breached,  and  on  17th
      June 2011 he was sentenced to an additional week subject to curfew. On
      31st August 2012, he was convicted of affray and unlawful wounding for
      an offence on 29th September  2011;  on  2nd  November  2012,  he  was
      sentenced  to  concurrent  sentences  of  30  months  and  12  months'
      detention. On 31st May 2013 a deportation order was signed (s32(5)  UK
      Borders Act 2007). On 5th  January  2017,  he  was  sentenced  for  an
      offence committed on  27th  September  2015.  The  judge's  sentencing
      remarks were not produced by the respondent and nor was  his  list  of
      convictions as recorded but the appellant's witness statement says  he
      received a Community Order of 12 months with 150  hours  of  community
      service and 40 days of rehabilitation activity organised by probation.



   7. The findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal are:

   i) His father was a high-ranking officer in the army of the DRC and as  a
      result BN and his family received heavy security whilst in the DRC.
  ii) Life was very difficult for BN and his mother in  the  UK  during  the
      period after her asylum  claim  was  refused  and  her  appeal  rights
      exhausted: they were living hand-to-mouth in different  parts  of  the
      country including Portsmouth and London. This made BN and  his  mother
      vulnerable to unscrupulous elements and the situation  may  well  have
      frustrated and angered him.
 iii) During the academic year  2006-7  BN  attended  secondary  school  but
      struggled to cope; although referred to  an  educational  psychologist
      and assessed as suffering from PTSD the  suggestion  he  attend  group
      therapy came to nought because the psychologist went on sick leave.
  iv) In 2008 (aged 15) he, together with two of his older brothers and  his
      two sisters who had joined him and his mother,  were  accommodated  in
      Barnsley by the respondent. His mother found it very difficult to deal
      with him.
   v) Shortly after this, BN's mother was granted indefinite leave to remain
      and he was granted leave in line on 14th November 2008. BN then 'fled'
      Barnsley and returned to London where he  stayed  with  a  friend.  He
      retained contact with his mother and  siblings.  Although  his  mother
      relocated to London in 2010, he remained living with  his  friend  and
      the friend's mother.
  vi) BN's mother's evidence that she had sustained domestic violence at the
      hands of BN's father was not credible.
 vii) BN's evidence that he had been a victim of his  father's  violence  in
      the past was not credible.
viii) BN is not at risk of being persecuted as  a  member  of  his  father's
      family.


        Hearing on 29th June 2017


   8. BN relied upon the  documents  he  had  filed  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and a supplementary bundle of 40 pages filed for the  hearing
      on 29th June; the skeleton arguments by Mr Chirico dated 17th  January
      2016 and 28th June 2017 (with annexes); the  chronology  prepared  for
      the First-tier Tribunal (loose); a letter dated 11 July 2012 from Mary
      Glindon MP to Hani and a letter from HE Barnabe-Kikaya-bin-Karubi  DRC
      Ambassador) dated 16th August 2012 to Mary Glindon MP (both loose).  I
      also had the respondent's bundle.


   9. There was some discussion as to the scope  of  the  appeal  given  the
      terms of the Upper Tribunal  decision  setting  aside  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision. Mr Chirico withdrew reliance  upon  the  ground  of
      appeal


              "the respondent had failed in her decision the subject of the
             appeal to have regard to  material  of  which  she  was  aware
             relating to his treatment whilst in the UK... the respondent's
             decision is not in accordance with the law for that reason and
             should be set aside"


        because, he acknowledged, that he  was  satisfied  that  the  Upper
        Tribunal was properly placed to determine the appeal before it.  He
        also confirmed that he would not be relying upon  submissions  that
        domestic violence from the father amounted to an Article  3/Refugee
        Convention breach but would be relying  upon  further  evidence  to
        dislodge the finding by the First-tier Tribunal that neither he nor
        his mother had sustained domestic violence  at  the  hands  of  the
        father/husband to  support  a  claim  under  Article  8.  Mr  Avery
        confirmed he would be relying upon the findings of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal that neither  BN  nor  his  mother  had  been  victims  of
        domestic violence.

  10. There was considerable  new  evidence  offered  by  the  appellant.  I
      confirmed that in the light of this I would be revisiting the findings
      of the First-tier Tribunal and, applying the principles of Devaseelan,
      would consider whether and the extent to which the evidence before  me
      was such that findings of the First-tier Tribunal were to be revisited
      and remade.

  11. I heard oral evidence from BN, in English,  and  submissions  from  Mr
      Chirico and Mr Avery. I reserved my decision.

        Additional evidence


  12.  Under cover of a letter dated 12th July 2017 BN's  solicitors  sought
      permission to adduce further evidence arising,  they  submitted,  from
      submissions made by Mr Avery at the hearing on 29th June. The  further
      evidence consisted of a note from  Mr  Chirico,  a  letter  from  BN's
      Reducing Reoffending Worker (Miriam Khan)  dated  11th  July  2017,  a
      letter from BN's responsible  Officer  at  South  Yorkshire  Community
      Rehabilitation Company (Sarah Askew) dated 7th July 2017 and a  letter
      from Dr Maloney dated 4th July 2017. I directed that I was  minded  to
      admit that evidence, but that the respondent had leave  to  make  such
      submissions as she wished in connection therewith by 15th August  2017
      failing which I would take the documents into account in  reaching  my
      decision. The respondent did not make any submissions  regarding  that
      evidence and nor did she object to it being admitted.


  13. The letters from Ms Khan and Ms Askew set out the attempts made by the
      appellant to access mental  health  services  and  that  he  has  now,
      eventually, been referred for mental health assessment.

  14. The letter from Dr Maloney states that he had not seen the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision but had seen the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      setting aside that decision which included considerable  reference  to
      the credibility findings. He confirmed that since  then,  he  had  now
      read the First-tier Tribunal decision  and  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
      decision had accurately recorded the credibility issues from the First-
      tier Tribunal as he understood them and that he was thus aware of  the
      substance when he wrote his  earlier  report;  that  having  read  the
      actual First-tier Tribunal decision did not affect those  conclusions.
      He expanded on some  of  his  conclusions  both  specifically  and  in
      general in terms of disclosure of traumatic events.


  15. Since the First-tier Tribunal decision was set  aside,  the  appellant
      has been convicted of a further offence of assault occasioning  actual
      bodily harm on 27th September 2015 (the day before his 24th birthday).
      He was convicted after a trial on 25th November  2016  and  sentenced,
      after  a  pre-sentence  report,  on  5th  January  2017.  The  judge's
      sentencing remarks were not produced by the respondent and nor was the
      list of his convictions but the appellant's witness statement says  he
      received a Community Order of 12 months with 150  hours  of  community
      service and 40 days of rehabilitation activity organised by probation.




  16. The fact that a community penalty was imposed for an assault indicates
      the sentencing judge did not consider that the offence, in  the  light
      of the mitigation advanced, was  so  serious  that  only  a  custodial
      sentence could be justified; nevertheless 150 hours community  service
      does indicate a finding of a high level of culpability and, of course,
      the public interest requires deportation save to the  extent  that  an
      exception provided by s33 of the 2007 Act permits a departure from the
      mandatory obligation contained in s32(5) to make a deportation order.


        Refugee and Article 3 non-medical claim


  17. The basis of the asylum claim is that, taken cumulatively, BN would be
      returning to DRC (i) as a failed  asylum  seeker  who  was  reasonably
      likely to have left  the  DRC  illegally;  (ii)  as  a  returnee  with
      convictions for violent  offences;  (iii)  as  a  person  with  mental
      illness that would render him less able to deal with  any  interaction
      or  questioning  with  the  authorities  which  would   increase   his
      vulnerability to harm. He would, it  is  submitted  be  likely  to  be
      identified as the son of a person who had claimed to be  in  political
      opposition (even though her asylum claim  was  unsuccessful)  who  had
      indefinite leave to remain and he had come to the UK to join  her  and
      was ultimately granted leave to remain in line. It was submitted  that
      he was a member of a PSG - those who had left DRC illegally, convicted
      criminal and a person with mental illness.


  18. BM and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]
      00293 (IAC) held, inter alia, that


             A national of the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC") who has
             acquired the status of foreign national offender in the United
             Kingdom is not, simply by virtue of such status, exposed to  a
             real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  or   treatment
             proscribed by Article 3 ECHR in the event of  enforced  return
             to the DRC.


             A national of the DRC whose attempts to acquire refugee status
             in the United Kingdom have been unsuccessful is  not,  without
             more, exposed to a real risk of persecution or serious harm or
             proscribed treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR in  the  event
             of enforced return to DRC.


  19.  BM (false passport) DRC [2015] UKUT 00467 (IAC) held, inter alia,


             The mere  fact  that  an  asylum  claimant  utilised  a  false
             passport or kindred document in departing  the  DRC  will  not
             without more engage the risk category specified  in  [119(iv)]
             of BM and Others (Returnees: Criminal and Non-Criminal) DRC CG
             [2015] 293 (IAC).  The application of this  guidance  will  be
             dependent upon the fact sensitive context  of  the  individual
             case.  The Tribunal will  consider,  inter  alia,  the  likely
             state of knowledge of the DRC authorities  pertaining  to  the
             person in question. A person claiming to belong to any of  the
             risk categories will not be  at  risk  of  persecution  unless
             likely to come to the attention of the DRC authorities.


  20. Mr Chirico submitted, on behalf of the appellant, that the  report  by
      Dr Muzong Kodi, produced after a visit to the DRC in March-April  2017
      (post-dating the CG by some 2 years) was a sufficient basis upon which
      to depart from the Country Guidance, particularly when  considered  in
      the context of the  cumulative  factors  relevant  to  this  appellant
      namely that he had in all likelihood left illegally and  his  criminal
      offending would come to light  because  of  his  likely  inability  to
      withstand questioning.


  21. Mr Avery, on behalf of the respondent, submitted  that  the  appellant
      does not fall into any of the risk  categories,  his  mother's  asylum
      claim was not accepted and her appeal failed, he  could  not  be  held
      responsible for his departure from DRC as a minor, he had no political
      activity and he would be of no interest to the authorities. Dr  Kodi's
      report was not, he  submitted,  sufficient  to  overturn  the  CG.  In
      particular,  the  report  relied  upon   un-named   sources   and   no
      corroborative evidence.


  22.  Dr Kennes, whose expert evidence was before the Tribunal  in  BM  CG,
      was not cross examined and the Tribunal noted that  his  sources  were
      impossible to test. The Tribunal said one of the main weaknesses of Dr
      Kennes' evidence was the absence of any evidence supporting the thesis
      that all or certain foreign national offenders would be a focus of the
      DRC authorities. After a very detailed analysis of  all  the  evidence
      that was before it with regard  to  foreign  national  offenders,  the
      Tribunal was unequivocal in its conclusion that there was no  evidence
      that a failed asylum seeker or foreign national offender was  at  risk
      of persecution or serious harm.


  23. Dr Kodi in his report states


   1. From my experience and my expert knowledge of the DRC as well  as  the
      discussions I had with immigration officers and human rights activists
      during my latest visit to the DRC (March-April 2017),  I  can  confirm
      that, as I said in my previous report, because of his  convictions  in
      the UK, [BN] would be risk being arrested on arrival and subjected  to
      inhuman and degrading treatment and even being killed.
            ......
   6. Fuelled by the ongoing political crisis, tensions are very high in the
      country and confrontations between the national  security  forces  and
      rebels have  resulted  in  hundreds  of  casualties,  including  among
      policemen and soldiers[1]. Two UN investigators who were operating  in
      the much troubled Kasai region, were kidnapped and decapitated  by  an
      unknown armed group[2]. The latter are, therefore on the  lookout  for
      any potential troublemakers[3].  So,  because  of  his  profile  as  a
      foreign national offender, the national security forces would consider
      [BN] as a potential threat to security and a possible recruit for  the
      much feared Kuluna street gangs. He would be at great  risk  of  being
      arrested on arrival in Kinshasa, subjected to inhumane  and  degrading
      treatment like scores of opposition political party  members,  leaders
      as well as  followers,  and  even  representatives  of  civil  society
      organisations and apolitical youth movements[4].
   7. ......The Immigration Attach� who, according to the Home  Office,  has
      been based at the DRC's Embassy to the UK,  undertakes  interviews  of
      prospective returnees for redocumentation and likely  reports  to  the
      DGM in Kinshasa[5]. It  is  likely  therefore,  that  the  information
      gathered by the Immigration Attach� in London would be  passed  on  to
      their DGM colleagues in Kinshasa.  The  interrogation  that  he  would
      undergo on arrival in Kinshasa would likely confirm this  information,
      which might put him in harm's way. He would then risk  being  detained
      in inhumane conditions, tortured or even killed.
           .....
   9. All the immigration Officials and all the human rights  activists,  as
      they had done on previous occasions,  confirmed  separately  that  all
      foreign   national   offenders   are   systematically   arrested   and
      incarcerated in Congolese main prisons and smaller detention  centres,
      where living conditions are appalling[6].  To  explain  the  Congolese
      authorities attitude toward foreign national offenders, they  referred
      to the worsening  security  situation  in  the  country  with  ongoing
      fighting between national security forces  and  various  armed  groups
      ....They also mentioned the government's concern about banditry in the
      cities, especially that  fuelled  by  the  Kuluna  street  gangs.  The
      determination of the Congolese government to root out  the  Kuluna  by
      any means possible was confirmed recently in the declaration  made  by
      the newly appointed commander of the national police  in  Kinshasa[7].
      Their assertions are widely supported by  reports  by  the  media  and
      human rights organisations which provide evidence that, in the  brutal
      crackdown on banditry  in  Kinshasa  and  the  rest  of  the  country,
      numerous human rights violations have been  committed  by  the  police
      including  arbitrary  arrest,  disappearances   and   extra   judicial
      executions[8].
  10. Since the DRC Government is cracking down on all types of criminals in
      the country, it is likely that [BN] as a convicted criminal  would  be
      arrested on arrival in Kinshasa and would not  be  allowed  to  settle
      down in the country and risk reoffending in the already much  troubled
      country.
  11. ...the information I collected...confirms that failed  asylum  seekers
      returned to the DRC are interrogated on arrival in  Kinshasa  and  are
      likely to be detained...
  12. ....as a convicted criminal, [BN]  would  likely  be  perceived  as  a
      possible recruit of the Kuluna criminal gangs that  continue  to  rob,
      maim and kill citizens in various areas of  the  DRC.  This  would  be
      another reason for the authorities to detain him. the Kuluna  criminal
      gangs continue to be a matter of great concern for the authorities and
      the citizens, especially in Kinshasa[9].


  24. The footnote references of Dr Kodi in some instances pre-date  BM  CG.
      Operation Likofi was considered  in  BM  CG  (paragraph  70)  and  the
      conclusion reached that it was


         "a crackdown accompanied by significant violence, carried out in a
         concerted police operation in 2014 against organised  street  gangs
         in an endeavour to eradicate all kinds of  street  crime.....it  is
         not  possible  to  extrapolate  from  the  circumstances  of   this
         operation a risk faced by returnees, whatever their background.  It
         was clearly directed against criminal gangs then operation and  did
         not entail a more widespread campaign against all those with a past
         criminal record. AI has devised a thesis, or has formulated a  mere
         opinion, which in our  view,  fails  to  engage  with  the  nature,
         purpose, vintage and duration of this discrete police operation..."


  25. Dr Kodi's 2017 report back-refers to his report of 6 October 2015.  As
      in  his  2017  report,  he  relies  upon  interviews   with   un-named
      immigration officials and human rights activists  who,  he  says,  all
      confirmed that a foreign criminal would be at risk of being  arrested,
      tortured or even killed on arrival in Kinshasa. He disagrees with  the
      conclusion reached in BM CG that foreign criminals are not so treated.
      He made similar statements in his 2015 report to  those  made  in  the
      2017 report regarding return as a failed asylum seeker  and  potential
      perception as a candidate for Kuluna street gangs.


  26. The OHCHR report 28 February 2016 considered human  rights  violations
      in the context of the events of 16 December 2016. The report documents
      the unlawful killing of demonstrators and the large-scale  arrest  and
      detention  of  those  suspected  of  planning  or   participating   in
      demonstrations. The report states  that  UNJHRO  considers  that  most
      people detained were arrested arbitrarily whilst peacefully protesting
      therefore exercising their  legitimate  right  to  peaceful  assembly.
      UNJHRO reports documenting a high number of  human  rights  violations
      targeting opposition leaders, civil society activists  and  journalist
      and other media workers.


  27. The respondent has  not  disputed  that  there  is  a  real  risk  the
      appellant left DRC without genuine documentation but she submits  that
      he was a child at the time and even if it comes to  the  attention  of
      the authorities through the redocumentation process or questioning  on
      arrival that he left without unlawfully, it is  insufficient,  relying
      upon BM, to result in the appellant being at risk of serious harm.


  28. The reports by Dr Kodi suffer from the same difficulties as the report
      by Dr Kennes and the AI report in BM CG - the assertions are not based
      upon any individual cases, there is no assessment of the nature of the
      crime committed by a foreign criminal that could lead to  arrest,  the
      lack of detail of the interviews undertaken, the lack of detail  about
      the individuals he interviewed and the general expression of  untested
      opinion. Although Dr Kodi is clearly an expert, the information in his
      report is not a sufficient basis to depart from  the  current  Country
      Guidance of BM CG and BM. The appellant was a child when he  left  the
      DRC; he has no political activity or interest; his  mother,  albeit  a
      former asylum seeker, is a failed asylum seeker and if information  is
      known about her by the DRC authorities it will also be known that  her
      claim was unsuccessful. The notion that all foreign criminals  are  at
      risk of arrest and detention is not sustainable. The report  makes  no
      distinction between someone for example who is  convicted  of  driving
      without due care  and  attention  and  someone  who  is  convicted  of
      manslaughter and the  huge  range  in  between.  There  is  simply  no
      sustainable evidence of anyone being  arrested  and  detained  because
      they are a foreign criminal. Likewise, there was no evidence before me
      on how the Kaluna street gangs recruit individuals whether forcibly or
      not or on what basis this appellant would be at risk or  be  perceived
      to be at risk of such recruitment. The possibility of him  voluntarily
      joining such a gang and thus becoming  at  risk  of  unlawful  killing
      cannot be a legitimate basis for an asylum claim; voluntarily  placing
      himself outside the law does not entitle him to asylum because the DRC
      authorities themselves behave unlawfully in their response to criminal
      gangs. It is not a situation similar to having to hide  his  political
      opinions.


  29. Although the applicant, on the basis of the medical evidence, may well
      be unable to deal with questioning as easily as  someone  without  his
      mental health problems, the information that would become known to the
      authorities on that questioning cannot be categorised as resulting  in
      a real risk of being persecuted for a Convention reason.


  30. I do not find the material relied upon is such as to depart  from  the
      First-tier Tribunal finding that the appellant will not be at risk  of
      being persecuted for a Convention reason  on  return  to  the  DRC.  I
      dismiss his appeal on asylum and Article 3 (non-medical) grounds.


        Article 3 and medical issues


  31. Mr Avery submitted that the medical  evidence  relied  upon  does  not
      support a departure from the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  that
      the appellant had not been a witness to domestic violence meted out to
      his mother by his father or that the appellant himself  had  not  been
      the victim of domestic violence. The psychological  reports  conclude,
      he submits, varying degrees of PTSD. He submitted that the findings of
      Dr Maloney that although at low risk of suicide in the UK,  that  risk
      increases to moderate possibly high if removed  were  not  sustainable
      and depends upon the appellant having made a credible claim as to  his
      past experiences. He submitted that the appellant had failed to engage
      with the NHS in his area and was not receiving any treatment. He  made
      reference to the fact that his siblings had not been  affected  as  he
      claims to have been by his history.  He  submitted  that  to  lay  the
      blame of the lack of medical treatment at the feet of  the  respondent
      was not sustainable - the references to that effect in GS were  obiter
      and cannot be said to be determinative of how a State should act.


  32. The up-dating medical report from  Dr  Maloney  dated  15th  May  2017
      describes a young man with "good affective range", repeatedly  showing
      signs of sadness and distress but supressing them in order to continue
      the conversation. There was, he says, nothing to indicate any disorder
      of thought, perception or belief suggestive of a psychotic illness. He
      says that by the time of the first report he wrote (22 January  2015),
      the appellant had modified his lifestyle considerably. By the date  of
      this report the appellant  had  been  convicted  of  an  offence  that
      occurred on 27th September 2015 which arose out of an  incident  at  a
      birthday party. Dr Maloney says


             6.21 He thus currently meets the criteria  for  post-traumatic
             stress disorder (PTSD)...
             6.22 It is a complex situation. As the traumas occurred during
             his developmental years they have had a significant effect  on
             his personality development. The overarousal component of  the
             PTSD has previously led him into conflict with others, leading
             to criminal convictions, and thus imperilling his  safety  and
             security in  the  UK.  He  currently  has  to  deal  with  the
             emotional consequences of uncertainty as to status, and may in
             due course face significant disruption  to  his  life,  and  a
             period of strenuous adaptation, which he is poorly equipped to
             deal with, as will be discussed below.
             6.23   Although   personality   factors   also   affect    his
             psychological state, other positive aspects of his personality
             appear   to   have   come   into   play   to   stabilise   his
             situation....his   overall   levels   of   interpersonal   and
             behavioural disturbance are low, and  he  does  not  meet  the
             criteria for a personality disorder: although his problems are
             significant, they are currently being kept in control  due  to
             his character strengths.
             6.24 In regards to his PTSD and the reoffending  in  2015:  it
             appears that the offence  involved  a  violent  outburst  with
             perceived abusive authority figures, as part of which  he  bit
             them. It is noteworthy that his  description  of  standing  up
             against his father, given during our  first  meeting,  was  as
             follows:
                      'The first time I used violence was towards my dad. I
                      hit him with something. I  remember  biting  him,  he
                      picked me up, chucked me down the stairs, that's  all
                      I remember. After that I became overprotective of  my
                      mum and my sisters.'
             6.25 The similarities in terms of his sense  of  protecting  a
             female by biting (a primitive  physiological  response)  raises
             the possibility that a significant  and  specific  trigger  for
             this most recent  offence  (and  possibly  others)  was  a  re-
             constellation of  his  feelings  of  having  to  struggle  with
             coercive male authority in defence of  a  woman,  arising  from
             childhood experiences. This may merit further exploration in  a
             therapeutic context. He did not make this association himself.
             ......
             6.29 I thus had no reason to suspect that he  was  fabricating
             or exaggerating psychiatric symptoms for effect.


        This is significant evidence because, at paragraph 6.22 of his
        report, Dr Maloney sets out a clear expert medical opinion that the
        appellant suffered from mental health difficulties "leading to
        criminal convictions". This expert opinion is echoed in the pre-
        sentence report prepared in respect of this appellant (see below at
        [43]) in which it was accepted that much of the appellant's
        "problematic behaviours is a direct result of his mental health
        issues".


  33. The medical evidence relied upon by the appellant is detailed  and  is
      not simply one report  prepared  after  one  consultation  through  an
      interpreter. Dr Maloney was aware of the conclusions of the First-tier
      Tribunal judge and has  specifically  addressed  the  matter  of  late
      disclosure. Although Mr Avery refers to the lack of  trauma  found  in
      the appellant's siblings who would have witnessed the  same  violence,
      it does not follow that all  members  of  a  family  suffer  the  same
      symptoms or consequences from similar acts. All individuals  perceive,
      and react to, situations differently. Dr Maloney is a  specialist  and
      has considerable and extensive experience. His first report was before
      the First-tier Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal  judge  considered
      it and the other evidence before him and reached a conclusion that the
      appellant's account of the abuse to himself and to his mother was  not
      credible. I take that as my  starting  point  and  place  considerable
      weight upon that finding, taken in the light of  the  evidence  before
      the First-tier Tribunal judge. Nevertheless, the subsequent report and
      letter from Dr Maloney do, I  find,  undermine  that  finding  to  the
      extent that I am satisfied,  on  the  totality  of  the  evidence  now
      available, that the appellant did witness his father's domestic  abuse
      directed at his mother, that his father did assault him and there  was
      considerable violence witnessed by the appellant. I note and accept Dr
      Maloney's statement that the trauma he has sustained  occurred  during
      his developmental years and this  had  a  significant  effect  on  his
      personality development.


  34. Dr Maloney was unable to provide evidence of the facilities  available
      in DRC for treatment of the appellant. Dr Kodi offers the opinion that
      if  arrested  and  detained  he  would  be  deprived  of  any  medical
      treatment. As I have found earlier, I  do  not  accept  the  appellant
      would be arrested and/or detained  on  arrival  or  subsequently.  The
      issue is whether he would be able  to  access  such  treatment  as  is
      available. Dr Kodi's updated report dated 4th May 2017  sets  out  the
      limited availability of psychiatric services. His report draws on  the
      World Health Organisation report as referred to in a  Refugee  Council
      Report, an IRIN report of 5 January 2016 and the UKBA COI report dated
      9 March 2016. The Refugee Council report he refers to is stated to say
      that an out-patient consultation in a public institution  costs  US$15
      to US$20 whilst the annual average earnings in DRC is in the region of
      US$190. A US$3000  deposit  is  required.  Dr  Kodi  states  that  the
      appellant would be unlikely to be able to access the medicine, medical
      care and family support he requires. He states that it is possible  to
      communicate by mobile telephone and internet.

  35. Dr Maloney records that the appellant lives at his brother's home  but
      does not see him a great deal. He doesn't talk to his mother or sister
      about his emotional or psychological problems.

  36. There was no additional significant more up to date information before
      me about the availability of medical  treatment  in  the  DRC.  In  Dr
      Maloney's opinion, which  I accept, the appellant  requires  treatment
      of three types: pharmacological, psychotherapeutic  and  psychosocial.
      He states that pharmacological treatment can offer helpful symptomatic
      relief and although it does not treat the underlying problems can

             "go some way  to  allowing  an  individual  to  function  more
             effectively, with less intrusive distress".


        He states that in the appellant's case much is determined by social
        issues and medication is not the mainstay of treatment. Dr  Maloney
        describes the psychotherapeutic aspects  of  treatment  and  states
        that

             "It will be important that he  is  not  offered  psychological
             support, and  then  support  withdrawn  once  he  has  allowed
             himself  to  feel  dependent....he  currently  faces  enforced
             removal to DR Congo, with considerable attendant  losses,  and
             he fears for the future. In such a situation,  the  most  that
             psychotherapy can  offer  is  some  immediate  relief  through
             emotional ventilation, supportive relationship, and  attention
             to devising strategies for daily life."


        Dr Maloney refers to psychosocial treatment being the  mainstay  of
        treatment which would aim to


             "remove or ameliorate those social factors  that  have  caused
             and are promoting and maintaining the disorder....Solely  from
             the perspective of his psychiatric treatment, he would be well
             served by secure status and ability to remain in the UK  where
             he   can   re-establish    himself    occupationally    and/or
             educationally and feel safe and secure in his relationships."


  37. Dr Maloney states, and again I accept this,


             "he has applied himself to  overcoming  his  problems  through
             self-control, and reading self-help books....if he  were  able
             to remain in the UK, and engage  in  psychological  treatment,
             and get a job and/or resume education, his prognosis would  be
             good....The re-experiencing  component  of  his  PTSD  relates
             directly to life in Congo....he will  need  a  high  level  of
             emotional and psychological support in any further therapeutic
             steps forward he takes. To some extent this  support  will  be
             able to come from his family, but he will also need to  engage
             with robust professional help....He will continue  to  benefit
             from the support of close family...If placed in a situation of
             duress the risks are  that  his  mood  will  deteriorate,  his
             capacity for self-control will reduce, and on the basis of his
             past history  he  may  revert  to  self-destructive  substance
             abuse. His disorder causes subjective distress, and impacts on
             functional capacity, which he is overcoming by  an  effort  of
             will.....By virtue of his current psychiatric state, which  is
             likely to worsen on return, he will be less able  than  normal
             to fend for himself in any adverse  circumstances  that  might
             arise. Even in the absence of specific  major  adverse  events
             occurring, he is likely to have difficulties in re-integrating
             into society and rebuilding his  life,  due  to  the  specific
             impairments noted above."


  38. It was not submitted and there is no question but that  the  appellant
      does not meet the threshold in N v SSHD [2005] 2 AC 296,  N  v  United
      Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 885 and GS and others [2015] 1WLR 3312 such  as
      would enable Article 3 protection to be granted.  Mr Chirico submitted
      that Paposhvilli v Belgium [2016] EHRR  1113  amended  this  threshold
      such that the protection available under Article 3 was  increased  and
      that the  appellant  fell  within  this.  Mr  Paposhvilli  was  not  a
      'deathbed" case although he was very seriously ill with leukaemia  and
      other illnesses. The Grand Chamber revisited the D v UK exception and,
      submitted Mr Chirico, concluded that where there were very exceptional
      circumstances, protection was available. In particular, he referred to
      [183] which reads as follows:


             "The Court considers that the 'other very  exceptional  cases'
             within the meaning of the judgment in [N v UK] which may raise
             an issue under Article 3 should  be  understood  to  refer  to
             situations involving the removal of a seriously ill person  in
             which substantial grounds have been shown for  believing  that
             he or she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would  face
             a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of  appropriate
             treatment in the receiving country or the lack  of  access  to
             such treatment, of being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and
             irreversible decline in his or her state of  health  resulting
             in intense suffering or to a  significant  reduction  in  life
             expectancy."


        Mr Chirico submitted there were procedural aspects to be undertaken
        which included that although the evidential  burden  lies  upon  an
        applicant, where evidence is adduced of risk then  it  is  for  the
        returning  authorities  to  dispel  doubts  raised  and  that  such
        enquiries are to be made prior to removal.


  39. There are, according to Dr Kodi, medical facilities available  in  the
      DRC to  treat  the  appellant.  They  are  not  as  widespread  or  as
      sophisticated as those available in the  UK  but  nor  are  they  non-
      existent or not appropriate. The tenor of Dr  Kodi's  report  is  that
      access is available but  at  a  cost.  Although  Dr  Kodi  states  the
      appellant would not be able to access family support he requires  this
      is not reflected in Dr Maloney's report.


  40. I am satisfied that neither the procedural aspects of Paposhvilli  nor
      the wider access to Article 3 applies  to  this  appellant.  There  is
      mention of a suicide risk in Dr Maloney's first  report  and  this  is
      further explored in the up-dated  report.  He  assesses  the  risk  of
      suicide as  moderate  and  possibly  high  and  that  this  should  be
      considered and reassessed, if faced with enforced removal. Of  course,
      the appellant will suffer on return  to  DRC  and  there  are  serious
      issues arising because of his PTSD and return to the DRC but these  do
      not, on the evidence before me, reach the level at  which  it  can  be
      said that


             "substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that
             he....would face a real risk....of being exposed to a serious,
             rapid  and  irreversible  decline  in  his...state  of  health
             resulting in extreme suffering or to a  significant  reduction
             in life expectancy."


        The evidence was that he would continue to receive support from his
        family, that he would be able to maintain contact with them, family
        members were employed. Dr Maloney set out what treatment he  should
        receive; Dr Kodi refers to treatment being available at a cost.  Dr
        Kodi states that the appellant "would not have  access  to  suicide
        support services". It is  difficult  to  reconcile  this  with  his
        earlier statement that treatment is available, albeit at a cost and
        I do not accept that there is a total lack of support available for
        someone who can pay. I find that the burden has not shifted to  the
        respondent to make enquiries as to the nature and  availability  of
        treatment in the DRC, if such a burden does  indeed  exist.   I  am
        also satisfied that in any event,  Dr  Maloney's  report  does  not
        support a conclusion that the appellant would, on return to the DRC
        suffer a decline in his health that would lead to extreme suffering
        or significant reduction in life expectancy.


        Article 8

  41. The appellant arrived in the UK in 2005 - the exact date  is  unknown.
      He was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  on  14th  November  2008.
      Although he has now been resident in the UK for  more  than  half  his
      life, he was unlawfully resident until 14th November 2008  and  cannot
      therefore successfully claim that he has been  lawfully  resident  for
      more than half his life - a prerequisite to fall within Exception 1 of
      s117C(4)(a) NIAA 2002.


  42. It was not submitted that the appellant has  established  family  life
      with his mother and/or siblings such as engage Article 8 however it is
      plain that the relationship that he has with those family  members  is
      an integral part of his private life and must be taken into account in
      assessing his right to  respect  for  his  private  and  family  life.
      Similarly, the impact upon his family members is an element  that  has
      to be taken into account. In the appellant's case,  that  impact  has,
      however, little if not negligible weight. His  relationship  with  his
      family members is not a dependant relationship in any way, either  him
      on them or them on him. The family members are, from the evidence,  in
      touch with him and care for him in  an  emotional,  financial  or  any
      other sense but there is and will be little impact upon  either  their
      daily lives or his other than sorrow  if  he  is  deported.  There  is
      evidence that at least two of his family members are employed although
      the level of their income is not given. On his deportation, there will
      therefore be a financial cost to them in terms of payment for  medical
      services and daily support, at least initially.

    43. The pre-sentence report dated 30 December 2016 says


             "While I am of the opinion that  much  of  [BN's]  problematic
             behaviour is a direct result of his mental health issues,  his
             attitudes in terms of the events leading  up  to  his  current
             offence display some anti-social elements to his behaviour....
             ....OGRS score...indicates a medium risk of re-offending...
             ....Likelihood of serious re-offending over the next two years
             is assessed...as low.....
             ....assessed as posing a medium risk of serious harm."

    44. From the evidence, the appellant  was  separated  from  his  mother
        without notice or warning in the DRC. He thought she had  abandoned
        him. The re-establishment of contact after his (probably  unlawful)
        entry to the UK was compounded by his  emotional  difficulties  and
        his mother's precarious immigration status. He was  separated  from
        his mother for some considerable time and had no contact with  her.
        He was witness to violence  to  his  mother  and  was  himself  the
        subject of violence. Given the nature of his father's employment he
        was surrounded by violence that required heavy security  to  be  in
        place. He records having a real sense of being in danger.  The  DRC
        at the time he was there (and now) is a violent place.

    45. The evidence is that between 2005 and 2008 the appellant, with  his
        mother moved numerous times. There is reference to  racism  and  to
        the appellant  being  attacked  -  the  alleged  perpetrators  were
        charged but not convicted. During  the  academic  year  2006/7  the
        appellant was referred to a  psychologist,  assessed  as  suffering
        from PTSD and referred for therapy but the referral did not  result
        in any treatment or continuing care. In 2008, after  the  grant  of
        indefinite leave to remain, the appellant ran  away  from  Barnsley
        where he was living with his mother and became homeless in  London.
        Since then he has been unable, despite attempts, to access  medical
        treatment until very recently because of homelessness and inability
        to register  with  a  GP.  The  evidence  before  me  supports  the
        conclusion that  it  is  only  very  recently  that  issues  of  GP
        registration have been  resolved  and  an  appointment  for  mental
        health assessment obtained.

    46.  The  current  medical  evidence  confirms  that  with  appropriate
        treatment the appellant will be able to recover from the traumas he
        has sustained which have been, according to both Dr Maloney and the
        probation officer, the root cause of his criminal offending.

    47. The OASys report was completed on 6th June 2013. From the evidence,
        it seems this was completed as a result of a video  interview,  not
        face to face. Although the appellant disputes the content  of  some
        of the report, and there is  evidence  from  a  prison  officer  at
        Feltham which is very supportive and positive,  I  have  taken  the
        OASys report generally  at  face  value  save  where  the  evidence
        indicates  otherwise.  The  report  includes  a  reference  to  the
        appellant continuing to deny the offence for which that report  was
        commissioned. The report refers to problems  during  his  childhood
        and negative memories about his father because of violence  towards
        his mother. The report  also  states  that  there  are  no  current
        psychological  problems.  The  report  refers  to   the   appellant
        acknowledging that he had  witnessed  some  horrific  incidents  of
        violence in the Congo including a stabbing and  that  he  sometimes
        experiences  flashbacks.  This  does  not  reflect   the   detailed
        consideration given by Dr Maloney and the fact that he was referred
        for treatment aged 14 or so because of a  PTSD  diagnosis.  Nor  is
        this supported by the report from Probation. It is surprising  that
        with  those  references  in  the  OASys  report,  that  no  further
        investigation was undertaken or that the conclusion could be  drawn
        that there were no psychological problems. I am satisfied that  the
        current medical evidence, taken  with  the  most  recent  probation
        report  and  the  references  to  the  difficulties  in   obtaining
        treatment  previously  are  evidence  of  long  term  psychological
        problems arising out of his time in the DRC, the  violence  he  has
        witnessed and the living arrangements in  the  UK  from  after  his
        arrival until his first  imprisonment.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
        evidence  (medical,  probation,   support   workers)   supports   a
        conclusion that had he received the treatment and referral  he  was
        diagnosed as requiring in 2006/7 the violent  criminality  may  not
        have occurred.


    48. Mr Chirico submitted that although the  appellant  did  not  become
        settled until 2008, the extent to which  little  weight  is  to  be
        given to his  previous  precarious  residence  should  be  modified
        because he had been brought to the UK, as a child, in circumstances
        over which he had no control. I accept that proposition.

    49.  Taken  together,  the  appellant's  offending   criminality,   all
        committed after he became an adult, that he will be able to  access
        medical treatment in the DRC, that he does not have  a  partner  or
        children in the UK, that his deportation, although it will have  an
        effect on him and  his  family  in  terms  of  separation,  is  not
        significantly out of the ordinary for families  who  are  separated
        for many reasons do not and cannot, in themselves or  cumulatively,
        amount to very compelling  reasons  such  as  not  to  require  his
        deportation.


    50. The appellant's mental health is a factor in the  consideration  of
        Article 8 and the proportionality of deportation,  even  though  it
        does not reach the Article 3 threshold. Mr Avery did not dispute or
        challenge the medical evidence and the professional opinion of  the
        probation officer that there was a direct causal link  between  the
        appellant's mental health and his criminal offending.  Nor  did  he
        dispute the evidence that the appellant  had  been  diagnosed  with
        PTSD but that  there  had  been  no  follow  through  in  terms  of
        treatment  whether  from  the  school,  social  services   or   the
        respondent. Nor did he make  submissions  in  connection  with  the
        additional evidence that I have admitted.


    51. Mr Avery did dispute Mr Chirico's submission that it was a  failure
        on the respondent's part to enable the appellant to access  medical
        treatment after diagnosis with PTSD in the 2006/7 academic year and
        thereafter. Mr Avery submitted that the psychological evidence  was
        weak and did not sustain the submission  that  treatment  had  been
        required since 2006/7 and that in any event  the  respondent  could
        not be held responsible for the lack of treatment. In my  judgment,
        both positions are inappropriate. The appellant does  not  seek  to
        blame the SSHD for the fact  that  he  should  have  been  referred
        sooner for the support and treatment that would have addressed  the
        mental health difficulties that are now said to  have  led  to  his
        criminal offending behaviour. He simply points  to  the  fact  that
        such support was not provided and suggests that if it had been,  he
        may well not have committed those offences that now put him at risk
        of deportation.  Mr Chirico  referred  to  the  Convention  on  the
        Rights of the Child and in particular Article 19[10] and  that  the
        obligations of the state did not end on adulthood[11].


    52. I am satisfied from the evidence before me that there is  a  casual
        link between the appellant's criminality and his lack of access  to
        mental health services which he was diagnosed as requiring whilst a
        child. I  am  satisfied,  from  the  evidence,  that,  having  been
        diagnosed with PTSD in 2006/7, the appellant was unable  to  access
        required treatment  for  a  variety  of  reasons  including  moving
        between accommodation and thus geographical areas at  short  notice
        at the instigation of the respondent, inability to register with  a
        GP because of the transient nature of accommodation and his status,
        lack of co-ordination between  those  who  had  dealings  with  the
        appellant and his family which should have resulted in an awareness
        of the mental health problems and the diagnosis that treatment  was
        required. A difficulty is that mental health services for  children
        (and adults) are in short supply and there have been  many  reports
        of the lack of availability having potential long-term  effects  on
        society  both  financially  and  otherwise.   In  this   particular
        instance, this appellant has been directly affected by the lack  of
        provision of mental health services, which had been  identified  as
        being needed, and the lack of which has, on the evidence before me,
        contributed significantly to his criminality.  The  appellant  has,
        through his own strength  of  character,  confronted  many  of  his
        problematic issues. He has not re-offended since 2015. His offences
        are violent offences and he committed  a  further  offence  despite
        knowing he was subject to a deportation order. I recognise it could
        be said that  having  recognised  and  started  to  deal  with  his
        problems despite the lack of access to medical treatment will  mean
        that returning him to the DRC will not be as problematic for him as
        it would have been had this self-identification  not  occurred  and
        this has  also  to  be  factored  in;  although  this  is  also  an
        indication of the likely recovery by the appellant if  he  receives
        the treatment Dr Maloney has advised.


    53. The deportation of foreign criminals is not, of  course  restricted
        solely to an assessment of an  individual's  criminality  but  also
        forms part of the respondent's policy in her  assessment  generally
        as to the deterrence  of  other  criminals  and  criminality.  This
        appellant has been convicted of violent crimes and  in  the  normal
        course of events  it  would  be  hard  to  see  how  the  mandatory
        obligations of the SSHD to deport foreign criminals,  it  being  in
        the  public  interest  to  do  so,  could  be  avoided.   But   the
        consideration  of  deterrence  is  not  a  fixed   value;   it   is
        consideration from the perspective of an observer appraised of  all
        the  salient  facts.  In  the  particular  circumstances  of   this
        appellant, no rational observer fully appraised of  the  facts  not
        least that the mental health problems experienced by the  appellant
        that went untreated notwithstanding diagnosis when he was  a  child
        and are the undisputed causal root of his offending, could properly
        conclude that the deterrent effect of removing  such  an  appellant
        would be cogent. Although obviously one cannot be certain  that  he
        would not have committed offences had he  received  treatment,  the
        evidence is such that the weight  to  be  given  to  the  deterrent
        effect of deporting this particular  foreign  criminal  is  not  as
        cogent and compelling as generally will be the case.


    54. Critical to this appellant is the evidence that his criminality  is
        directly related to his mental health problems for which he has not
        received treatment despite being  diagnosed  at  an  early  age  as
        requiring it. That fact, combined with the  violence  he  witnessed
        and was the subject of, the lack of further  offences  since  2015,
        the probation officer's report, the positive character  references,
        that he has made credible  and  laudable  efforts  to  address  his
        mental health problems himself even though he has  been  unable  to
        access  professional  help,  the  difficulties  he  will  have   in
        reintegrating into the DRC having left as a child so many years ago
        and the limited deterrent effect do, in my opinion, amount to  very
        compelling circumstances such as to outweigh the significant public
        interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  as  is  now
        enshrined in s117C(1).

    55. Of course, if the appellant were  to  re-offend  or  fail  to  take
        advantage of treatment offered then it would be  a  very  different
        matter. His non-removal pursuant to the deportation order  will  be
        an opportunity for him to  take  advantage  of  the  chances  being
        offered to him now and to access treatment that he  was  previously
        not given.

    56. It follows that I find there are very compelling  reasons  for  the
        public interest  to  be  outweighed  in  the  deportation  of  this
        appellant and I allow his appeal.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside and I remake  the
decision
     by allowing it.



    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






[pic]

                                    Date 27th October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] Radio Okapi...
[2] Radio Okapi....
[3] Radio Okapi...
[4] See, for instance, Amnesty International , ....2016...
[5] Home office, Country Policy Bulletin ...2014...
[6] MONUSCO ... deaths in detention centres March 2013...
[7] Radio Okapi ...19 April 2017...
[8] Radio Okapi..23 March 2017..Operation Likofi..
[9] Radio Okapi..24 August 2015..
[10] Article 19

1. States Parties shall take all appropriate legislative, administrative,
social and educational measures to protect the child from all forms of
physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent
treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in
the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the
care of the child.

2. Such protective measures should, as appropriate, include effective
procedures for the establishment of social programmes to provide necessary
support for the child and for those who have the care of the child, as well
as for other forms of prevention and for identification, reporting,
referral, investigation, treatment and follow-up of instances of child
maltreatment described heretofore, and, as appropriate, for judicial
involvement.


[11] Article 39

States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to promote physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of a child victim of: any
form of neglect, exploitation, or abuse; torture or any other form of
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; or armed conflicts.
Such recovery and reintegration shall take place in an environment which
fosters the health, self-respect and dignity of the child.



