
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01798/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 May 2014                                 |On 4 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JOHNNY CALLIE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jacobs, Counsel


                        DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS


Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with  permission  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Finch  and  Mrs  Patfield  (the  panel)  who
    allowed the respondent's appeal against the decision refusing to revoke
    a deportation order.  I shall refer to the respondent throughout as the
    claimant.  He is a national of the United States born April 1950 and he
    arrived as a serviceman in the United Kingdom on 1  October  1991.  The
    claimant retired from the United States Air Force on 1 October 1991 and
    he was thereafter granted  leave  to  remain.   The  deportation  order
    signed on 14 April 2009 was made after  the  claimant  had  been  found
    guilty of conspiracy to supply a class A drug at  Ipswich  Crown  Court
    for which he was sentenced to seven year's imprisonment on 30  November
    2007.

 2. No application for anonymity was made before me.  I am  satisfied  that
    the anonymity direction made in the  First  -tier  Tribunal  should  be
    continued in the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal solely  in  relation
    to  the  claimant's  partner  (SN)  in  the  light  of  her  particular
    circumstances.

 3. There is a long history of proceedings by the claimant  in  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal, First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal,  the
    Administrative Court and the Court of Appeal.  On 16  October  2009  an
    appeal against the deportation order which had been  made  pursuant  to
    section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 was heard and  dismissed  by  the
    AIT.  On 13 November 2009 reconsideration of the decision  was  ordered
    by Senior Immigration Judge Spencer.  In a determination dated 5  March
    2010 Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor found  that  the  AIT  had  materially
    erred in law but dismissed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds.  This
    followed a hearing confined to submissions only. On 3 June  2010  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor refused permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  On 28 July 2010, Hallett LJ refused permission  to  appeal  on
    the papers and on 13 December 2010 a renewed application for permission
    to appeal was refused.

 4. On 4 August 2011 the Secretary of State detained the claimant to effect
    his removal.  Removal directions were then issued and on 23 August 2011
    the claimant's solicitors submitted an application to the Secretary  of
    State to revoke the deportation  order.   The  following  day  judicial
    review  proceedings  were  issued  and  an  injunction  sought  against
    removal.  The same day the Administrative Court granted interim  relief
    restraining the Secretary of State from removing the claimant.   On  11
    November 2011 the Administrative Court sealed a consent  order  between
    the parties permitting the claimant to submit  further  representations
    on the application to revoke the deportation order.

 5. On 11 January 2012 the Secretary of State made a new decision  refusing
    to revoke the deportation order and  she  certified  the  human  rights
    claim  as  manifestly  unfounded  pursuant  to  section  94(2)  of  the
    Nationality and Immigration Act 2002.  Permission to apply for judicial
    review of that decision was  refused  by  a  Deputy  High  Court  Judge
    however on 27 July 2012, Sir Stephen  Sedley  ordered  a  stay  against
    deportation and that the application for judicial review be  determined
    at a hearing.  On  12  September  2012  the  Court  of  Appeal  granted
    permission to apply for judicial review and remitted the  case  to  the
    Administrative Court.  Thereafter an order by consent was made  by  the
    Court quashing the certification.  On 16 August 2013 the  Secretary  of
    State made a further decision refusing to revoke  a  deportation  order
    with an in-country right of appeal giving her reasons for doing so in a
    letter of the same date (the reasons letter).  The  appeal  before  the
    panel was heard on 27 February 2014.   The  claimant  and  his  partner
    together with another witness adopted their statements.  There  was  no
    cross-examination.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. The Secretary of State relies on grounds of challenge  being  (i)  that
    the judge had failed to give reasons or adequate reasons  for  findings
    on  a  material  matter  and  (ii)  the  judge  had  made  a   material
    misdirection of law.  As to (i), it is argued that although  the  panel
    had made reference to the starting point being that of the findings  of
    the earlier tribunal, there was no further reference to those  findings
    when addressing the current situation and evidence.  Reliance is placed
    on Devaseelan (second appeals - ECHR -  extra-territorial  effect)  Sri
    Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702 being relied  on.   The  second  limb  to  the
    ground is that the panel failed to establish with adequate reasons  how
    the current medical evidence was materially different from  that  which
    was available to the Tribunal in 2011.   Inadequate  consideration  had
    been given "to the positions available to the [claimant's]  partner  in
    the UK".  The panel had made no findings on the material matter of  the
    claimant's own criminal  conduct  which  jeopardised  his  relationship
    which had been considered by the Court of Appeal in Lee v  SSHD  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 348.

 7. As to (ii), the challenge is that the panel had failed to give balanced
    consideration to the public  interest  in  making  its  findings  under
    Article 8.  It had failed to consider the serious criminality  and  the
    pressing public interest in favour of his deportation with reference to
    SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550.   The  panel  had  made  no
    findings on the impact of section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and the
    weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  side  of  the  balancing
    exercise.  It had made no findings on the wider scope of deportation as
    a deterrent, an expression of societal abhorrence and as  a  system  of
    control that maintains public confidence.  Although the panel had noted
    that it may prove difficult for the claimant and his partner to acquire
    medical care in the United States, it was impossible for them to do so.
     The claim under Article 8 should not be  enhanced  by  the  virtue  of
    healthcare in the United States being different or more expensive  from
    that in the United Kingdom.  It is argued that the Article 8 claim  was
    not very strong nor  were  there  any  factors  that  would  amount  to
    something  exceptional  or  'very  compelling'  with  reference  to  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1192.   The  public  interests  in
    deporting a foreign national who has been convicted of a serious  drugs
    related offence was pressing and a primary consideration to  which  the
    panel had not had due regard.

 8. In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox
    considered there was no particular force in the  first  ground  and  it
    considered that the panel had given adequate reasons why  it  might  be
    able to depart from earlier findings in 2011.  He  was  just  persuaded
    that there was arguable merit  in  the  second  ground  observing  that
    although the panel had set out a number of quite compelling factors  on
    the  claimant's  side  of  the  proportionality  balance,  it  was  not
    sufficiently evident that the panel had properly applied  its  mind  or
    given appropriate weight to the "extremely pressing public interest".

 9. Mr Jacobs argued that  permission  had  been  confined  to  the  second
    ground.  I gave my ruling at the hearing that as permission  to  appeal
    had not been specifically refused on the first grounds, notwithstanding
    the negative observations on the merit of this ground, it remained open
    to Mr Deller to argue it ground before me.

Discussion

10. I am grateful to the extensive oral submissions from Mr Deller  and  Mr
    Jacobs the latter supplementing points raised in a skeleton argument.

11. I begin my consideration with the second ground.  If that is made  out,
    irrespective of  any criticism made of the reasoning as asserted in the
    first ground, the decision will need to be set aside.

12. As the decision  is  a  refusal  to  revoke  a  deportation  order  the
    Secretary of State was required to comply with paragraphs 390 and 390A:

         "390.    An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
                be  considered  in  the  light  of  all  the   circumstances
                including the following:

                (i)    the grounds on which the order was made;

                (ii)   any representations made in support of revocation;

                (iii)   the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                    maintenance of an effective immigration control;

                (iv)    the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                    compassionate circumstances.

         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies  the  Secretary  of  State  or
                Entry  Clearance  Officer  assisting  the  application  will
                consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it
                does not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  to
                the public interest in  maintaining  the  deportation  order
                will be outweighed by other factors."

13. Paragraphs 397 and 398 provide:

         "397.    A deportation order will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
                removal pursuant to the order would be contrary to the  UK's
                obligations under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights
                Convention.  Where deportation  would  not  be  contrary  to
                these obligations it will only be in  exceptional  interests
                that the public interest in deportation is outweighed.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)    the deportation of the person from the United Kingdom
                    is conducive to the public good because they  have  been
                    convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four
                    years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public  good  because  they  have  been
                    convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  four
                    years but at least twelve months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good because, in the view of the
                    Secretary of State, their offending has  caused  serious
                    harm or they are a persistent offender who have shown  a
                    particular disregard for the law,"

                the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
                whether paragraphs 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not
                it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
                interest  in  deportation  will  be  outweighed   by   other
                factors."

14. Paragraphs 399 and 399A provide specifically  for  circumstances  where
    there are children or a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    partner and persons who have been here for a lengthy  period  to  those
    who come  within  the  categories  of  398(b)  and  (c).   Pursuant  to
    paragraph 399B, limited leave may be granted for a period not exceeding
    30 months.

15. In MF (Nigeria) Lord Dyson identified the issue the court was  required
    to determine at [36] of his judgment:

         "What is the position where paragraphs 399 and 399A  do  not  apply
         either because the case falls within paragraph 398(a)  or  because,
         although it falls within  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)  none  of  the
         conditions set out in paragraph 399(a) or (b) or paragraph  399A(a)
         or (b) applies?  The new Rules provide that in that event, "It will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be  outweighed  by  other  factors".   It  is  the
         apparent difference between the  parties  as  to  the  meaning  and
         application of this provision  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  the
         present appeal."

16. At [40] Lord Dyson noted the submission by Miss Giovannetti that,

         "The reference to exceptional circumstances serves the  purpose  of
         emphasising that, in the balancing exercise,  great  weight  should
         only be given to the public interest in deporting foreign criminals
         who do not satisfy paragraphs 398 and 399  or  399A.   It  is  only
         exceptionally that such foreign criminals will succeed  in  showing
         that their rights under Article 8.1 trump the  public  interest  in
         their deportation".

    He accepted that submission  and  went  on  to  explain  what  must  be
    understood by reference  to  exceptional  circumstances.   At  [42]  he
    observed,

         "In approaching the question of whether removal is a  proportionate
         interference with an individual's Article 8 rights, the scales  are
         heavily weighted  in  favour  of  deportation  and  something  very
         compelling (which will be "exceptional") is  required  to  outweigh
         the public interests in removal.  In our view, it is no coincidence
         that the phrase "exceptional circumstances"  is  used  in  the  new
         Rules in the context of weighing  the  competing  factors  for  and
         against deportation of foreign criminals"

    And he continued:

         "43. The word "exceptional" is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule.  The general rule in the present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paragraphs
             399 and 399A do not apply, very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to outweigh the public interest in deportation. These
             compelling reasons are the "exceptional circumstances".

         44.  We would, therefore, hold that the new Rules  are  a  complete
             code and that the exceptional circumstances to  be  considered
             in  the  balancing  exercise  involve  the  application  of  a
             proportionality   test   as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence. We accordingly respectfully do not  agree  with
             the UT that the decision-maker is not "mandated  or  directed"
             to take all the relevant  Article  8  criteria  into  account:
             paragraph 38."

17. As to whether there was a one or two stage test Lord Dyson observed  at
    46:

         "There has been debate as to whether there is a one  stage  or  two
         stage test.  If the claimant succeeds on an application of the  new
         Rules at the first hurdle i.e. he can show that  paragraph  399  or
         399A applies, then it can be said that he has succeeded  on  a  one
         stage test.  But if he  does  not,  it  is  necessary  to  consider
         whether there are circumstances which are  sufficiently  compelling
         (and therefore exceptional) to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         deportation.   That  is  an  exercise  which  is  separate  from  a
         consideration of whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies.  It is  the
         second part of a two stage approach  which,  for  reasons  we  have
         given, is required by the new Rules."

18. The judge directed herself as to the law at [12]  to  [14]  as  to  the
    impact of the UK Borders Act 2007 and the relevant Immigration Rules as
    follows:

         "12. The appellant accepts that he is an American and is therefore,
             a foreign national.  The  Home  Office  bundle  contained  the
             sentencing remarks made by  His  Honour  Judge  Goodwin  which
             stated that the appellant had been sentenced to  seven  years'
             imprisonment on 30 November 2007.  Therefore,  the  respondent
             was obliged to  make  an  automatic  deportation  order  under
             section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007  and  our  starting
             point should be that the deportation  of  a  foreign  national
             criminal is conducive to the public good.

         13.  Paragraph 398(a) of the Immigration Rules applies to this case
             as although the appellant has asserted  that  his  deportation
             will be contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR, he was sentenced to
             a  period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  four  years,   and
             therefore, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  the
             public interest and deportation will be  outweighed  by  other
             factors  for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  Rules   and
             paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules does not apply.

         14.  However, the fact that new provisions had been  inserted  into
             the Immigration Rules, which relate to private and family life
             rights, does not mean that we do  not  have  to  consider  the
             appellant's rights under existing domestic and European  Court
             of Human Rights case law.  We have a duty arising from section
             6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 not to make  a  decision  which
             conflicts with the appellant's  rights  under  the  ECHR.   In
             particular, in Green (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 00245
             (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
             confirmed that we had  to  consider  whether  the  refusal  to
             revoke his deportation order  would  amount  to  a  breach  of
             Article 8 of the ECHR even if he did  not  qualify  for  leave
             under the Immigration Rules and its new provisions relating to
             family and private life.  We have also taken into account  the
             view of the Court of Appeal in  MF Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA
             Civ 1192 and the decision in Shahzad v  SSHD  [2014]  UKUT  85
             (IAC) but do not believe these preclude us  from  taking  into
             account Article 8 of the ECHR."

19. She thereafter proceeded to  carry  out  the  proportionality  exercise
    observing at [17]: "Nevertheless the respondent also has to  show  that
    it would be proportionate to deport the appellant to the United  States
    of America" and at [18] "We have reminded ourselves of the great weight
    which we must give to the fact that the appellant was  convicted  of  a
    very serious offence which had a serious effect  on  the  community  in
    which he lived."

20. The judge weighed in the appellant's  favour  the  observation  by  the
    sentencing judge that he did not believe that the claimant had been the
    ringleader of the conspiracy to supply heroin  and  crack  cocaine  but
    that he had played a major part. She also observed that:

     (i) The claimant's previous convictions for theft and  shoplifting  did
    not aggravate the sentence for conspiracy as it was far more serious.

    (ii) A letter from the Norfolk and Suffolk  Probation  Trust  dated  20
    February 2014 stated that the claimant's compliance in  engagement  and
    supervision for his licence had been  excellent,  he  had  demonstrated
    good insight into the impact of drug offences, he did  not  demonstrate
    any attitudes that would lead to further offending, he had an excellent
    reference from the prison officer at Norwich Prison, had remained  drug
    free since his release on 4 August 2010 and in a letter dated 14  March
    2011 it was stated that he had been assessed to pose a low risk of harm
    to others in re-offending.

    (iii) The evidence of rehabilitation and low risk was not before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor.  There was further medical evidence in  relation
    to the claimant's partner and her risk  of  suicide  and  also  further
    evidence of the claimant's successful rehabilitation.

    (iv) The claimant is suffering from diabetes and  degenerative  changes
    to his right knee and is also suffering from high blood pressure.

    (v) The claimant had been awarded a number of medals and had served  in
    the Vietnam War.  There were also very positive letters of support from
    the Pastor at Ipswich International Church and others.

    (vi) The claimant had not relied on welfare benefits.

    (vii) The claimant had been living with his partner SN since June 1995.
     She is a British citizen who has no contact with other members of  her
    family and has very few friends.  Due to her depression and anxiety she
    is unusually dependent upon the claimant and cannot  easily  leave  her
    home on her own or travel outside Ipswich at all unless he is with her.



    (viii)    SN had been referred to a child and  adolescent  psychiatrist
    in 1976 following violent physical and sexual abuse from her stepfather
    from an early age.  She would experience high levels  of  anxiety  were
    she to leave her home and travel to America with the claimant.  She has
    a history of attempted suicide and made a further attempt on 27  August
    2009.

    (xi) SN would be unable to obtain status in  the  United  States  as  a
    resident alien unless she married the claimant.  Her refusal to  travel
    with the claimant arises from the abuse she suffered.  She  would  only
    be able to stay there as  a  visitor  and  would  not  be  entitled  to
    Medicaid.  It is  unlikely  the  couple  could  afford  private  health
    insurance.

    (xii) The claimant has two children born in the United Kingdom who  are
    British citizens, a son born 26 December 1985.  They enjoy a very close
    relationship.  The claimant also has  a  close  relationship  with  his
    grandson.  The claimant has not been able to  maintain  a  relationship
    with his daughter who was born on 25 December 1996.  He  is  no  longer
    permitted contact although this is something he is trying to restore.

    (xiii)    The claimant has not lived in the United States  since  1984,
    has no property there and in the light  of  his  age  and  his  medical
    conditions it would be difficult  for  him  to  obtain  employment  his
    parents are dead and he has no remaining contacts.

21.  By way of conclusion the judge stated at [31]:

         "Taking this and the totality  of  the  evidence  into  account  in
         applying a balance of probabilities we find that the respondent has
         not established that the appellant's deportation to  America  would
         be a proportionate breach of Article 8 of the ECHR."

22.  The judge was correct to proceed to a second stage with her  Article  8
    consideration and also rightly directed herself at [13] that  it  would
    only be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest would  be
    outweighed by other factors.  At [18] she reminded herself of the great
    weight that must be given to the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of a very serious offence which had a serious effect  on  the
    community.

23.  It is not only the nature of the particular offence which needed to  be
    taken into account but in addition consideration needed to  be  had  to
    the public interest in deporting foreign criminals who do  not  satisfy
    the various categories in 399 or 399A.  There are thus two  aspects  to
    the public interest side. In referring to  the  crime  itself  and  the
    effect on the community there is no doubt that the  judge  clearly  had
    both aspects to the forefront of her mind.  Mr Jacob argued  that  that
    so long as the judge had referred to exceptional circumstances  it  was
    not an error not to make reference to "very compelling". That  must  be
    right if it is possible to infer from the  judge's  evaluation  of  the
    factors militating against deportation that she did so on the basis  of
    the scales being heavily weighted in favour of deportation. Reading the
    determination as a  whole  does  yield  such  an  analysis.  I  am  not
    persuaded that the judge failed to consider the serious criminality  as
    asserted in the grounds or that she  was  not  aware  of  the  pressing
    public interest. I am not persuaded that the  judge  strayed  from  the
    test she was required to apply.

24.  As to the specific aspect referred to in the  second  ground  regarding
    the problems it was  anticipated  SN  would  encounter  from  accessing
    medical treatment, this was only one of a number of  factors  that  the
    judge took into account.  If this were the only or principal reason for
    finding in the appellant's favour, I accept this would  be  susceptible
    to legitimate challenge. There is no challenge to  the  other  findings
    other than the view expressed that the claim was not very strong.  This
    is at best no more than a disagreement having regard to all the factors
    listed by the judge.

25.  I return to the first ground  which  challenges  the  adequacy  of  the
    judge's reasons to depart from the findings  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Taylor. It is evident from the determination that the  judge  correctly
    considered  that  there  was  new  evidence  and  came  to  conclusions
    rationally open to her.  As it appears to be the case SN had  attempted
    suicide in August 2009 and this did not come to light until  after  the
    hearing by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor. This clearly had an appreciable
    impact and the judge was not in error in treating it as something  new.
    The second limb to this ground  argues  that  the  judge  has  made  no
    findings on the appellant's criminal conduct which now jeopardised  his
    relationships;  in  other  words  the  appellant  has  to  accept   the
    consequences of what he has done. Paragraphs [18] and [19] address  the
    criminal behaviour in detail and I cannot see how the judge can be said
    to have overlooked this. Rehabilitation is particularly  considered  in
    [18] otherwise this limb is more appropriate to the  considerations  in
    the second ground which I have already dealt with.

26.  In summary I am satisfied that the judge made findings rationally  open
    to her on the evidence and correctly directed herself as  to  the  law.
    Whilst another judge might have come to a  difference  conclusion,  the
    finding on proportionality was a permissible  one.   I  find  that  the
    panel did not err as alleged and I dismiss the appeal by the  Secretary
    of State. The determination of the FtT stands.







Signed                                                                  Date
    3 June 2014
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson







