
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01672/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 June 2015                      |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MOHAMMED HASSAN BARRE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Adewoye instructed by Prime Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1     In this decision, we continue to refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant, a national  of  Somalia,
    appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated  8  July  2013  to
    make a  deportation  order  against  him  under  s.3(5)(a)  and  s.5(1)
    Immigration Act 1971. On 14 August 2013 he filed notice of appeal,  out
    of time, to the First tier Tribunal, but applying for an  extension  of
    time which was granted. The Respondent had on 19 August  2013  actually
    signed a deportation order against the Appellant, possibly in ignorance
    of the fact that the Appellant had brought an out of  time  appeal.  We
    proceed to treat the present  appeal  as  an  appeal  brought  under  s
    82(1)(j) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('NIAA 2002').

2     The Appellant appealed against the decision of 8 July 2013  on  asylum
    and human rights grounds (Articles 2, 3, and 8). The appeal came before
    Judge of the First tier Tribunal Bennett at Hatton  Cross  on  23  July
    2014, and was allowed, ostensibly on human rights grounds under Article
    8 ECHR, finding that the circumstances that the Appellant would have to
    face  in  Merka,  Somalia,  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  [79].  The
    Respondent sought permission to appeal, which was granted by the  Upper
    Tribunal on 1 December 2014.

3     The error of law hearing came before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
    on 30 January 2015. In his decision and directions dated 4  March  2015
    (appended to this decision), he ruled that the FtT had materially erred
    in law, in:

    (i)    failing to have regard to the considerations set out in Part  5A
         NIAA 2002 [18];

    (ii)   its assessment of then-applicable Country Guidance  of  AMM  and
         others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM)  Somalia  CG
         [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC) ('AMM'); by:

         (a)      considering only the Appellant's  position  on  return  to
             Merka, rather than also considering his position in  Mogadishu
             [27, 29]; and,

         (b)      failing, when considering what connections  the  Appellant
             may or may not have in Somalia, to take into account the FtT's
             own earlier finding that the evidence of the Appellant and his
             family members in the UK was to be treated with  the  greatest
             circumspection [27]-[29].

4     Judge Kopieczek adjourned the re-making  of  the  decision,  observing
    that findings of fact made by the FtT  were  to  stand,  save  for  any
    findings infected by error of law. Directions given were as follows:

    "1     At the next hearing the parties must be in a  position  to  make
         submissions as to what findings of fact are to be preserved, and in
         relation to the application of the decision in MOJ & Ors (Return to
         Mogadishu) Somalia CG [20014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)."

5     The matter now comes before  the  Tribunal  as  a  re-hearing  of  the
    Appellant's appeal.

    Immigration and offending history

6     The essential elements of the Appellant's  immigration  and  offending
    history are as follows. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on
    19 July 2006 with indefinite leave to enter on family reunion  grounds.
    He has never naturalised as a British Citizen.

7     The Respondent's reasons for making the decision of  8  July  2013  to
    deport the Appellant are contained within a letter dated  4  July  2013
    ('the refusal letter'). The Appellant has a total of 17 convictions for
    27 offences dating from 1 December 2009 to 29 May 2013. These  are  set
    out in the record of the Appellant's antecedents  as  recorded  in  the
    Police National Computer ('PNC') print-out and in a table at  page  2-3
    of the Respondent's letter  of  4  July  2013  (Q2-Q3).  These  include
    offences for robbery, theft, using or threatening  to  use  abusive  or
    insulting words or behaviour with intent to cause fear  or  provocation
    of violence (2 such convictions), handling stolen goods, possession  of
    a class B controlled substance (cannabis) (5 such convictions), battery
    (2 such convictions), affray, possession with intent to supply a  Class
    B controlled substance, and various offences of failing to comply  with
    previous community orders.

8     The Appellant has been sentenced  to  detention  and  training  orders
    ('DTO') on four occasions, amounting to 24 months in  total,  the  last
    being a DTO of 8 months, arising from his conviction on 22 October 2012
    for possession  with  intent  to  supply  a  Class  B  controlled  drug
    (cannabis),  for  which  he  was  initially  sentenced   to   a   Youth
    Rehabilitation Order with ISSP (Intensive Supervision and  Surveillance
    Programme). On 28 December 2012 he was convicted of failing  to  comply
    with that sentence, and a sentence of an 8 month DTO was imposed. Since
    that sentence of 28 December 2012, the Appellant has been convicted  of
    one further offence, on 29 May 2013, of possession of Class  B  drug  -
    cannabis, for which he was fined.

9     Upon considering that offending history, the Respondent  held  in  her
    refusal letter that the Appellant's deportation would be  conducive  to
    the public good (refusal letter, Q1)  and  that  he  was  a  persistent
    offender whose offences had caused serious harm, and  was  therefore  a
    person to whom  paragraph  398(c)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applied
    (refusal letter, Q5-Q6). The Respondent's decision of 8  July  2013  to
    deport  the  Appellant  was  therefore  made  under  s.3(5)  and   5(1)
    Immigration Act 1971, rather than s.32 UK Borders Act 2007.

    Relevant law

10    As a consequence of the Appellant's offending history,  the  following
    provisions are relevant:

11    s.3(5)(a) Immigration Act 1971:

         "(5)     A person who  is  not  a  British  citizen  is  liable  to
         deportation from the United Kingdom if -

             (a) the  Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
             conducive to the public good;

             ..."

12    s.5(1) Immigration Act 1971:

         "5. - Procedure for, and further provisions as to, deportation.

         (1)      Where a person is under section 3(5) or (6)  above  liable
         to deportation, then subject to the following  provisions  of  this
         Act the Secretary of State may make  a  deportation  order  against
         him, that is to say an order requiring him to leave and prohibiting
         him from entering the  United  Kingdom;  and  a  deportation  order
         against a person shall invalidate any leave to enter or  remain  in
         the United Kingdom given him before the order is made or  while  it
         is in force."

13    Part 5A NIAA 2002 (ss.117A-D):

         "Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
         the question of whether an interference with a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)      In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

         (2)      In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a) who is not a British citizen,

             (b) who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
             offence, and

             (c) who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or

                  (iii)      is a persistent offender.

         (3)      For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to
         an order under-

             (a) section 5 of the Criminal Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
             (insanity etc),

             (b) section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland)  Act  1995
             (insanity etc), or

             (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland)  Order
             1986 (insanity etc),has not been convicted of an offence.

         (4)      In  this  Part,  references  to  a  person  who  has  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

             (a) do not include a  person  who  has  received  a  suspended
             sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence
             or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);

             (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced to a period
             of imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue of being
             sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in  aggregate  to
             that length of time;

             (c) include a person who is sentenced to detention, or ordered
             or directed to be detained, in an  institution  other  than  a
             prison (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution
             for young offenders) for that length of time; and

             (d) include a person  who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or
             detention, or ordered or  directed  to  be  detained,  for  an
             indeterminate period, provided that it may last for  at  least
             that length of time.

         (5)      If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as to
         whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
         asserting that fact to prove it."

14    Immigration Rules, Part 13:

         "A362.   Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation
         under Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8  will  only
         succeed where the requirements of these rules as at  28  July  2014
         are met, regardless of when the notice of intention  to  deport  or
         the deportation order, as appropriate, was served.

         ...

         Rights of appeal  in  relation  to  a  decision  not  to  revoke  a
         deportation order

         396.     Where a person is liable to  deportation  the  presumption
         shall be that the public interest requires deportation.  It  is  in
         the public interest to deport where the  Secretary  of  State  must
         make a deportation order in accordance with section 32  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007.

         397.     A deportation order will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
         removal pursuant to  the  order  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
         obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
         Convention. Where  deportation  would  not  be  contrary  to  these
         obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the
         public interest in deportation is outweighed.

         Deportation and Article 8

         A398.    These rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                his deportation would be contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's
                obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                made against him to be revoked.

         398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public  interest
                because they have been convicted of  an  offence  for  which
                they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
                least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public  interest
                because they have been convicted of  an  offence  for  which
                they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public  interest
                because, in the  view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
                offending has caused serious harm or they are  a  persistent
                offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,

                the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
                whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,
                the public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed
                by  other  factors   where   there   are   very   compelling
                circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
                399 and 399A.

         399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is
                in the UK, and

                    (i)      the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)     the child has lived in the UK continuously  for
                    at least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                    the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
                        in the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                        deported; and

                        (b) it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
                        remain in the UK without the person who  is  to  be
                        deported; or

                (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or
                settled in the UK, and

                    (i)      the relationship was formed at a time when  the
                    person (deportee) was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their
                    immigration status was not precarious; and

                    (ii)     it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to
                    live in the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                    deported, because of compelling circumstances  over  and
                    above those described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM;
                    and

                    (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to
                    remain in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                    deported.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                most of his life; and

                (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                integration into the country to which it is proposed  he  is
                deported."

15    Relevant authorities include (but are not limited to):

15.1  Chege (section 117D-Article 8 approach-Kenya) [2015] UKUT  165  (IAC),
    the Headnote to which reads as follows:

         "The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds  has
         been brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to consider:

         i  is the appellant a foreign criminal as defined by s117D (2) (a),
             (b) or (c);

         ii if so, does  he  fall  within  paragraph  399  or  399A  of  the
             Immigration Rules;

         iii      if not are there very compelling  circumstances  over  and
             beyond those falling within 399 and  399A  relied  upon,  such
             identification to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness  of  the
             criminality and taking into account the  factors  set  out  in
             s117B.

         Compelling as an adjective has the meaning of having a powerful and
         irresistible effect; convincing.

         The purpose of paragraph 398 is to recognize circumstances that are
         sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
         deportation but do not fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         The task of the judge is to assess the competing interests  and  to
         determine whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
         for private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  or
         whether   the   public   interest    arguments    should    prevail
         notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8.

         It follows from this that if an appeal does not  succeed  on  human
         rights grounds,  paragraph  397  provides  the  respondent  with  a
         residual  discretion  to  grant  leave  to  remain  in  exceptional
         circumstances where an appellant cannot succeed by invoking  rights
         protected by Article 8 of the ECHR."

    The hearing

16    The documents before the  Tribunal  include  the  Respondent's  bundle
    prepared on 19 August 2013, and the  Appellant's  bundle  prepared  for
    this  re-hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  contained   witness
    statements of the Appellant, his father Hassan Halane Barre, his mother
    Shukri Xaaji Nuur Ali, and his sister Sabrin Mohamed,  all  dated  June
    2015. These statements contained for the most part the same evidence as
    was set out in their statements before the FtT, but had been brought up
    to date with some additional information. An additional witness who had
    given evidence before the FtT had been the  Appellant's  older  brother
    Noor Hassan Barre, but he was tragically killed in a stabbing  incident
    on 31 October 2014.

17    However, the only witnesses actually attending  the  hearing  to  give
    evidence before us were the Appellant and his father.  The  Appellant's
    father later gave evidence explaining the absence  of  the  Appellant's
    mother and sister at the hearing.  There  was  no  application  for  an
    adjournment to facilitate the attendance of any additional witnesses.

18    Ms Brocklesby-Weller sought to rely on a further  document,  being  an
    updated PNC print-out of the Appellant's arrests and  convictions.  She
    sought to rely on information contained at the rear of the recent print
    out that on 23 May 2015 the Appellant had been arrested and remanded on
    Police Bail on condition that he not enter certain streets  in  Harrow,
    and that he appear  before  the  Police  again  on  3  July  2015.  The
    suspected offence for which he was arrested is not stated.

19    We admitted this document in evidence. We return to our assessment  of
    it, below.

20    The Appellant  gave  evidence  in  English.  He  adopted  his  witness
    statement of 25 June 2015. In relation to  questions  from  Mr  Adewoye
    regarding the Appellant's recent arrest, the Appellant accepted that he
    and two friends had been arrested whilst out walking because the police
    had found a bag of cannabis near them. The police had found nothing  on
    the Appellant upon being searched. He has been released on  bail.   The
    Appellant stated that he no longer smoked or dealt cannabis.

21    The Appellant said that he had not been to Somalia since  arriving  in
    the UK, and had no particular skills that he could use there.  He  left
    school in 2010, at year 11.

22    Cross examined by Ms Brocklesby-Weller, the Appellant stated  that  he
    currently lived with his father in rented accommodation  owned  by  the
    Council. When asked who paid for his food and clothing,  the  Appellant
    stated that his father helped him  financially,  as  did  other  family
    members - his mother, sister, and little brother. His  father  did  not
    look after any other family member. Regarding his  recent  arrest,  the
    Appellant repeated the account given earlier. He and  his  friends  had
    not run away when stopped. His friends did not smoke cannabis.

23    There was no re-examination.

24    In response to questions from the Tribunal,  the  Appellant  confirmed
    he had been arrested in Harrow,  in  the  area  where  he  lived,  mid-
    evening. The offence for which they  were  arrested  was  suspicion  of
    possession of cannabis. The Appellant believed that the police intended
    to carry out fingerprint checks on the bag and wanted him back in July.



25    The  Appellant's  father,  Hassan  Halane  Barre,  gave  evidence.  He
    adopted his witness statement of 24 June 2015. His attention was  drawn
    to the letter at page 55 of the bundle from Julius Rutherford  Cleaning
    Services regarding his employment with them  at  2.15  hours  per  day,
    being paid at �142.97 per fortnight. He was asked if he  had  any  bank
    account which showed payment of those wages.  The  witness  produced  a
    statement from a Nationwide bank account in the name of H H  Barre  for
    the period 31 December 2014 to 30 March 2015. We admitted this document
    into evidence. We note that the account shows a series  of  fortnightly
    credits in the sum of �144.80. The witness  explained  that  a  payment
    into the account on 4 February 2015 of �1,980  was  a  funeral  payment
    from income support in respect of the recent death of  his  oldest  son
    (Noor Hassan Barre, for whom there is a death certificate at page 54 of
    the Appellant's bundle showing that he died on 31 October 2014  from  a
    stab wound to the chest.)

26    He gave evidence that he was divorced  from  his  wife.  She  had  not
    attended because  his  daughter  informed  him  that  her  mother  (the
    witnesses' ex wife) was sick. The witnesses' daughter could not come to
    give evidence because she was pregnant (4 months) and not feeling well.



27    Cross examined, Mr Barre confirmed that he has  worked  as  a  cleaner
    from February 2015  to  present.  He  worked  2.15  hours  a  day,  but
    sometimes did overtime when the school  was  closed  and  he  did  deep
    cleaning. He was not expecting to get more hours of work, unless he got
    another job. He was not looking for  another  job  at  the  moment.  He
    stated that he rented a Housing  Association  home.  He  received  some
    benefit - �16 per week from the job centre, paid fortnightly. This  was
    job seekers allowance. He stated that nobody  supported  the  Appellant
    financially except him. The Appellant's mother and sister did not  help
    out. The Appellant stays at home with him.

28    He denied that the Appellant's mother and sister  give  any  money  to
    the Appellant. When Ms Brocklesby-Weller put to the  witness  that  the
    Appellant himself had  previously  said  that  his  mother  and  sister
    sometimes helped him, the witness said maybe, he  did  not  know.   His
    daughter was pregnant and not working. Her husband worked. He was aware
    that the Appellant had been arrested in May. The Appellant had not told
    him the reason for the arrest. He confirmed that  the  Appellant  still
    lives with him. They did not travel together to court today -  he  came
    by train; the Appellant came by car with friends. When asked  if  these
    were friends that the Appellant had had for a while or if he  knew  the
    Appellant's friends, the witness said that he had no idea. He described
    that the Appellant comes to the house at night, sleeps and  then  goes.
    He did not know what his son did in the day. He said that the Appellant
    goes out at about 1.30-2.00 but he did not  know  where  the  Appellant
    goes.  He comes home at about 11 - 12  o'clock;  sometimes  9  o'clock.
    Later at the weekends.

29    Asked if the Appellant was still  using  cannabis,  the  witness  said
    that he had not seen it. He agreed that it was fair to say that he  did
    not know. His friends do not come to the house. He was aware  that  the
    Appellant does not go to certain places but the Appellant had not  told
    him the conditions of bail.

30    In re-examination the witness said that he did not know the  smell  of
    cannabis, but  that  he  had  not  smelt  any  strange  odours  on  the
    Appellant.  He did know if the Appellant took cannabis.

31    In response to questions from the Tribunal, the witness did  not  know
    the details of his daughter's husband's job. The witness had  not  seen
    the Appellant smoking cigarettes. As to the help he gave the  Appellant
    - he did not give the Appellant money, but they  ate  together  in  the
    house. If he needed money for clothes or the bus, he will buy things or
    give the Appellant money. The Appellant does  not  get  any  government
    money - immigration said that he was not allowed.

    Submissions

32    Ms Brocklesby-Weller argued that in assessing the risk of harm to  the
    Appellant on return, the findings at [66] of the FtT decision  remained
    relevant:

         "... I view the remainder of [the  Appellant's  parents']  evidence
         about their circumstances  in  Somalia,  including  their  lack  of
         family there, with the greatest circumspection  because  they  have
         shown themselves to be untruthful in a core aspect of  their  claim
         and willing to say whatever they think will further their cause.  I
         do not therefore accept their claim to come  from  minority  clans,
         even at the lower standard."

33    With reference to the  paragraphs  of  the  headnote  in   MOJ  &  Ors
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)  ('MOJ'),  the
    Appellant would be returning as an ordinary civilian and would  not  be
    at risk of treatment contrary to  Article  3  ECHR  or  at  risk  under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive (ii); there  would  be  no
    risk of forced recruitment into Al Shabaab (vi).  Return  would  be  to
    Mogadishu and the Appellant had not shown that he could not  go  there.
    There has been a  durable  change  since  AMM.  Whereas  the  Appellant
    asserts he has no family in Somalia, the  Tribunal  should  treat  that
    assertion with caution given previous adverse credibility findings, and
    we should proceed on the basis that the Appellant has  some  family  in
    Somalia, perhaps even extensive family networks.

34    Even if the Appellant did not have family in Somalia, this  would  not
    result in a risk of serious harm by  way  of  destitution  because  the
    Appellant has not established  that  there  was  no  real  prospect  of
    obtaining a livelihood  (xi).  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  referred  to  MOJ
    [411], and [421], and argued that returnees from the west might be seen
    in a positive light in terms of employment. She argued that  there  was
    no reason to suppose  that  the  Appellant  could  not  be  financially
    supported from his relatives in the UK -  the  Appellant's  father  had
    supported him; there  was  inadequate  evidence  as  to  the  financial
    position of the Appellant's sister and her husband, and of his mother.

35    The Appellant would be able to take advantage of the economic boom  in
    Mogadishu (MOJ [349-350]). A prolonged absence from Mogadishu was not a
    sufficient basis for finding that a risk of  harm  would  result  (MOJ,
    [477]), and Ms Brocklesby-Weller referred us to  the  outcome  for  the
    appellant 'SSM', in MOJ, who failed to establish  a  risk  of  harm  by
    reason of long absence. She argued that there would not be a real  risk
    of the Appellant finding himself in an  internally  displaced  persons'
    camp.

36    Addressing the issue of the Appellant's rights under Article  8  ECHR,
    Ms Brocklesby-Weller addressed the Tribunal on Part 5A  NIAA  2002  and
    the relevant immigration rules. She averred that the  Appellant  was  a
    'foreign criminal' as defined by s.117D(2) NIAA 2002,  on  the  grounds
    that he has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious  harm,
    or that he is a persistent offender. S.117C(3) provides that the public
    interest requires deportation unless exception  1  or  2  applies.   Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller did not make any submissions as to Exception 1  under
    s.117C(4), but her later submissions on para 399A  addressed  the  same
    issues.

37    Exception 2, under s.117C(5) did not apply;  the  Appellant  does  not
    have a partner, and does not have any children.

38     As  to  the  Appellant's  propensity  to  re-offend   generally,   Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller noted the observations of the FtT which did not share
    the family's confidence that the Appellant would  not  re-offend;  this
    was little more than a hope [73].  Since  then  he  has  been  arrested
    again,  although  not  convicted.  She  queried  the  role   that   the
    Appellant's father could or did take in taking care of  the  Appellant;
    he did not know the details of why the Appellant had been arrested; did
    not know the terms of bail; he came to court separately.  He  does  not
    know if the Appellant is still using drugs.

39    As to  the  length  of  the  Appellant's  residence  in  the  UK,  and
    addressing the case of Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546,  Ms Brocklesby-
    Weller argued that the Court's observation in Maslov (i.e. that  for  a
    settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major part of his  or
    her childhood and youth in the host country very  serious  reasons  are
    required to justify expulsion - [75]) was not a free-standing test, and
    she referred to SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ  1636  (17  December
    2014) [45] -[46]:

         "45.     Moreover,  as  a  consequence  of  its  error,  the  Upper
         Tribunal did not make a proper assessment  of  the  impact  of  the
         judgment of the Grand Chamber of  the  Court  of  Human  Rights  in
         Maslov v Austria. At para. [46] of its decision, the Upper Tribunal
         highlighted para. [75] of the judgment of  the  Grand  Chamber,  in
         which it says that in relation to a settled  migrant  of  the  kind
         described there, "very serious  reasons  are  required  to  justify
         expulsion". The Upper Tribunal did not attempt  to  integrate  this
         guidance within the framework of the new rules, but rather  treated
         it as a free-standing matter of assessment for itself  in  relation
         to which it appears to have regarded the relevant  approach  to  be
         one which imposed a heavy onus on the Secretary of  State  to  show
         "very serious reasons" justifying expulsion.

         46.      In my view, the Upper Tribunal should have approached  the
         assessment of the claim under Article 8 by application of  the  new
         rules, and in particular  (since  the  appellant  could  not  bring
         himself within paragraphs 399 and 399A of the new rules) by  asking
         itself whether there  were  very  compelling  reasons,  within  the
         "exceptional circumstances" rubric in paragraph  398,  to  outweigh
         the strong public interest in deportation in the appellant's  case.
         In addressing that question, the Upper Tribunal should, of  course,
         have given due respect to the guidance from the  Grand  Chamber  in
         Maslov at para. [75] of the judgment (reading it in the context  of
         the general guidance given by the Grand Chamber at paras. [68]-[76]
         of the judgment), but as a matter to be brought  into  the  overall
         assessment and balanced  against  the  strong  public  interest  in
         deportation to which the UK Borders Act 2007 and the new rules give
         expression. On a proper approach under the new rules,  in  relation
         to a person  assessed  to  have  active  ties  to  his  country  of
         citizenship, without a relevant family life in the  United  Kingdom
         and whose serious offending had occurred when he was  an  adult,  I
         think the more natural conclusion would be that  deportation  would
         be found to be justified in a case like this."

    and also to the Court of Appeal's judgment  in   SSHD  v  MA  (Somalia)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 48 (05 February 2015), [25](iii):

         "iii)    In its consideration of the guidance in Maslov v  Austria,
         the tribunal made the same error as occurred in  the  case  of  the
         appellant AG (Gambia) in AJ (Angola) (see paragraph 21  above).  In
         paragraph 33 of its determination the  tribunal  said  that  "there
         need to be very serious  reasons  to  justify  expulsion",  but  it
         treated that as a free-standing matter of  assessment  rather  than
         integrating it within the framework of the  new  rules  and  asking
         itself whether there were very compelling reasons to  outweigh  the
         public interest in deportation.

40    As regards Immigration Rules 398-399A, the Appellant  had  no  partner
    or child (399) and in relation to para 399A, the Appellant had not been
    lawfully present for most of his life; and  he  was  not  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK, given his  offences  involving  drugs,
    robbery, threatening behaviour, and various  failures  to  comply  with
    sentences.

41    Further, in terms of any comparisons to  the  facts  of  Maslov,  that
    individual had committed his  offences  at  the  age  of  14-15  years,
    whereas the Appellant had offended for a longer period - 15- 17  years.
    She invited us to dismiss the appeal.

42    For the Appellant, Mr Adewoye addressed  the  Tribunal  first  on  the
    risk of harm issue. He argued that some elements of AMM still  applied,
    as was stated in Headnote (i) of MOJ. Some individuals could succeed in
    an Article 3 ECHR claim on the  grounds  of  their  vulnerability.  The
    Appellant was vulnerable because of his age, and lack of experience  in
    living in Somalia.  We  also  note  the  argument  in  the  Appellant's
    skeleton argument (para 12(vii)) that it should be a preserved  finding
    from the FtT decision that the Appellant will be expected  to  complete
    the transition to life as a fully independent adult in  very  difficult
    circumstances in view of his age and lack of experience of life  as  an
    independent adult.

43    On the issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  can  be  expected  to  take
    advantage of the  economic  boom:  the  examples  of  persons  who  had
    successfully done so at [225] of MOJ  were  generally  people  who  had
    money to invest. The first  three  months  after  return  were  crucial
    (referring to evidence set out at [96] of MOJ). Further, survival still
    depended on the availability of a nuclear family: MOJ [341]-[342],  and
    headnote paras (ix)-(x).  The Appellant had not lived in Mogadishu.  As
    regards remittances from the UK; he could not be forced to  rely  on  a
    distant relative such as his brother-in-law, who in any event  did  not
    have enough money to support his own  family.  The  Appellant's  mother
    similarly did not have funds to send the Appellant. The  Appellant  was
    not likely to gain any employment; he  has  no  particular  skills.  He
    would not be able to secure accommodation for himself and would end  up
    in an IDP camp. The Appellant would not know which areas  of  Mogadishu
    to avoid in order to lessen the risk to him of being caught  up  in  an
    attack (MOJ [387]-[388]. He would be at risk of serious harm.

44    Addressing the Tribunal on Article 8 ECHR, Mr Adewoye argued that  the
    Appellant did not 'fall foul of'  s.117B  NIAA  2002;  he  was  not  in
    receipt of public finds. His private life was established when  he  had
    ILR, and therefore not at a time when his status  was  precarious.  His
    criminality was not the most serious; most of his convictions were  for
    breaches of community sentences and possession  of  cannabis.  Although
    there was a robbery conviction the Appellant had not received a  single
    sentence of 12 months  or  more  -  only  when  sentences  were  served
    consecutively.

45    At this point of submissions, the Tribunal  pointed  out  evidence  in
    the Respondent's bundle  which  we  had  noted  during  the  course  of
    submissions as to the Appellant's origins, bearing  in  mind  that  the
    submission  being  made  was  that  the  Appellant  had  not  lived  in
    Mogadishu.  Although within application forms set out at K3 and O4,  it
    was suggested that the Appellant's mother was born in  Merka,  evidence
    at K5 suggested that the Appellant's maternal grandmother was  born  in
    Mogadishu, and that the Appellant's mother was  married  in  Mogadishu.
    Further at H1 and O3, it was indicated that  Mogadishu  was  the  birth
    place of both the Appellant and his father, and was the place where the
    Appellant last lived in Somalia. Mr Adewoye thought that some of  these
    forms might have been completed by the Appellant's  Social  Worker  who
    may not have had a complete understanding of Somali geography.  He  did
    not invite us to hear any further evidence from the Appellant or father
    as to any of these issues. He invited us to allow the appeal.

    Discussion

46    We preserve the following findings of fact as accurately  representing
    the Appellant's circumstances at the time of the  FtT's  decision,  and
    not being vitiated by error of law (although we comment  further  below
    as to the current strength of the  Appellant's  family  life  with  his
    parents).

    (i)    "... I view the remainder of [the Appellant's parents'] evidence
         about their circumstances  in  Somalia,  including  their  lack  of
         family there, with the greatest circumspection  because  they  have
         shown themselves to be untruthful in a core aspect of  their  claim
         and willing to say whatever they think will further their cause.  I
         do not therefore accept their claim to come  from  minority  clans,
         even at the lower standard." [66];

    (ii)   "I am satisfied that [the Appellant's parents] are committed  to
         the Appellant and that they have a  genuine  parental  relationship
         with him..." [66]; " ... he probably has a  family  life  with  his
         parents. Family life  does  not  automatically  end  on  a  child's
         eighteenth birthday. The Appellant has  just  turned  nineteen  but
         appears to have been detained since before his eighteenth birthday.
         He was living with his father as part of his father's household  up
         until the time that he was detained and was  in  contact  with  his
         mother. He had not become independent of his parents.  This  family
         life is nevertheless likely to end soon irrespective of whether  he
         is  allowed  to  remain  here  because  he  is  likely  to   become
         independent of his parents in the foreseeable future" [67];

    (iii)  The family's confidence that the Appellant would  no  re-offence
         was little more than a hope [73].

    (iv)   The Appellant  will  speak  the  Somali  language  and  will  be
         familiar with Somali culture from his parents [75].

    (v)    The circumstances prevailing in 2014 in Merka would not  justify
         a grant of humanitarian protection [78].

47    We do  not  preserve  any  findings  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
    proposed  removal  to  Somalia  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the Appellant; such findings cannot stand in light  of
    the errors of law found by this Tribunal on 4 March 2015.

48    We consider first whether the Appellant would be at any risk  of  harm
    upon return to Somalia.

49    Mr Adewoye appears  to  argue  at  paragraph  48  of  the  Appellant's
    skeleton argument that an element of the Country Guidance contained  in
    AMM which continues to apply is headnote (ii) of the Country  Guidance,
    ie:

         "The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not,  however,  pose  a  real
         risk of Article 3 harm in respect  of  any  person  in  that  city,
         regardless of circumstances. The humanitarian  crisis  in  southern
         and central Somalia has led to a declaration of famine in IDP camps
         in Mogadishu; but a returnee from the United Kingdom who is fit for
         work or has family connections may be able to avoid having to  live
         in such a camp. A returnee may, nevertheless, face a real  risk  of
         Article 3 harm, by reason of his or her vulnerability."

50    Although headnote (i) of MOJ does indicate that the  country  guidance
    issues addressed in that  determination  are  not  identical  to  those
    engaged with by the Tribunal in AMM, and that therefore, where  country
    guidance has been given by the Tribunal in AMM in respect of issues not
    addressed in MOJ, then the guidance provided by AMM shall  continue  to
    have effect, we find that the matters considered in AMM which were  not
    revisited in MOJ  are  matters  concerning  the  situation  in  Somalia
    outside Mogadishu. The comprehensive review of conditions in  Mogadishu
    set out in MOJ results  in  none  of  the  observations  in  AMM  about
    conditions there having any continuing application.

51    Further, we observe in any event that AMM gave an example  of  persons
    who might still be at risk of a breach of their rights under Article  3
    ECHR upon return  to  Mogadishu,  based  on  the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal at that time:

         "369     Conversely, a returnee could face real risk of a violation
         of Article 3, by reason of his or her vulnerability. For example, a
         woman with children returned without any family and without  family
         support in Mogadishu from those  already  there,  may  well  suffer
         treatment proscribed by Article  3,  regardless  of  any  financial
         assistance provided by the United  Kingdom  Government,  given  her
         increased susceptibility to opportunistic attack."

52    The Appellant clearly does not fit the example given.

53    Rather, we find the starting point in the assessment of  any  risk  of
    harm to the Appellant is the Country Guidance set out in MOJ.  Although
    the FtT considered the circumstances then prevailing in Merka,  we  are
    of the view that there is no reason to restrict  our  consideration  to
    that town. The Appellant's return will  take  place  to  Mogadishu.  If
    (which neither we nor the FtT found to be established) there  would  be
    any risk of harm to the Appellant in  Merka,  we  consider  whether  he
    could reside in Mogadishu. The headnote of MOJ appears as  an  Appendix
    to this decision.

54    Applying the guidance in MOJ,  we  find  that  the  Appellant,  as  an
    'ordinary civilian' (i.e. not associated with the security forces;  any
    aspect  of  government  or  official  administration  or  any  NGO   or
    international organisation) returning to Mogadishu after  a  period  of
    absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk of harm  such  as
    to require protection under Article 3 of the ECHR or Article  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive. In particular, he will not be at real risk
    simply on account of having lived in a European location for  a  period
    of time of being viewed with suspicion either by the authorities  as  a
    possible supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab  as  an  apostate  or
    someone whose Islamic integrity has been compromised  by  living  in  a
    Western country. There is no real prospect of a re-established presence
    of Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu. The present level  of  civilian  casualties
    arising from armed conflict does not amount to  a  sufficient  risk  to
    ordinary civilians such as to represent an Article 15(c) risk. We  find
    that there is no reason why the Appellant  would  not  within  a  short
    period of time be able to identify areas and  establishments  that  are
    clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets, such as  the  Bakara
    market or other areas described at para 387 of MOJ. There  is  no  real
    risk of forced recruitment to  Al  Shabaab  for  civilian  citizens  of
    Mogadishu, including for recent returnees  from  the  West.  (See  MOJ,
    headnote paras (ii)-(vi)).

55    The Appellant asserts that he has no nuclear family in Mogadishu  and,
    being from a minority clan, will have no clan support.   We  find  that
    there is no reasonable degree of likelihood  that  those  are  reliable
    propositions. His argument that he is from a  minority  clan  has  been
    rejected and, as found by the FtT, the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant as to the family's circumstances in  Somalia,  including  the
    alleged lack of family there, is  to  be  treated  with  'the  greatest
    circumspection'. The references from the Appellant's evidence which  we
    drew to Mr Adewoye's attention as to the Appellant being born  in,  and
    had last lived in Mogadishu also suggest that the Appellant has greater
    connections with that city than he is prepared to admit to. Even if the
    information contained in the ICD.0350 form dated March  2013  at  O3-19
    was completed by the Appellant's Social Worker, we note that the Social
    Worker Wendy Hargreaves asserts in her letter dated 18 March 2013 at O2
    that she also spoke with the Appellant's parents  when  completing  the
    form. Further, information indicating that the Appellant  was  born  in
    Mogadishu also appears in a VAF2 form dated 3 May 2008 at H1.

56    We find that we  are  entitled  to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant comes from a  majority  clan  and  will  therefore  be  in  a
    position to seek  assistance  from  clan  members  who  are  not  close
    relatives, who may potentially be  able  to  assist  the  Appellant  in
    providing a social support mechanism and assistance with  access  to  a
    livelihood (MOJ headnote (vii) and (viii)).

57    With reference to MOJ  headnote  (ix)  we  do  not  accept,  as  being
    established to a reasonable of likelihood, that on return to  Mogadishu
    after a period of absence, the Appellant has no nuclear family or close
    relatives in the city. Although  therefore  not  required  by  MOJ,  we
    nonetheless continue to perform  the  careful  assessment  of  all  the
    Appellant's circumstances as suggested at MOJ headnote (ix):

    (i)    The Appellant's circumstances before departing Somalia were that
         he lived in either Merka or Mogadishu (and we  have  indicated  our
         doubts above as to the Appellant's  evidence  about  his  place  of
         origin) and left Somalia in  2006  (Appellant's  witness  statement
         para 5), aged 10 or 11.

    (ii)   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 July 2006  and
         has now been outside of Somalia for  9  years.  His  Social  Worker
         noted having spoken to the Appellant's parents in March  2013  that
         the when the Appellant started to attend school in  Harrow  he  was
         bullied due to not being able to speak English. The FtT  held  that
         the Appellant will be able to speak  the  Somali  language  and  is
         familiar with Somali culture from his parents [75].

    (iii)  The Appellant has not established that he has no family or  clan
         associates to call upon in Mogadishu.

    (iv)   We accept that the Appellant  will  not  have  any  of  his  own
         financial resources to all upon. It is unlikely that the  Appellant
         would receive assistance through VARRP (considered at [423] of MOJ)
         on the grounds that, if this appeal  fails  and  the  Appellant  is
         deported, there will be a deportation order against him.

    (v)    The Appellant's prospects of securing a livelihood will  be,  in
         the light of our finding that the  Appellant  has  not  established
         that he is from a minority  clan  and  has  no  nuclear  family  in
         Mogadishu, much the same as many  others  returning  to  Mogadishu.
         Although the Appellant does not have any particular  qualifications
         or skills, he is young and  healthy,  and  the  Appellant  has  not
         shown, as per MOJ headnote (x) why he would not be able  to  access
         the economic opportunities that have been produced by the  economic
         boom, especially as there is evidence to the effect that  returnees
         are taking jobs at the expense of those who have not been away.

    (vi)   As  to  the  potential  availability  of  remittances  from  the
         Appellant's family in the United Kingdom, we note that, contrary to
         the evidence of the Appellant's father, the Appellant asserted that
         he obtained some financial assistance from his mother and sister as
         well as his father. By  whatever  means,  the  Appellant  has  been
         supported financially in the United Kingdom by his family for  some
         time, and there is no clear reason offered by the Appellant  as  to
         why this would not be able to continue if the  Appellant  departed.
         We do not over-state the amount of money that the Appellant may  be
         able to receive from his family in the UK - this is  likely  to  be
         modest, but we find  that  a  degree  of  financial  support  would
         continue to be available to the Appellant in Somalia.

    (vii)  The Appellant has been financially supported by  his  family  in
         the United Kingdom. However, the Appellant has engaged in  criminal
         activity in the  United  Kingdom  including  being  concerned  with
         possession of proscribed drugs with intent  to  supply.  This  past
         criminal conduct indicates that the Appellant is not a naive  young
         man with no street experience - see the  description  of  appellant
         SSM at [475] of MOJ by way of comparison.

    (viii) We have no indication of how the Appellant actually left Somalia
         and travelled to the United Kingdom.  In  those  circumstances,  we
         leave out of account the fact that the Appellant's  departure  from
         Somalia must have been funded by someone, at  some  point,  in  our
         assessment of the Appellant's likely circumstances on return.

58    The Appellant therefore fails to establish, as per MOJ, that he  is  a
    person with no clan or family support and would not be  in  receipt  of
    remittances from abroad and has no prospects of securing  a  livelihood
    on return. He does not face a real  risk  of  living  in  circumstances
    falling below that  which  is  acceptable  in  humanitarian  protection
    terms.  The corollary of that position, described  in  headnote  (xii),
    does not therefore arise.

59    The Appellant's removal to Somalia does not give rise to a  breach  of
    the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, or the Appellant's rights
    under Article 3 ECHR.

    The Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR

60    We approach this assessment following the guidance  in  Chege,  ie  to
    consider the following issues:

    i Is the appellant a foreign criminal as defined by s117D (2) (a),  (b)
         or (c).

    ii     If so, does  he  fall  within  paragraph  399  or  399A  of  the
         Immigration Rules

    iii    If not are there very compelling circumstances over  and  beyond
         those falling within 399 and 399A relied upon, such  identification
         to be informed by the seriousness of  the  criminality  and  taking
         into account the factors set out in s117B.

61    We find that the Appellant is a  foreign  criminal  as  defined  under
    S.117D NIAA 2002, on the grounds that the Appellant has been  convicted
    of an offences that have caused serious harm: robbery, theft, using  or
    threatening to use abusive or insulting words or behaviour with  intent
    to cause fear or provocation of violence (2 such convictions), handling
    stolen goods, battery (2 such convictions), affray, and possession with
    intent to supply a Class B controlled substance. We find that there  is
    no  requirement  to  identify  positive  evidence  that  a   particular
    individual has been caused serious harm  by  the  Appellant's  actions;
    rather, we find that we may take  judicial  notice  of  the  fact  that
    dealing in and facilitating the  consumption  of  proscribed  drugs  is
    seriously harmful to society at large, both in terms of the health  and
    welfare of drug users, and due to the criminality, such  as  theft  and
    violence, which is associated with the drugs trade. We also  find  that
    the Appellant is a persistent offender. As a result, we agree with  the
    Respondent that para 398(c) of the Rules applies to the Appellant.

62    However, neither para 399(a) or (b) apply to the Appellant, as he  has
    no children or partner.

63    Further, we find that para 399A does not apply to  the  Appellant,  on
    the grounds that (addressing the issues raised in 399A(a)-(c)):

    (a)    He has not been lawfully present in the UK for most of his  life
         - he has been present for 9 years of  his  20  years  (at  time  of
         determining this appeal). Even though he was granted ILR, less than
         half of one's life cannot be held to be most of one's life.

    (b)    The Appellant has not socially and culturally integrated in  the
         UK. Although criminal offences can be and are committed by  persons
         who have been born in, and spent the whole of their  lives  in  the
         UK, and whose only experience of culture and society is that within
         the UK, we find that social and  cultural  integration  within  the
         rules refers to social and cultural  integration  into  law-abiding
         society.  The  Appellant  has  failed  to  integrate  socially  and
         culturally in the UK. In any event, the Appellant fails to  satisfy
         399A(a) and (c).

    (c)    There would not be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's
         integration into Somalia; we refer to our retained finding that the
         Appellant will speak the Somali language and will be familiar  with
         Somali  culture  from  his  parents.  As   discussed   above,   any
         difficulties the Appellant has in obtaining employment will not  be
         such as to be likely to cause him to become destitute.

64    As para 399 and 399A do not apply, para 398 provides that "the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

65    Chege suggests that 'compelling' as an adjective has  the  meaning  of
    having a powerful and irresistible effect; convincing.  We also note at
    [43]-[44] of MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192:

         "43.     The word "exceptional" is often used to denote a departure
         from a general rule. The general rule in  the  present  context  is
         that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras 399 and  399A
         do not apply, very compelling reasons will be required to  outweigh
         the public interest in deportation. These  compelling  reasons  are
         the "exceptional circumstances".

         44.      We would,  therefore,  hold  that  the  new  rules  are  a
         complete  code  and  that  the  exceptional  circumstances  to   be
         considered in the balancing exercise involve the application  of  a
         proportionality test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence."

66    The reference to exceptional circumstances  has  since  28  July  2014
    been replaced with the expression "the public interest  in  deportation
    will  only  be  outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A".

67    The Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) appeared to equate the  two  terms
    at [43]-[44], as did the Upper Tribunal in Oladeji  (s.3(1)  BNA  1981)
    [2015] UKUT 326 (IAC) (21 May 2015):

         "24.     We consider that the new rule has  not  imposed  a  higher
         threshold but simply confirmed the approach of the Court of  Appeal
         in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  which  regarded  the  two
         expressions as synonymous."

68    We find that the  identification  of  'very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and  399A"  therefore
    requires a  proportionality  balancing  exercise  to  be  carried  out,
    through 'the lens of the rules' (AJ (Angola)), and Part 5A NIAA 2002.

69    We find that the deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
    interest and is  part  of  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control (s.117B(1) and 117C(1)).

70    The Appellant speaks English, but he gains no positive entitlement  to
    leave to remain because of that (AM  (s.117B)  [2015]  UKUT  260  IAC).
    Although, as Mr Adewoye asserted, the Appellant may not be  in  receipt
    of public finds, he is clearly not financially independent (s.117B(3)).



71    The Appellant has not been in the United Kingdom unlawfully. There  is
    therefore no requirement under s.117B(4) to treat any private life that
    he has developed  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  having  little  weight.
    However, AM provides that:

         "In some circumstances it may also  be  that  even  a  person  with
         indefinite  leave  to  remain,  or  a  person  who   has   obtained
         citizenship, enjoys a status that is  "precarious"  either  because
         that status is revocable by the Secretary of State as a  result  of
         their deception, or because of  their  criminal  conduct.  In  such
         circumstances the person will be well aware that he has  imperilled
         his status and cannot viably claim thereafter that  his  status  is
         other than precarious."

72    Notwithstanding the Appellant's enjoyment  of  ILR,  he  might,  as  a
    result of his criminality,  be  described  as  holding  an  immigration
    status which was 'precarious', with the result,  under  s.117B(5)  that
    any private life developed at a time when  his  status  was  precarious
    should be given little weight. However we do not find it  necessary  to
    rule on whether the Appellant's immigration status has been precarious,
    as the Appellant has advanced  very  little  if  any  evidence  of  his
    private life in the UK, aside from  his  connections  with  his  family
    members. There is therefore little evidence to attach weight to.

73    No issues arise under s.117B(6).

74    When examining the consideration at s.117C(2), that the  more  serious
    the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is the  public
    interest in deportation, we find that although the Appellant's offences
    are not of the most serious in nature, and his longest single period of
    imprisonment was 8 months, we find that his offences running up to  the
    end of 2012 were becoming  increasingly  serious,  and  that  his  many
    offences of failing to comply with community orders indicated  that  he
    was largely immune to the sanctions of the criminal  courts.  We  treat
    his offences as being of a serious nature and the  public  interest  in
    deportation as having significant weight.

75    Neither Exception 1 or 2, set out in s.117C(4) and  (5)  apply,  given
    our findings on para 399A at [63] above, as he has no child or partner.
    S.117C(3) therefore provides that it is a consideration, for us to take
    into  account,  that  the  public  interest  requires  the  Appellant's
    deportation.

76    S.117C(6) does not arise directly,  as  the  Appellant  has  not  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years.

77    We do not find that the apparent indication within s.117C(3) that  the
    Appellant's non-satisfaction of Exception 1 or 2  within  s.117C(4)  or
    (5) means that  it  is,  without  more,  proportionate  to  deport  the
    Appellant. We find that that is so for the following reasons:

    (i)    If it were otherwise, then persons sentenced to  periods  of  at
         least 4 years imprisonment, whose removal still,  under  s.117C(6),
         requires a consideration  of  whether  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those in Exceptions 1 and 2, would  be
         provided greater  statutory  protection  than  those  with  shorter
         sentences.

    (ii)   Paragraph 398 of the Rules still requires,  for  the  Appellant,
         consideration  of   whether   there   are   any   very   compelling
         circumstances over and above paras 399 and 399A.

    (iii)  Part 13 is a complete code which must involve a  proportionality
         balancing exercise which takes  all  material  considerations  into
         account.

78    We come to the following conclusions.

79    The  Appellant's  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  limited.
    Although his parents were  described  in  2014  by  the  FtT  as  being
    "committed to the Appellant and  that  they  have  a  genuine  parental
    relationship with him..." [66] , it was also observed that "This family
    life is nevertheless likely to end soon irrespective of whether  he  is
    allowed to remain there because he is likely to become  independent  of
    his parents in the foreseeable future" [67]. The evidence that we heard
    from the Appellant's father as to his  current  relationship  with  the
    Appellant paints a picture of a young man merely sharing the same  roof
    with his father. The Appellant has not told  his  father  what  he  was
    arrested for in May 2015 or the conditions of his bail. He  comes  home
    at night, sleeps, and then goes out for most of the day,  with  friends
    whom the Appellant's father does not know, and  comes  home  late;  the
    father does not know what the Appellant  has  been  doing.  The  father
    candidly admitted that he did not know whether the Appellant was  still
    smoking cannabis.

80    We did not hear from the Appellant's mother or sister.  They  live  in
    Wembley. The hearing took place in central London. The reasons given by
    the  Appellant's  father  for  their  non-attendance   (sickness,   and
    pregnancy  resulting  in  feeling   unwell,   respectively)   are   not
    compelling. We find that their  non-attendance  is  indicative  of  the
    importance that they attach to the present proceedings and to the level
    of importance that they attach to their family ties to  the  Appellant,
    that is to say, not very much.

81    Bearing in mind that the Appellant was still only 19 at  the  time  of
    the hearing, we give him the  benefit  of  the  doubt  as  regards  the
    existence of family life between himself and his other  family  members
    in the United Kingdom, but we find that  family  life,  as  defined  by
    Article 8 ECHR, continues to exist  between  them  by  only  a  slender
    margin.

82     We  take  into  account  the  Appellant's  likely  future   offending
    behaviour. We do not have any pre-sentence or OASys reports  before  us
    and therefore there is no professional assessment of his propensity  to
    re-offend. However,  we  have  regard  to  the  Appellant's  persistent
    offending over a  period  when  aged  14-17.  We  understand  from  the
    Appellant's evidence that a bag of cannabis was  found  by  the  police
    near to a place where the Appellant and two friends were standing. None
    of them admitted to owning the bag of drugs. We do not find, even on  a
    balance of probabilities, that  the  Appellant  was  in  possession  of
    cannabis when arrested in May this year. There is no  evidence  in  the
    bundle produced for this hearing of the completion of victim  awareness
    courses, or other rehabilitative training. We have no  confidence  that
    the Appellant will avoid further convictions.

83     Mr  Adewoye  has  made  reference  to  the  case  of  Maslov  in  his
    submissions.  We recall that in Akpinar, R (On the  Application  Of)  v
    Upper Tribunal (IAC) [2014] EWCA Civ 937, relied on by  the  Respondent
    in  submissions  before  the  FtT,  Sir  Stanley  Burnton,  (with  whom
    MacFarlane LJ and Maurice Kay LJ agreed) held as follows:

         "43.     My conclusion is that there is not a "clear  and  constant
         jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg   court"   (see   R   (Alconbury
         Developments  Ltd)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Environment,
         Transport and  the  Regions  [2001]  UKHL  23,  [2003]  2  AC  295,
         paragraph 26, and R v. Special Adjudicator ex  parte  Ullah  [2004]
         UKHL 26 [2004] 2 AC 323 at paragraph 20) requiring  this  Court  to
         treat "very serious reasons", if the  phrase  means  "very  serious
         offences", as a precondition of deportation of  someone  who  is  a
         "settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the  major  part  of
         his or her childhood and youth" in this country."

84    Rather, [75] of the judgment in Maslov could  be  explained  thus,  in
    the view of the Court of Appeal at [32]:

         "I do not think that the Court can  have  intended  or  did  intend
         otherwise. What was said in paragraph 75 must be read  as  relating
         to the facts of the case before it, among other  factors  that  the
         offending in question was, as subsequently stated in Onur, no  more
         than acts of juvenile delinquency."

85    We therefore take into account, as an important factor, the fact  that
    the  Appellant's  offences  were  committed  when  he  was   a   minor,
    necessarily at a time before a person has become fully mature. However,
    save for his remaining free from further conviction since 29 May  2013,
    we see no real evidence that the Appellant has  effected  any  material
    change in his life or that he  is  engaging  in  any  positive  way  in
    society.

86    We are of the view  that  giving  appropriate  weight  to  the  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals,  and  weighing  all  that  can
    properly be weighed in the balance in  favour  of  the  Appellant,  and
    having regard to his private and family life in the United Kingdom, the
    Appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  there  are   very   compelling
    circumstances outweighing the public interest in deportation. There  is
    nothing  very  powerful,  irresistible  or   convincing   which   would
    demonstrate that the Appellant's removal is disproportionate under Part
    13 of the Rules, which includes a proportionality balancing exercise.

87    In light  of  the  fact  that  we  have  found  that  the  Appellant's
    deportation would not be contrary to the  UK's  obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention, we finally  consider
    whether there are any exceptional circumstances, as contemplated  under
    para 397 of the rules, as to why the public interest in deportation may
    be outweighed. We  can  find  no  additional  factors  that  there  are
    relevant to that assessment; there  are  no  exceptional  circumstances
    under which we would allow this appeal.

88    The Tribunal having previously found  that  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    decision of 15 August 2014 involved the making of an error of law,  and
    having set that decision aside, we make the following decision.




    Decision

89    We re-make the decision, dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision of 4 July 2013 to make  a  deportation  order
    against the Appellant. The appeal is dismissed on asylum, human  rights
    and humanitarian grounds.


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

9 November 2015

Appendix 1: Error of law decision

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01672/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|On 30 January 2015                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MOHAMMED HASSAN BARRE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adewoye, Solicitor


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen Somalia born on 6 August 1995.   On  8
    July 2013 the respondent made a decision to make  a  deportation  order
    against the appellant under Section  3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971, it being considered that the appellant's deportation is conducive
    to the public good.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge N J Bennett on 23 July  2014,  whereby  he
    allowed the appeal.  Permission to appeal against his  decision  having
    been granted, the matter now comes before me.

 4. The further background to the appeal, as set out in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal, is that the appellant arrived in the  UK  in  July
    2006 with his three siblings, having been granted indefinite  leave  to
    enter to join his father. Judge  Bennett's  determination  goes  on  to
    record that since 1 December 2009 the appellant has been  convicted  of
    25 criminal offences. From the respondent's decision letter it  can  be
    seen that his offending has including robbery, public  order  offences,
    possession of class B drugs and failure to comply  with  various  court
    orders.

    Submissions

 5. Mr Jarvis referred to the fact that a number of adverse  findings  were
    made in relation to the appellant and his  witnesses,  for  example  in
    terms of his mother's claim that the appellant's father had been killed
    in Somalia, whereas his father was in fact a witness in the proceedings
    before the Tribunal.  In addition, the First-tier Judge had noted  that
    the appellant's mother's claim to come from the  minority  Ashraf  clan
    had been rejected by an Adjudicator in the course of her appeal.  Those
    matters, it was submitted, were relevant  to  the  application  of  the
    country guidance decision of AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian
    crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC).

 6. At [66] of the determination Judge Bennett had stated  that  he  viewed
    the evidence of the witnesses about  their  circumstances  in  Somalia,
    including their lack of family there, with the greatest circumspection,
    and he had considerable reservations about the evidence of their belief
    that the appellant had changed for the better.

 7. He concluded at [75] that the appellant speaks the language of  Somalia
    and would be familiar with Somali culture from  his  parents.   It  was
    submitted that the conclusion  at  [79]  that  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances, particularly having regard to the  situation  in  Merka,
    was a wrong approach.  The judge had in effect  undertaken  an  Article
    15(c) analysis by the back door.

 8. In addition, it was submitted that Judge Bennett  had  failed  to  take
    into account the amendments to the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  brought  about  by  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  Although the judge heard the appeal on  23  July
    2014, the appeal was not determined until 12 August 2014  and  by  then
    the amendments to the 2002 Act had come into force.   Furthermore,  the
    Immigration Rules were amended such that there would need to have  been
    "very compelling circumstances"  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A  before  the  appeal  could  be  allowed.   The
    amendments  to  the  Immigration  Rules  applied  from  the   date   of
    implementation, no matter when the immigration decision was made  in  a
    deportation case.

 9. In any event, the judge had to apply the country guidance  decision  of
    AMM and in respect of which the  determination  betrays  a  fundamental
    misunderstanding in terms of his having said that  that  decision  does
    not say anything about other parts of the country.   AMM  dealt  mostly
    with Mogadishu because that was the only point of return.   It  decided
    that a return to Mogadishu would not involve a  breach  of  a  person's
    Article 3 rights.  It said that there was a potential for Article 15(c)
    harm for most people but not if a person had connections.  In this case
    there were serious issues with the appellant's  credibility.   That  in
    turn reflects on the issue of what connections the appellant  may  have
    in Somalia.

10. There was no analysis in the determination of what would happen if  the
    appellant was returned to Mogadishu, rather than Merka.  There  was  no
    assessment of the impact of the lies that the family had told in  other
    respects. Furthermore,  there  was  no  consideration  of  whether  the
    appellant could live in Mogadishu.

11. Mr Adewoye rejected the suggestion that Judge Bennett should have taken
    into account the amendments to  the  2002  Act  brought  about  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, and the  amendments  to  the  Immigration  Rules,
    given that they were not in force at the time of  the  actual  hearing.
    He relied on the decision in YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.  It was submitted that only if  I
    were to find an error of law in the assessment of  Article  8  would  I
    then have to apply what is now the current law under  Section  117C  of
    the 2002 Act.

12. Furthermore, it was submitted that even if Section 117C had applied  to
    the circumstances of the appellant's appeal, he would have the  benefit
    of the exceptions under Sections 117C(4)(b) and (c), that is  in  terms
    of social and cultural integration  in  the  UK  and  very  significant
    obstacles to integration into Somalia.  The judge had accepted that the
    appellant has social and family ties to the  UK  and  that  there  were
    significant difficulties for life for him in Somalia if  deported.   He
    was aware of the need to establish exceptional circumstances  in  terms
    of undue hardship as indicated in the various authorities.

13. I was referred to various paragraphs of  the  Country  Information  and
    Guidance Report by the Home Office in relation to Somalia, the date  of
    which appears to be 27 February 2014 (page 12).  Reference was made  to
    the skeleton argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

    My assessment

14. It is submitted on behalf of the respondent that the  First-tier  Judge
    should have taken into account the coming into force of Section  19  of
    the Immigration Act 2014 which introduces amendments to  the  2002  Act
    concerning deportation of foreign criminals.  It is also submitted that
    the First-tier Judge ought also to  have  taken  into  account  in  his
    decision the amendments to the Immigration Rules which took effect from
    28 July 2014.  Whilst it is accepted that neither the statutory changes
    nor the changes to the Immigration Rules were in force at the  time  of
    the hearing before the First-tier Judge (23 July 2014), by the time  of
    promulgation on 12 August 2014, all those  provisions  were  in  force.
    Thus,  the  judge's  decision  was  required  to  apply  the   relevant
    provisions of the amended 2002 Act and  associated  amendments  to  the
    Immigration Rules.

15. On behalf of the appellant it is submitted that given that the  changes
    were not in force at the  time  of  the  hearing,  the  judge  was  not
    required to, and indeed ought not to have, taken any of  those  changes
    into account.  It was  submitted  that  the  decision  in  YM  (Uganda)
    supported the appellant's position on this issue.   Mr  Jarvis  on  the
    other hand, contended that in fact YM (Uganda) established the opposite
    of what was contended for on behalf of the appellant.

16. Mr Adewoye relied on [12] of YM (Uganda).   In  that  paragraph  it  is
    noted that the relevant parts of the Immigration Act 2014, amending the
    2002 Act, came into force on 28 July  2014,  that  is  after  the  oral
    argument had taken place in the appeal before the Court of  Appeal  and
    whilst the judgment  was  in  preparation.   However,  that  particular
    paragraph says nothing about whether the court was obliged to take  the
    new provisions into account in its judgment.   At  [25]  and  [26]  the
    arguments on behalf of the parties before the court  are  set  out,  in
    terms of whether the Upper Tribunal had been required in that  case  to
    make its decision in terms of the law  as  it  was  before  it,  or  as
    subsequently  enacted.   The  Secretary  of  State  agreed   with   the
    proposition that the Court of Appeal had to consider the law as it  was
    when the Upper Tribunal "made its  decision"  and  the  court  was  not
    therefore required to consider the new provisions in the 2002 Act  when
    deciding whether there had been an error of law in the decision of  the
    Upper Tribunal.  At [36] the Court of Appeal concluded  that  its  task
    was to consider the law  as  it  applied  at  the  time  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision and not to consider the law as it had  subsequently
    changed.  Thus, the Court decided that the amendments to the  2002  Act
    and to the Immigration Rules were irrelevant to the  task  of  deciding
    whether the Upper Tribunal had made an error of law.

17. Although the Court of Appeal was not concerned  with  the  question  of
    whether the Upper Tribunal should have taken into  account  changes  in
    the law post-hearing but prior to promulgation,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    does use the word "the decision", rather than hearing, as in  the  date
    of the decision by the Upper Tribunal rather than the date of  hearing.
    In any event, it does seem to me to  be  an  untenable  proposition  to
    suggest that if statutory changes take  effect  on  a  date  after  the
    hearing but prior to promulgation, a judge  is  not  required  to  take
    those changes into account.  Mr Adewoye in  effect  suggested  that  it
    would have been unfair for the judge to have taken into  account  those
    changes to the legal framework post-hearing.  However,  it  would  have
    been open to the judge to have  recalled  the  parties  for  a  further
    hearing or to have invited written submissions on  the  effect  of  the
    legislative changes.  Mr Adewoye suggested that there had  to  be  some
    mandate in the Procedure Rules for the  judge  to  have  taken  such  a
    course.  Even if there is any force in that proposition, which I do not
    believe that there is, it is easily  answered  with  reference  to  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  as  then  in
    force.  The judge could have reconvened the hearing or invited  further
    submissions with reference,  if  necessary,  to  rule  43  (conduct  of
    appeals and applications), and rule 45 (directions).

18. I am satisfied that it was an error of law for Judge  Bennett  to  have
    determined the appeal without reference to the changes in the 2002  Act
    as brought about by the Immigration Act 2014, and the  changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  So far as the Immigration Rules are concerned,  the
    position is not so straightforward but after analysis, I have  come  to
    the view that he was similarly required to take them into account.

19. The changes to the Immigration Rules took effect on 28 July 2014 so far
    as concerns, amongst other  matters,  Article  8  claims  from  foreign
    criminals.  These relate to  paragraphs  A279,  398,  399  and  399A-C.
    Although not canvassed in argument before me, I have considered whether
    those changes, taking effect on 28 July 2014, apply to decisions  taken
    by the Secretary of State before that date.  In this case, the decision
    to make a deportation order was made on 8 July 2013.  The  changes  are
    brought about by HC 532, and  as  concerns  foreign  criminals  are  in
    paragraphs  13-30   of   the   Statement   of   Changes.    Under   the
    "Implementation" section it states as follows:

         "The change set out in paragraph 13 of this statement takes  effect
         on 28 July 2014.

         The changes set out in paragraphs 14 to 30 of this  statement  take
         effect on 28 July 2014 and apply to all ECHR Article 8 claims  from
         foreign criminals which are decided on or after that date."

20. Looking at other paragraphs in the Implementation section, it could  be
    said that the changes only relate to decisions made by the Secretary of
    State, rather than courts or Tribunals because courts or  Tribunals  do
    not, in one sense, decide claims but appeals, and other  provisions  in
    the Implementation section consider applications made  before  28  July
    2014  but  not  decided  by  that  date.   Similarly,   some   of   the
    implementation  provisions  relate  to  applications  made  before  the
    amendments to the rules on other dates came into force.

21. However, I am satisfied that the changes to the  Immigration  Rules  as
    they apply to foreign criminals did come into force  on  28  July  2014
    whenever the decision was made by the Secretary of State.  I take  this
    view for three reasons.  Firstly, A362 as amended states that:

         "Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation...  the
         claim under Article 8 will only succeed where the  requirements  of
         these rules as at 28 July 2014 are  met,  regardless  of  when  the
         notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the  deportation  order,  as
         appropriate  was served." (my emphasis).

22. Secondly, the explanatory memorandum to HC 532 at 3.4 and  3.5  refers,
    in essence,  to the need to coincide  and  align  the  changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules with the corresponding changes to the 2002 Act so far
    as concerns foreign criminals.

23. Thirdly, the court in YM (Uganda), at [39] said that:

         "In the absence of any statement to the contrary, the most  natural
         reading of the Rules is that they apply to decisions taken  by  the
         SSHD until such time as she promulgates new rules, after which  she
         will decide according to  the  new  rules.   The  same  applies  to
         decisions by Tribunals and the courts...".

24. Having concluded that the First-tier Judge erred in law in his  failure
    to apply the amendments  to  the  2002  Act  and  the  changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules, the next question to be decided is whether the error
    of law is such as to require the decision to be set aside.  Mr  Adewoye
    submitted that in any event, even with reference to the new  rules  and
    the new statutory regime, the appellant's appeal would have  succeeded.
    However, under Section 117C(4)(a) the appellant would have had to  have
    established that he had been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
    his life.  He arrived when he was aged 10, going on 11, and at the date
    of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal he was aged 18.   At  the
    date the decision was promulgated he was aged 19.  On  either  view  he
    had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his  life.   Even
    assuming under Section 117C(4)(b) it could be said that he was socially
    and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom by reason of the length
    of time that he had been here, he would nevertheless have to  establish
    that there would be "very significant  obstacles"  to  his  integration
    into Somalia under sub-paragraph (4)(c).  I do  not  read  the  judge's
    conclusions as meaning that on the facts  that  particular  test  would
    have been met.

25. A further issue arises in terms of [71] of the determination. There  it
    is stated that the appellant does not face automatic deportation  under
    the UK Borders Act 2007 "which means that Parliament has not decided by
    statute that the public interest requires his  deportation".   However,
    that is precisely what Section 117C(1) of the 2002 Act does  say:  "The
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest."

26. Similarly, the same can be found in paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration
    Rules, namely that the deportation of a person from the UK is conducive
    to the public good "and in the public interest" because in the view  of
    the Secretary of State their offending has caused serious harm or  they
    are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.
     The  Secretary  of  State  did  conclude  that  the  appellant  was  a
    persistent offender.  The provisions of the Immigration  Rules  in  398
    reflect those in the 2014 Act. I do not consider that it could be  said
    that the outcome of the appeal would have been the same notwithstanding
    the errors of law.

27. These are sufficient reasons to conclude that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside.  However, I am also  satisfied  that
    there is merit in what is said on behalf of the respondent in terms  of
    the judge's consideration of the then country guidance in  AMM.   Judge
    Bennett concluded that the appellant's return to Merka,  having  regard
    to the situation there, the appellant's age and lack of  experience  in
    living there as an adult, outweighs the public interest in deportation.
     As Mr Jarvis submitted however, that conclusion  fails  to  take  into
    account that the appellant would be returned in the first  instance  to
    Mogadishu.  It is sufficient to refer to the  headnote  of  AMM,  which
    contains the guidance reflected  in  the  body  of  the  decision.   In
    essence, AMM concluded that with respect to Mogadishu there remained in
    general a real risk of Article 15(c) harm for  the  majority  of  those
    returning there after a significant period of  time  abroad.   However,
    that risk did not arise in the case of a person connected with powerful
    actors or belonging to a  category  of  middle  class  or  professional
    persons who can live to a reasonable standard  in  circumstances  where
    the Article 15(c) risk does not apply. The Tribunal  did  say  however,
    that the significance of that category, was not to be overstated and is
    not automatically to be assumed to exist merely because  a  person  has
    told lies.

28. Pausing there, there is no assessment by the First-tier  Judge  of  the
    significance of the lies that had been told by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in connection with this appeal, in terms of events in Somalia
    and the family's clan status.  In addition, it is to be remembered that
    at [66] Judge  Bennett  said  that  he  viewed  the  remainder  of  the
    witnesses' evidence about their  circumstances  in  Somalia,  including
    their lack of family there, with the  greatest  circumspection  because
    they had shown themselves to be untruthful in the core aspect of  their
    claim and willing to say whatever they think will further their  cause.
    Those are mattes that needed to be considered in  the  context  of  the
    country guidance in AMM so far as it relates to Mogadishu.

29. AMM also concluded that the armed conflict in Mogadishu  at  that  time
    did not pose a real risk of Article 3 harm in respect of any person  in
    that city, regardless of circumstances.  It did conclude  that  such  a
    person may face a real risk of Article 3 harm by reason of his  or  her
    vulnerability.  In this connection the  appellant's  age  and  lack  of
    experience of Somalia would  have  been  significant.   However,  those
    factors were not considered with  reference  to  Mogadishu  itself,  as
    opposed to Merka.

30. Thus, in terms of the judge's assessment of the then country  guidance,
    I am also satisfied that he erred in law.  That error of law is also in
    its own right such as to require the decision to be set aside.

31. It is not appropriate for this appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the decision will be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.  It is
    not anticipated that there will be the need for any further evidence to
    be given, but I do consider that a  further  hearing  is  necessary  to
    allow the parties to make submissions in terms of the re-making.

32. The findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal, except in so  far
    as any of those findings are infected by  the  error  of  law,  are  to
    stand.

                                 DIRECTIONS

    1.     At the next hearing the parties must be in a  position  to  make
         submissions as to what findings of fact are to be preserved, and in
         relation to the application of the decision in MOJ & Ors (Return to
         Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek    4/03/15
Appendix 2:

MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) (Rev  1)  (CG)  [2014]  UKUT  442  (IAC)  (3
October 2014)

Headnote:

"LEGAL GUIDANCE

(i)   The operation of the Upper Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber
      Guidance Note no.  2  of  2011,  "Reporting  Decisions  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber"  and,  particularly,  [11]
      thereof, does  not  render  the  process  of  composition  of  country
      guidance decisions procedurally unfair.

(ii)  As a  general  principle,  where  attendance  of  an  appellant  is  a
      prerequisite to the vindication  of  the  person's  right  to  a  fair
      hearing, the appellant must be present.

COUNTRY GUIDANCE

(i)   The country guidance issues addressed in this  determination  are  not
      identical to those engaged with by the  Tribunal  in  AMM  and  others
      (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT
      445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance has  been  given  by  the
      Tribunal  in  AMM  in  respect  of  issues  not  addressed   in   this
      determination then the guidance provided by AMM shall continue to have
      effect.

(ii)   Generally,  a  person  who  is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.   not
      associated with the security  forces;  any  aspect  of  government  or
      official administration or any NGO or international  organisation)  on
      returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence  will  face  no  real
      risk of persecution or risk of harm  such  as  to  require  protection
      under Article 3 of the ECHR or  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
      Directive. In particular, he will  not  be  at  real  risk  simply  on
      account of having lived in a European location for a period of time of
      being viewed with suspicion either by the authorities  as  a  possible
      supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab as  an  apostate  or  someone
      whose Islamic integrity has been compromised by living  in  a  Western
      country.

(iii) There has been durable  change  in  the  sense  that  the  Al  Shabaab
      withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is no real prospect of
      a re-established presence within the city. That was not  the  case  at
      the time of the country guidance given by the Tribunal in AMM.

(iv)  The level of civilian casualties,  excluding  non-military  casualties
      that clearly fall within Al Shabaab target groups such as politicians,
      police officers, government officials and those associated  with  NGOs
      and international organisations, cannot be  precisely  established  by
      the statistical evidence which is incomplete and unreliable.  However,
      it is established by the evidence considered as a whole that there has
      been a reduction in the  level  of  civilian  casualties  since  2011,
      largely due to the cessation of  confrontational  warfare  within  the
      city and Al Shabaab's resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on  carefully
      selected targets.  The present level of casualties does not amount  to
      a sufficient risk to  ordinary  civilians  such  as  to  represent  an
      Article 15(c) risk.

(v)   It is open to an ordinary  citizen  of  Mogadishu  to  reduce  further
      still his personal exposure to the  risk  of  "collateral  damage"  in
      being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was not targeted  at  him
      by avoiding areas and establishments that are clearly identifiable  as
      likely Al Shabaab targets, and it is not unreasonable for  him  to  do
      so.

(vi)  There is no  real  risk  of  forced  recruitment  to  Al  Shabaab  for
      civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for  recent  returnees  from
      the West.

(vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence  will  look
      to his nuclear  family,  if  he  has  one  living  in  the  city,  for
      assistance in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing  a  livelihood.
      Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan members who
      are not close relatives, such help is only likely  to  be  forthcoming
      for majority clan members, as minority clans may have little to offer.

(viii)      The significance of clan membership in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
      Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms  and  assist
      with access to livelihoods, performing less of a  protection  function
      than previously. There are no clan  militias  in  Mogadishu,  no  clan
      violence,  and  no  clan  based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
      minority clan members.

(ix)  If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu  after  a
      period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the city
      to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will need to
      be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  of   the   circumstances.   These
      considerations will include, but are not limited to:

           circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

           length of absence from Mogadishu;

           family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

           access to financial resources;

           prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that  be  employment
           or self employment;

           availability of remittances from abroad;

           means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;

           why his ability to fund  the  journey  to  the  West  no  longer
           enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.

(x)   Put another way, it will be for the person facing  return  to  explain
      why he would not be able to access  the  economic  opportunities  that
      have been produced by  the  economic  boom,  especially  as  there  is
      evidence to the effect that returnees are taking jobs at  the  expense
      of those who have never been away.

(xi)  It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family  support  who
      will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who have no real
      prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return  who  will  face
      the prospect of living in circumstances falling below  that  which  is
      acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

(xii) The evidence indicates  clearly  that  it  is  not  simply  those  who
      originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to live in  the
      city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing a real
      risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for  a
      person of a minority clan  with no former links to the city, no access
      to funds and no other form  of  clan,  family  or  social  support  is
      unlikely to be realistic as, in the absence of means  to  establish  a
      home and some form of ongoing financial support there will be  a  real
      risk of having no alternative but to live in  makeshift  accommodation
      within an IDP camp where there is a real possibility of having to live
      in conditions that will fall below acceptable humanitarian standards."
