
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01462/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 February 2015 & 25 March 2015  |On 22 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     lml
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Peer & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 24  October  1967.   She
    arrived in the UK in 2000 as a visitor.  In due course, on  19  January
    2010, she was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  with  her  three
    children.

 2. On 15 July 2013 a decision was made to deport the appellant  under  the
    automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.  This  was
    a result of her conviction on 19 March  2012  in  the  Crown  Court  at
    Wolverhampton for an  offence  of  unlawful  wounding,  for  which  she
    received a sentence of 30 months' imprisonment.

 3. Her appeal against the respondent's decision came before a Panel of the
    First-tier Tribunal on 4 April 2014, the Panel consisting of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P. J. Clarke and Mr J. O. De Barros, a non-legal member,
    whereby the appeal was allowed.

 4. Permission to appeal against that decision having  been  granted  by  a
    judge of the Upper Tribunal, the  appeal  came  before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Hanson on  28  July  2014.   He  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law and set aside its decision, for the  decision
    to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.  I set out Judge Hanson's decision
    as follows:

                    "ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND DIRECTIONS

         1.   This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  a
             determination of a panel of the First-tier  Tribunal  composed
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge P J Clarke and Dr J O  De  Barros
             (hereinafter  referred  to  as   'the   Panel')   who   in   a
             determination promulgated on 18th  April  2014  allowed  LML's
             appeal against an order for her deportation  from  the  United
             Kingdom.

         2.   LML was born in  1967  and  is  a  single  female  citizen  of
             Jamaica. On 13th July 2013 an automatic deportation order  was
             made following a conviction for unlawful  wounding  for  which
             LML was sentenced to a period of 30 months imprisonment.

         3.   Having considered the evidence  made  available  to  them  the
             Panel  set  out  their  findings  from  paragraph  11  of  the
             determination which can be summarised as follows:

             i.   That LML and her daughter were credible  witnesses  about
                  their relationship and the relationship  between  LML  and
                  her daughter B.

             ii.  That LML is B's  primary  carer  [11  (i)].  LML's  older
                  daughter C    confirmed in a witness  statement  that  she
                  could not care for B.

             iii. Documentary evidence does not suggest that B has any sort
                  of   relationship with her father [11 (ii)].

             iv.  A letter from B indicates a close relationship  with  her
                  mother and that she and her sisters visited  their  mother
                  fortnightly in prison and that her mother  telephoned  her
                  on a daily basis [11 (iii)].

             v.   LML has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
                  with B, a child under 18 in the UK and a  British  citizen
                  [14].

             vi.  It would not be reasonable for B to leave the UK. She was
                  born here, she is a British citizen, her sisters and niece
                  is in the UK. The school report  indicates  she  is  doing
                  well. There is no indication she  has  family  in  Jamaica
                  although as a result of  inconsistencies  in  the  witness
                  statements the panel were not sure about that fact [15].

             vii.     There is no family member in the UK able to care  for
                  B in the UK. She has no contact with her father attendance
                  at school suffered when    her  sister  looked  after  her
                  although there is little evidence her schoolwork suffered.
                  C is not be able to care for B. C is pregnant and will  be
                  moving in with her boyfriend although such  a  finding  of
                  inability is made with an element of  doubt.  It  was  not
                  suggested another daughter P was able to care for B [16].

             viii.    Requirements of 399 (a) (i) and (ii) (a) and  (b)  of
                  the Immigration Rules are met [17].  In light of this  the
                  Secretary of State did not consider  B's  rights  and  the
                  general principles of European law or Article 8 ECHR.

         4.   The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  asserting
             that the Panel made a material misdirection in law in relation
             to their application of paragraph 399 (a). The grounds  allege
             the Panel's findings are ambiguous  and  in  relation  to  the
             other daughter P, inadequate. P was not excluded from the role
             as a potential carer for B solely  because  the  Secretary  of
             State did not advance her as a potential carer.

         5.   The grounds also asserts that the Panel failed to  acknowledge
             that  cases  involving  criminality   differed   from   merely
             administrative removal cases and that the  best  interests  of
             the child, whilst a weighty fact, need to be  weighed  against
             the public interest in respect of reasonableness. There was  a
             viable alternative to B leaving the United Kingdom  which  was
             to remain with either  of  her  sisters  although  should  her
             mother wish to remain her primary carer it will be  reasonable
             to expect B to leave the United Kingdom with  her  mother  who
             could assist her in readjusting to life in  Jamaica.   It  was
             said in a supplementary decision letter that it will  be  open
             to B to return to the UK at  an  independent  age  if  she  so
             wished.

         6.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Dr
             Kekic on the basis it is arguable that the Panel, in what is a
             brief determination, did not consider all the factors and that
             the findings under paragraph 399 are  flawed  and  that  where
             there is serious criminality, as here, the Panel  should  have
             appreciated that the presence of the  child  is  not  a  trump
             card. Permission was granted on all grounds.

         Error of law


         7.   LML finds herself the subject of  a  deportation  order  as  a
             result of her criminality. His Honour Judge Webb in sentencing
             her on 17 April 2012 noted  the  guilty  plea,  the  fact  LML
             carried a knife to peel fruit, and that she did not intend  to
             cause serious injury although it was  noted  that  the  damage
             caused to the victim by LML undoubtedly involved greater harm.
              The injury to the victim's face was a serious  one  which  is
             permanent physically and probably permanently  psychologically
             affected her.  The Judge stated  the  assault  was  sustained,
             that there were number of  blows  with  a  knife,  it  was  an
             offence of great harm involving the  use  of  a  weapon.   LML
             deliberately caused more  harm  than  was  necessary  for  the
             commission of the offence leading to the conclusion it was  an
             offence of higher culpability within Category 1 for  malicious
             wounding. A further aggravating factor was the location of the
             offence  in  broad  daylight  in  West  Bromwich.   The  Judge
             suspected it was a deliberate attack by LML to mark  the  face
             of someone she thought was a rival for  the  attentions  of  a
             man. It was an isolated incident with no previous  convictions
             although the Judge noted "people who use knives and then cause
             lifelong injury physically and  psychologically  to  a  victim
             would lose their liberty, whether or  not  they  are  of  good
             character.  In my judgement, you could have faced a Section 18
             wounding charge. This was a very serious and nasty offence and
             in all the circumstances it comes at the top of  the  category
             range of 1 to 3 years, in my judgment."

         8.   The basis of the opposition  to  deportation  order  was  that
             deportation would breach LML's rights under  Article  8  ECHR.
             The  Panel  correctly  identified  that  there  are   relevant
             Immigration Rules that they were required to consider and that
             as a result of the  period  of  offending  paragraph  398  was
             applicable which states:

             398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
             Rights Convention, and

                  (a)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to the public good because they  have  been
                      convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have  been
                      sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  least  4
                      years;

                  (b)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to the public good because they  have  been
                      convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have  been
                      sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  4
                      years but at least 12 months; or

                  (c)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to the public good because, in the view  of
                      the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused
                      serious harm or they are a  persistent  offender  who
                      shows  a  particular  disregard  for  the  law,   the
                      Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                      consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
                      if it does  not,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
                      circumstances that the public interest in deportation
                      will be outweighed by other factors.

             399. This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
                  applies if -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a child under the age of  18  years
                      who is in the UK, and

                      (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                      (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                           at least the 7 years  immediately  preceding  the
                           date of the immigration decision; and  in  either
                           case

                           (a)  it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
                               child to leave the UK; and

                           (b)  there is no other family member who is  able
                               to care for the child in the UK; or ........

         9.   In relation to a deportation decision it  has  been  held  the
             Rules are a complete code.

         10.  Mr Smart relied upon four submissions which are:

             a.   The panel's  findings  in  respect  of  (a)  and  (b)  of
                  paragraph 339(a) are fundamentally flawed as circumstances
                  relied upon at paragraph 15 of the  determination  do  not
                  established that it would be unreasonable. The Panel  rely
                  upon B's citizenship, family members in the  UK,  and  the
                  fact that she would not be facing removal were it not  for
                  the deportation proceedings brought against her mother.

             b.   The Panels conclusions are misguided as it is open to LML
                  to entrust her daughter B to her other children. Whilst it
                  was found that one sister C would be unable to look  after
                  B the reasoning provided by LML does not make it clear why
                  this should be so. The Panel clearly  had  an  element  of
                  doubt and their findings in respect of P are inadequate as
                  it was open to the Panel to consider whether  P  would  be
                  able to assume the role of carer  to  B  rather  than  the
                  conclusion that because the Secretary  of  State  did  not
                  advance her as a potential carer this  excluded  her  from
                  the role.

             c.   The Panel's findings that were it not for the deportation
                  there would be no issues with B remaining  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  fails  to  acknowledge   that   cases   involving
                  criminality    are    fundamentally     different     from
                  administrative removal cases in that the best interests of
                  the child not a 'trump card'.   The  Secretary  of  States
                  case has always been of the view that there  is  a  viable
                  alternative to B leaving the United Kingdom  by  remaining
                  with either of her  sisters  although  if  LML  wished  to
                  retain her role as the primary carer for daughter it would
                  be reasonable to expect B to leave with her mother.

             d.   It was the view of the Court of Appeal in AR (Pakistan) v
                  SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 816 that  it  would  be  contrary  to
                  principal if the best  interests  of  the  child  were  to
                  always take precedence over the wider public interest when
                  the two are in conflict. The Court stressed the need for a
                  balanced assessment of such conflicting interests which it
                  is stated has not occurred in the determination.   It  was
                  submitted the Panel failed to consider the seriousness  of
                  the offence when considering 'reasonableness'.

         11.  Reference was also made by Mr Smart to a supplementary refusal
             letter dated 10th January 2014.  In that letter, at  paragraph
             20, the situation of B was considered by  the  decision  maker
             who stated:

             c)   Notwithstanding [B's] rights as a British citizen, it  is
                  not considered unreasonable  to  expect  B  to  leave  the
                  United  Kingdom.   It  is  noted  that  your  client   has
                  previously stated that her  daughter's  relationship  with
                  her father is no longer subsisting.  Your  client  is  the
                  main carer for her daughter and it is therefore considered
                  that the best interest of [B] would be to remain with  her
                  mother as a family unit. [B] is young enough to  adapt  to
                  life abroad, would benefit from the family unit  with  her
                  mother being maintained abroad and would be able to  enjoy
                  the cultural and social benefits of her Jamaican heritage.
                   As a British citizen, your  client's  youngest  daughter,
                  once she is  old  enough  to  live   independently,  could
                  return to the United Kingdom if she  wished.  Furthermore,
                  both education and medical provisions  are  available  and
                  these are not such a differing standard  from  the  United
                  Kingdom so as to make it an  unreasonable  adjustment.  In
                  addition,  [B]  has  an  unequivocal  right  to   Jamaican
                  citizenship  as  a  result  of   her   mother's   Jamaican
                  nationality. However, it is also  recognised  that,  as  a
                  British  citizen,  your  client's  daughter  also  has  an
                  unequivocal right to reside in United  Kingdom  and  enjoy
                  the benefits of her citizenship. Any decision made by your
                  client to take her daughter with her to Jamaica will be on
                  a purely voluntary basis and no effort  will  be  made  to
                  remove your client's daughter from the United Kingdom.

             d)   It is, however, considered that there is  another  family
                  member who could care for [B] in the United Kingdom. It is
                  noted that your client's two elder children [PAP] and [C S-
                  K P], who are both over the  age  of  18,  were  the  main
                  carers for their  step  sister  whilst  their  mother  was
                  serving her custodial sentence.  Even though [P]  and  [C]
                  cared for their step  sister  previously,  they  have  now
                  stated that they would not be in a position  to  care  for
                  their  step  sister  should  their  mother  be   deported.
                  However, it should be noted that neither [P] nor [C]  have
                  given reasons which showed that their circumstances  would
                  prevent them from caring for their step sister even though
                  they have claimed that they are unable to do so.

         12.  In paragraph 21 the author of the supplementary refusal letter
             also notes that should LML decide that B must  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom and the two older daughters refuse to care  for
             her, the Home Office  will  be  able  to  liaise  with  Social
             Services and put the relevant provisions in place for B to  be
             able to remain in the United Kingdom.

         13.  Mr Ahmed opposes the application by reference to the fact  the
             Panel heard evidence from LML and her daughter. It was  stated
             that  the  original  refusal  letter  only  mentioned  C   and
             enquiries being made in relation to her ability to care for B.
             Although it was accepted the supplementary refusal letter  was
             in existence Mr Ahmed asserted no submission  were  made  upon
             the same. There is also no evidence P could  care  for  B  and
             that the burden was not relevant as a result of the same.  B's
             father is not relevant to the proceedings.

         14.   Mr  Ahmed  also  submitted  that  the   issue   is   one   of
             reasonableness.  The child has been in the UK for 12 years and
             should not be the victim of her parent's  actions.  She  is  a
             British citizen and has strong ties to the  UK.  There  is  an
             element of proportionality to the issue of reasonableness  but
             it is fact specific.

         Discussion


         15.  This is a case in which I find the Panel have  erred  in  law.
             LML is the subject of an automatic  deportation  order  for  a
             serious offence of violence involving the use of a knife.  She
             was sentenced to  30  month  imprisonment  and  so  the  above
             Immigration Rules apply. When LML was in prison LML's daughter
             B was cared for by her sister C.  B  rejoined  her  mother  on
             release. LML is B's primary carer.  Although B  is  a  British
             citizen this is not a trump card- see ZH (Tanzania) - although
             it is not proposed to deport B with her mother. That  is  said
             to be a matter for choice within the family.  The  Immigration
             Rules in relation to Article 8 and deportation have been found
             to be a complete code.  One  element  which  allows  a  person
             sentenced to under 4 years to remain on family life grounds is
             to be found in paragraph 399 which states that if a person has
             a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  child
             under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and (i) the  child
             is a British Citizen; or (ii) the child has lived  in  the  UK
             continuously for at least the 7  years  immediately  preceding
             the date of the immigration decision; and in either  case  (a)
             it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK; and (b) there is no other family member  who  is  able  to
             care for the child in the UK; -  that person  is  entitled  to
             remain in the UK

         16.  B is a British citizen and the  issue  is  not  just  that  of
             reasonableness as Mr Ahmed submitted but  also  whether  there
             are other family members able to care for B  in  her  mother's
             absence. In this respect the Panel are wrong in fact when they
             claim there was no reliance by the Secretary of State  on  the
             fact P was a possible carer.  It  may  be  that  the  original
             refusal letter  only  mentioned  C  and  that  the  Presenting
             officer did not mention P, but she was  clearly  mentioned  in
             the  supplementary  refusal  letter  and  relied  upon  as   a
             potential carer.

         17.  The wording of the Rule also uses  the  specific  term  'able'
             which needs  to  be  explored  in  full  in  relation  to  all
             potential family members including  B's  father  if  there  is
             contact with him or other relatives of B, as  the  wording  of
             the Rule is not limited to the immediate family.  In  relation
             to reasonableness the immigration history of B was  noted  but
             that in isolation does not make her returning to Jamaica  with
             her mother unreasonable. Greater evidence of the impact upon B
             was required and more detailed and adequate  reasons  demanded
             of such an important element.

         18.  I find the Panel have materially erred such that determination
             must set aside. It may be the outcome might be the  same  once
             all relevant issues have been considered and adequate  reasons
             given, but it cannot be said this is the only outcome at  this
             stage. The following directions  shall  apply  to  the  future
             management of this case:

             a.   The determination shall be set aside.  LML's  immigration
                  history and   that of B shall  be  preserved  findings  as
                  shall the evidence  relation  the      index  offence  and
                  LML's imprisonment.

             b.   List for substantive hearing before Upper Tribunal  Judge
                  Hanson sitting at Sheldon Court  on  the  first  available
                  date after 17th December 2014, but not less than  14  days
                  after the pre-hearing review provided  for  below,  taking
                  into account the availability of Mr N  Ahmed  of  counsel.
                  Provisional time estimate 3 hours.

             c.   List for a pre hearing review before UTJ Hanson at  which
                  the parties   are expected to be in a position to  discuss
                  the number of witnesses to      be called,  issues  agreed
                  and those remaining in dispute, the time estimate in light
                  of the witness numbers,  and  any  other  case  management
                  directions required, on the first available date after 3rd
                  December 2014.

             d.   LML must file with the Tribunal and Mr Smart at the  Home
                  Office Presenting Officers Unit in Solihull details of all
                  family members of B living in the UK, however remote,  and
                  contact details by way of addresses and telephone numbers,
                  if known, by 4.00pm 29th October 2014.

             e.    The  parties  shall  file  consolidated,  indexed,   and
                  paginated bundles, containing all the evidence they intend
                  to rely upon no later than      4.00pm 19th November 2014.
                   Witness statements in  the  bundle  shall  stand  as  the
                  evidence in chief of the maker and must be signed,  dated,
                  and contain a declaration of truth. Evidence not filed  by
                  the stated date shall not be admitted without  permission.
                  Any application for such permission must  be  made  before
                  the expiry of     the date set out above  and  include  an
                  explanation for the delay,  the  person  responsible,  the
                  nature of the evidence sought to be admitted out of  time,
                  the time scale in which it will be available, whether  the
                  opposing party consents to the  late  filing,  any  impact
                  upon the hearing date, and prejudice to  either  party  by
                  admitting or not admitting the evidence.

             f.   No interpreter shall  be  provided  unless  requested  in
                  advance of the hearing for which details of  the  language
                  and dialect must be provided together with an  explanation
                  for why an interpreter is required on the  facts  of  this
                  case.

         Anonymity.

         19.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
             45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
             Rules 2005. I continue that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the
             Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008."

 5. For the present, the content of Judge Hanson's error of  law  decision,
    and my brief introduction, are  sufficient  to  put  into  context  the
    remainder of this determination.  I heard oral evidence on 25  February
    2015 and 25 March 2015.

    The oral evidence

 6. In examination-in-chief the appellant  adopted  her  witness  statement
    dated 16 November 2013.  She said that if she has family in Jamaica she
    does not know where they area.

 7. In cross-examination she said  that  she  lives  in  a  rented  council
    property which she pays for when she is working.  She  lives  with  her
    daughters C and B, as well as C's daughter, A.

 8. When she came to the UK she left her daughters C and P in Jamaica  with
    a friend, Anne Marie, for nine  months.  They  were  not  happy  there,
    because they told her that she used to beat them to make them sweep the
    yard and to read.  They did not tell her that when they were in Jamaica
    but only when they came to the UK.

 9. When they were in Jamaica they did not move to live anywhere else.  She
    would contact them on  Anne  Marie's  phone.   She  did  not  tell  the
    appellant that she had had any difficulties with her children  at  that
    time.  She is not still in contact with her.

10. The appellant was referred to the social worker's  report,  written  by
    Peter Horrocks, in which it states that he was told that the  appellant
    has a  maternal  uncle  and  two  maternal  cousins  in  Jamaica.   The
    appellant agreed that that was the case but said that she did not  know
    where they are.  She had lost contact with them from the time she  came
    to the UK and has not heard from them since.

11. She did not leave her two children with those relatives because she and
    their father had separated and he was not looking after them.  She  had
    no family who could look after them.   Anne  Marie  was  a  very  close
    friend whom she had known  for  about  five  years.   Their  respective
    mothers had been in hospital at the same time, and both died of cancer,
    which was when they became close friends.  At that time Anne Marie  was
    single and had two children.

12. She, the appellant, used to go to church in Jamaica on a regular  basis
    and had friends there.  She is not still in contact with them.   As  to
    why she cut off all friendships in Jamaica, she said that when she came
    to the UK she was not supposed to work but she was doing cleaning.  She
    had no money with which to contact anybody and she  was  looking  after
    her children.

13. She worked in Jamaica in a grocery store  and  did  hairdressing.   The
    hairdressing was done at her house, which was rented.  She gave up that
    house when she came to the UK.  She left her possessions  with  friends
    but does not know  where  those  possessions  are  now.   It  was  just
    furniture and nothing else.

14. She last had contact with B's father when  she  became  pregnant.   Her
    father does not know her.  She does not know if he is still in the  UK.
    They were not living together when she became pregnant.

15. She is very close to her family in the UK and they all get on.  They go
    to church as a family in Wolverhampton.  When she  was  in  prison  her
    children continued going to church.  They did support them,  with  food
    and bills because she was working part-time.

16. If she was deported there would  be  no  one  to  look  after  B.   The
    appellant expressed surprise to hear that in the social work  report  B
    had said she would want to go with her to Jamaica.  She said that B had
    not been to Jamaica and does not know about it.  She also said that she
    would not want her to leave her again.  The first time she left her was
    when she went to prison.

17. She is not able to go to Jamaica because she  has  a  nut  allergy  and
    needs an Epipen.  She would not be able to afford that in Jamaica.

18. She, the appellant, would not be able to obtain work in  Jamaica.   She
    reads the papers which say there are no jobs there.  She wants a better
    life for her daughter.  Going to Jamaica  would  only  ruin  her.   She
    would be on the street as there would be nowhere to go.

19. B would not be able to stay with  her  other  daughter,  C  in  the  UK
    because C has just had  a  baby.   P  has  her  child  to  look  after.
    Although C looked after B when she was in prison, she had no  child  at
    that time and it would be hard for her to look after both.

20. P does have her own flat which  has  two  bedrooms,  for  her  and  her
    daughter.  No one else lives there.

21. The appellant's daughter C  adopted  her  witness  statement  dated  16
    November 2013 in examination-in-chief.  She  now  has  a  4  month  old
    daughter, A.  She does not think she would be  able  to  look  after  B
    because her own daughter, A, is already a  handful.   She  is  aged  25
    years.

22. In cross-examination she  explained  the  circumstances  in  which  her
    mother left her in Jamaica with a friend, and about her life  with  her
    mother's friend.  She was also asked questions about what she told  her
    mother about how she was treated.

23. As to what relatives she has in Jamaica now, she said that she has  her
    father there, although she does not really know where he is.  When they
    were in Jamaica they were not in contact with any member of the family.
     As to the social worker's report referring  to  her  mother  having  a
    maternal uncle and cousin there, she does not know them.

24. The father of her daughter is RW, who lives  in  Birmingham.   They  do
    have plans to get together but at the moment it is helpful to have  the
    appellant at home with her to help her.  B also helps.

25. RW is involved with their daughter and sees her pretty much every  day.
    He tries to see her after work.  RW has other  children  and  aunts  in
    England.  His parents are in Jamaica.

26. He is not married.  His children are roughly aged 4 and 10 years.  They
    live with him.  As to who looks after them when he goes to  work,  they
    go to school and he works round them.  They do eventually plan to  live
    together but they are not sure where as he would need a  bigger  house.
    All of that relates to why she would not be able to look after B if the
    appellant had to go back to Jamaica.

27. As to why B could not live with her if the appellant was  removed,  she
    does not think it would be fair to RW to take his sister  in  as  well.
    He has got children already.  She is the one holding up the process  of
    her and RW getting together because she is getting help from her mother
    at home.  She gave evidence of her employment which was formerly  full-
    time but is now part-time.  She did part-time work when she was looking
    after B when the appellant was in prison.

28. Referred to her witness statement, she said that  B  was  difficult  to
    look after when the appellant  was  in  prison  because  she  just  got
    "dropped in" to being a mother.  She used to go out  with  her  friends
    which she was unable to carry on doing.  B was stressed out  about  her
    mother and she did not know how to comfort her.  B was 10 at the  time.
    She is now more mature.

29. They are a close family and regularly attend church  together.   As  to
    how much help they got from  the  church  when  the  appellant  was  in
    prison, she did not speak to a lot of people.  She got a bit of comfort
    on the phone but she closed off from people as she  was  also  stressed
    out.  A few people from the church did ring her to see if she  was  ok.
    She stopped partying and invested  everything  in  B.   She  was  still
    working and the housing support worker helped her to sort out benefits.
     Friends took her to see the appellant.

30. She has indefinite leave to remain.  If the appellant were  removed  to
    Jamaica, she would not be able to visit her often as she would  not  be
    able to afford it.

31. In answer to a question from me  she  said  that  the  mother  of  RW's
    children does not live with him.

32. The appellant's other daughter, P, adopted  her  witness  statement  in
    examination-in-chief.  She has a daughter TW, aged 4, who would be 5 in
    April.  She lives with her.

33. As to why she said in her witness statement that she would not be  able
    to take responsibility for B, she already has her  own  child  and  she
    does not want any more children at the moment.  It would  be  difficult
    to juggle work, and the possibility of going back to study if  she  had
    to look after B.  Her mother gives her most of the help at the moment.

34. In cross-examination she said that when the appellant was in prison she
    lived at her own address but she came back and forth to help her sister
    with B.  In traffic that takes about half an hour on the bus.   She  is
    not able to drive.  She lives in a two bedroom house.

35. She was also asked  questions  about  her  stay  in  Jamaica  when  the
    appellant came to the UK in 2000, and the circumstances  in  which  she
    lived with her mother's friend.  She came here when she was 9.

36. She does not have relatives in Jamaica and nor does her mother that she
    knows of.

37. She is looking for work at the moment.   She  has  not  worked  before.
    When she left school she went to college and then got pregnant.  It  is
    difficult to find work because she  has  no  experience.   She  started
    looking for work about two years ago.  She has done unpaid  work  at  a
    job centre for experience.

38. B could not stay with her in her house because it  would  be  too  much
    stress for her.  It is true that they are close but she does not  think
    she could manage the responsibility.  That is why she chose not to have
    more children.  She does not have contact with TW's father.

39. On 25 March 2015 the appellant was recalled to give evidence.  In cross-
    examination she said that she had not read the social  work  report  of
    Peter Horrocks.  The information she gave him was accurate.   She  does
    not remember the exact dates that B was admitted to  hospital  for  her
    nut allergy.  The allergy was first diagnosed when she was a  baby  but
    she does not remember her exact age.  She had given her some  nuts  and
    her throat started swelling.  She rang the doctor who told her to bring
    her into the surgery straightaway.

40. The next time she went into hospital for the same reason was  when  she
    was about 2.  She explained the circumstances in which  that  happened.
    She has gone to the children's hospital about four times.   It  is  not
    true that she has only gone once, as the medical report states.

41. B also has eczema, and she explained the circumstances  in  which  that
    was diagnosed.  She also keeps getting tonsillitis, the last time about
    two weeks ago.  It is true that the  school  have  threatened  to  take
    action because she has been off school so much as a result.

42. In re-examination she was asked about other medical records  additional
    to the ones that had been provided.  She had said that she  needed  the
    reports urgently but she was told that it  might  not  be  able  to  be
    possible for the children's hospital to provide them in time.

    Submissions

43. Mr Smart relied on the decision letter  and  the  supplementary  letter
    dated 18 January 2014.  It was submitted that the Immigration Rules now
    applicable are different from those that were in force at the  time  of
    the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  question  now  is
    whether it is unduly harsh for the appellant's child to live in Jamaica
    or to remain in the UK.  On the facts neither is unduly harsh.

44. It was submitted that the appellant left her two children in Jamaica in
    2000 when the children stayed with friends.  She has a  maternal  uncle
    and a cousin there.  Although it is claimed that there  is  no  contact
    between her and those  relatives,  that  is  purely  self-serving.   It
    suited her case to state that she does not have  friends  or  relatives
    there.

45. Although B's siblings say that they are unable to look after her,  that
    is simply a matter of personal choice.  P lives  in  a  flat  with  her
    daughter and C in the family home.  B could stay with either of them.

46. The social work report is of limited value.  It is an assessment  based
    on what the family have said and the author's own observations  without
    reference  to  any  medical  or  educational  evidence.   B's   medical
    conditions have been exaggerated by the appellant  in  the  information
    given to the social worker.  I was referred to aspects  of  the  social
    work report.  For example, although it is suggested  that  B  has  very
    severe eczema, the medical records indicate that she has  mild  eczema.
    She has been treated by shampoos, moisturisers and skin cream.  All  of
    those medications are available over the counter at chemists.

47. I was referred to the decision in AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636,  as
    well as s.117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act").  I was also  referred  to  the  decision  in  McLarty
    (Deportation - proportionality balance) [2014] UKUT 00315 (IAC) at [29]-
    [31] in relation to the respondent's policy objective of deportation in
    relation to foreign criminals insofar as it relates to proportionality.

48. Ms Revill relied on the skeleton argument.  She submitted that the only
    matter in dispute is whether it would be unduly harsh for B  to  go  to
    Jamaica or to remain in the UK without the appellant.   In  both  cases
    that had been established.   It  was  accepted  that  the  decision  in
    McLarty was relevant in relation to  proportionality.   The  IDIs  also
    suggested a similar approach.

49. It was accepted that there is a sliding scale in terms of the  sentence
    imposed but that is only one factor.  It was  not  suggested  that  the
    offence that the appellant committed was not serious, albeit that it is
    the only offence she has been convicted of.  There is  a  low  risk  of
    offending.  That is not decisive but it is important.  The letter  from
    the offender manager demonstrates that the appellant expressed  remorse
    and experienced shock at being separated from her family.

50. B's best interests had to be taken into account, albeit that  they  are
    separate from the public interest issues.  The "unduly harsh" test is a
    proportionality  assessment.   B's  best  interests   are   a   primary
    consideration.

51. If she had to go to Jamaica B would be with her mother and it is in her
    best interests to be cared for  by  her  mother.   However,  she  is  a
    British citizen and although that is not a trump card it is  a  weighty
    factor, as explained in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4.  B has the right to live and be  educated  in
    the UK and to have  access  to  the  NHS.   In  evidence  there  was  a
    relatively plausible account of the trips B has had to make to hospital
    and why the children's hospital records are not before the  court.   On
    balance, it is not a proper interpretation to say  that  the  appellant
    has exaggerated B's health conditions.  She does suffer from eczema and
    does have a nut allergy.   I  was  referred  to  the  medical  records.
    Information provided  indicates  that  Epipens  are  not  available  in
    Jamaica.

52. B is currently being educated in the UK and  moving  to  Jamaica  would
    disrupt that education and it would be likely to be difficult  for  her
    to adjust.  She would also be deprived of the strong relationships with
    her extended family in the UK.  Her sister C lives in the  family  home
    and her other sister P visits every day.  She has two  nieces,  one  of
    whom lives with her.

53. The limited means of P and  C  mean  that  only  occasional  visits  to
    Jamaica would  be  possible.   This  would  all  have  a  significantly
    detrimental impact on B.  Her two sisters  are  Jamaican  citizens  but
    have children here and the father of one of them is here.

54. The evidence is that there is no contact with other family  members  in
    Jamaica.  B had never been there and has no  connection  with  Jamaica.
    She has always lived in the UK.

55. Although the social worker's report said  that  B  had  said  that  she
    wanted to go to Jamaica with her mother, that does not indicate that it
    would not be unduly harsh for her to have to go there.

56. If she stayed in the UK without the appellant, she would be  without  a
    parent.   It  does  not  need  definitively  to  be  decided  that  the
    appellant's other daughters would be able to look after B, albeit  that
    that is relevant.  Both sisters gave reasons as to why they  would  not
    be able to look after her.  C looked after her when the  appellant  was
    in prison.  Since then  C  has  become  a  mother  herself  and  has  a
    daughter, A.  She would not be able to devote as  much  time  to  B  as
    before.  She also intends  to  move  in  with  her  partner.   C  would
    struggle to look after the appellant.

57. P no doubt did her best to look after  B  when  the  appellant  was  in
    prison but she is a single  mother  to  her  daughter  and  reliant  on
    benefits, so her situation is very tight.

58. Both C and P obtained significant support from the appellant.   P  goes
    there every day with TW, her daughter, and C lives with the  appellant.
    If that support were taken away it would be even more difficult to look
    after B.

59.  B  suffered  significantly  with  the  previous  separation  from  the
    appellant, albeit that she was able to visit her  fairly  regularly  in
    prison.  If the appellant is deported, she would  not  be  able  to  do
    that.

60. B is an anxious child and perhaps has more than the usual attachment to
    her mother, and in respect of  which  I  was  referred  to  the  social
    worker's report.  B does not want to be separated from  her  mother  so
    she does not go  to  sleepovers  with  friends.   Her  development  and
    educational progress are likely to be significantly affected,  with  no
    end to the separation in sight.

61. Even taking into account the extent of the public interest, it would be
    unduly harsh and therefore disproportionate for  the  appellant  to  be
    separated from her daughter.

62. Even if the appellant is not able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, there are very compelling  circumstances,  including
    the  effect  on   the   wider   family,   including   the   appellant's
    granddaughters.  Their best  interests  also  need  to  be  taken  into
    account as they see the appellant every day.  TW is 4 years old  and  5
    in April.  A is 4 months old.  TW is clearly old enough to have  formed
    a bond with the appellant.

63. B feels that she would have no choice but to go  to  Jamaica  and  live
    there with her mother.  The decision in Zambrano [2011]  EUECJ  C/34/09
    is relevant although not decisive.  Effectively, B would  be  compelled
    to leave the UK although theoretically could stay here without her.

64. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that for the  appeal  to  be
    allowed there would need to be  something  more  than  mere  separation
    between a parent and  child  and  the  obvious  effect  of  that.   The
    question is, is it unduly harsh.

    My conclusions

65. The parties agreed that the reference  in  the  supplementary  decision
    letter dated 10 January 2014, to the decision being one  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order, is incorrect.   Similarly,  although  there
    had originally been a  deportation  decision  in  respect  of  B,  that
    decision was withdrawn when B became a British citizen.  Thus,  LML  is
    the only appellant.

66. It was also accepted on behalf of the appellant, and agreed between the
    parties, that it is the post-28 July 2014 Immigration Rules that  apply
    notwithstanding the date of the respondent's decision and what was  the
    position before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  this  respect  I  was
    referred to the decision in YM (Uganda) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1292.   The  appellant's  skeleton
    argument proceeds on that footing.

67. Likewise, with reference to s.117C of the 2002 Act,  the  appellant  is
    not able to rely on Exception 1  because  she  has  not  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of her life.

68. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules are as follows:

         "A398. These rules apply where:

        a) a  foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
           deportation  would  be  contrary   to   the   United   Kingdom's
           obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

        b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made  against
           him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and

        a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
           public good and in the public interest because they have been
           convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
           period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

        b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
           public good and in the public interest because they have been
           convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
           period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months; or

        c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
           public good and in the public interest because, in the view of
           the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm
           or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular
           disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
         public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

        a) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
           with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

           i) the child is a British Citizen; or

          ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7
              years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
              decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported..."

69. I also set out ss.117A-D as follows:

                                  "PART 5A

         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

            (a)   breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
            family life under Article 8, and

            (b)   as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
            Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

            (a)   in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
            117B, and

            (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
            to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

            (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

            (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

            (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and

            (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

            (a)   a private life, or

            (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

            (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
            relationship with a qualifying child, and

            (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
            the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

            (a)   C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
            most of C's life,

            (b)   C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
            Kingdom, and

            (c)    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
            integration into the country to  which  C  is  proposed  to  be
            deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-

            "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
            Rights;

            "qualifying child" means a person who is under the  age  of  18
            and who-

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                period of seven years or more;

            "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  (within  the
                meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A)  of
                that Act).

         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

            (a)   who is not a British citizen,

            (b)   who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
            offence, and

            (c)   who-

               (i)    has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
               least 12 months,

             ..."

70. In the error of law decision, it can  be  seen  from  [18a.]  that  the
    appellant's immigration history and that of B are to be findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal that are preserved, as  well  as  the  evidence  in
    relation to the index offence and the appellant's imprisonment.

71. It is important to set my conclusions into  context  in  terms  of  the
    offence for which the appellant was convicted and which, after all,  is
    the basis of these proceedings before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  best
    source of information on that question is the sentencing remarks of His
    Honour Judge Webb who sentenced the appellant on  17  April  2012.   He
    stated that the appellant had pleaded guilty but only when  the  matter
    was listed for trial.  The basis of plea was that she carried  a  knife
    to peel fruit, a matter which the prosecution were prepared to  accept.
    It was also accepted by the prosecution  that  the  appellant  did  not
    intend to cause serious injury.  Nevertheless, he concluded that as  an
    offence of malicious wounding it was a serious one.  The injury to  the
    victim's face was a serious one "which has permanent physical and  very
    probably permanent psychological effects for her".

72. He stated that the  assault  upon  the  victim  by  the  appellant  was
    sustained.  There was one particularly serious injury but there were  a
    number of other blows with the knife, cuts and grazes which were  shown
    in the photographs  put  before  the  judge.   He  concluded  that  the
    appellant had deliberately caused more harm than was necessary for  the
    commission of the  offence.   There  was  a  weapon  available  to  the
    appellant and she used it.  He concluded that the offence  was  one  of
    "higher culpability", presumably within the sentencing guidelines.

73. As to aggravating features, it was  found  that  the  location  of  the
    offence was "disturbing" in that the appellant felt  she  was  able  to
    commit the offence in broad daylight.  Of much  more  concern  was  the
    impact that the offence had on the victim.  Judge  Webb  said  that  he
    suspected that it was a deliberate act by the  appellant  to  mark  the
    face of someone she thought was a rival for the attentions  of  another
    man.  On the other hand, he also found that there was some validity  to
    the point that on the basis of plea she did not intend serious harm, it
    would not have been therefore, a deliberate act to mark the face  of  a
    rival.

74. He took into account that the appellant had no previous convictions and
    had shown a degree of remorse, although he stated that whether  or  not
    that was remorse for what she had done or fear of the consequences,  he
    was not entirely sure.  He sentenced her on the basis that  she  was  a
    person of good character and the sole or  primary  carer  for  a  young
    child.

75. Paragraph 398(b) applies in that  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but  at  least  12  months.
    The next question then, is whether paragraphs 399 or 399A apply.  It is
    accepted on behalf of the appellant that 399A does not apply because it
    includes a requirement that the  person  concerned  has  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of their life.  That does not apply in  the
    case of this appellant.

76. Returning then to paragraph 399,  it  is  not  disputed  but  that  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, namely B,  who  is  a
    British citizen and who has also lived in the UK  continuously  for  at
    least seven years preceding the date of the immigration decision. B was
    born on 24 February 2002 and is now aged 13 years.

77. The question correctly identified by the parties  revolves  around  the
    issue of 'undue hardship'.  That is, whether it would be  unduly  harsh
    for B to live in Jamaica and whether it would be unduly harsh  for  her
    to remain in the UK without the appellant.

78. Ms Revill suggested, and I agree, that this involves an  assessment  of
    proportionality.  However, it is to be  recognised  that  the  fact  of
    separation in itself, i.e. B living in the UK without the appellant, is
    not sufficient to establish that it would be unduly harsh.   The  Rule,
    and indeed the 2002 Act at s.117C, both contemplate separation as being
    a possible  outcome  of  deportation  proceedings.   Thus,  it  is  not
    sufficient for an appellant  to  say  that  it  is  "unduly  harsh"  to
    separate her from her child, without more.  Separation is an inevitable
    feature of deportation as recognised in the Immigration  Rules  and  in
    primary legislation.  It is also reflected in  the  jurisprudence,  for
    example in AD Lee v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 348.

79. Furthermore, it is not enough for an appellant to  point  to  the  fact
    that the child with whom  he  or  she  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship is under the age of 18 years and is a British citizen,  or
    has lived in the  UK  for  at  least  seven  years.   Overlaying  those
    features of the case is the requirement for  separation  to  be  unduly
    harsh.  Thus, something more is required.

80. In considering the question of whether it would be unduly harsh  for  B
    to live in Jamaica with the appellant or for B  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without the appellant, I start with a consideration of what is  in  B's
    best interests. In that respect, it seems to me to be  plain  that  B's
    best interests are to remain with the appellant.  It is  not  necessary
    for me at this  point  to  rehearse  the  evidence  pertaining  to  the
    closeness of their relationship.  It is  sufficient  to  state  that  B
    lives with the appellant, they have a close relationship and B does not
    have contact with her father.

81. Before proceeding further however, it is also  important  to  recognise
    that a child's best interests, whilst being  a  primary  consideration,
    are not the only, or indeed the most important, consideration.

82. However, the age of the child, their length of stay or  integration  in
    the UK, the stage of the child's  education,  and  all  other  relevant
    factors must be taken into account.  It is important to mention that  I
    have considered in detail the social  work  report  of  Peter  Horrocks
    dated 6 February 2015, B's school reports and letters from the  school,
    the witness statements  of  the  appellant  and  her  daughters,  their
    letters and the oral evidence.  Specifically, I note the letter from  B
    herself which has a stamped date  of  13  November  2012.   It  is  not
    entirely clear when it was written.  As Mr Horrocks says in his report,
    B's voice needs to be heard.

83. There is also medical evidence in relation to B, about which there  was
    some limited dispute in terms of the  seriousness  of  her  conditions.
    Medical records have been provided, which was essentially  the  purpose
    of the adjournment of the first hearing before me, although it is  said
    on behalf of the appellant that there are other  medical  records  that
    she has not been able to produce.  It is clear that B does have  a  nut
    allergy.  There was dispute about the number of times she has had to go
    to hospital as a result of that nut allergy.   I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to resolve that  dispute  because  what  is  plain  from  the
    medical records is that B is required or does need to carry with her an
    Epipen.  It is evident from the  medical  records  that  staff  at  her
    school needed training in the use of the Epipen.  That she has required
    hospital treatment and that she requires to carry an Epipen  with  her,
    as well as the fact that staff at her school  needed  training  in  its
    use, all indicate that her condition is not something trivial.   Whilst
    there was no detailed medical report  about  the  effects  of  the  nut
    allergy on her, and more widely as to the potential consequences of  an
    allergic reaction, the evidence that has been provided  indicates  that
    her  condition  is  one  that  has  been  taken  seriously  by  medical
    professionals.

84. Further in relation to this issue, only limited evidence  was  provided
    of the extent to  which  B  could  be  safeguarded  in  terms  of  that
    condition in Jamaica.  A copy of an article from  the  Jamaica  Gleaner
    dated 4 January 2014, being a one page article,  in  summary  indicates
    that Epipens are not available in Jamaica.  The article  also  contains
    very brief information about anaphylactic shock.   However,  without  a
    medical report in relation to B dealing with this issue,  it  would  to
    some  extent  be  speculative  to  conclude  that  B  is  at  risk   of
    anaphylactic shock were she to have an allergic  reaction.   Indeed  in
    any event, the consequences of anaphylactic shock are not explained  in
    evidence before me by any expert evidence.

85. However, one can reasonably conclude that the standard of medical  care
    in Jamaica is, for the most part, not as high as that in the UK.   That
    fact, together with the, albeit very brief, article  from  the  Jamaica
    Gleaner, is sufficient evidence to indicate that B  would  be  more  at
    risk in Jamaica in relation to her nut allergy.

86. The medical reports provided to me also indicate that  B  suffers  from
    eczema.  The seriousness of that condition again is  not  explained  in
    any medical report.  It is, it seems to me, sufficient to note that she
    has visited her GP more than once in relation  to  that  condition  and
    receives treatment for it, for example in the form of creams, bath  oil
    and the like.  Whether or  not  she  needs,  or  has  been  prescribed,
    treatment including hydrocortisone, a matter in dispute, again does not
    seem to me to be particularly relevant.  I do  however  accept,  as  Mr
    Smart said, that such treatment, for example shampoos and moisturisers,
    can be obtained over the counter.  The extent to which they are in fact
    available in Jamaica has not been established.   There  is  however  no
    indication   that   her   condition   has,   for   example,    required
    hospitalisation or absence from school.

87. Similarly, in terms of the visits to the doctor B has made  because  of
    tonsillitis, a question arose as to the extent to which that has caused
    her absence from school, and whether the school had threatened to  take
    action because of those absences.  Again, a fine judgement  about  that
    issue does not need to be made.  It is sufficient to note  that  it  is
    clear from the medical records that B has received treatment more  than
    once for tonsillitis and related conditions.  On the face of  it,  that
    does not seem to be a life threatening condition, but of  course  again
    it is reasonable  to  assume  it  can  be  a  limiting  and  disruptive
    condition in the life of a teenage child of school age.

88. It is clear from the medical reports that B  has  visited  the  GP  for
    other conditions, which were not referred to in the oral evidence or in
    submissions.  I mention that fact only to include it within the overall
    observation that B has over the years required  treatment  for  various
    conditions and which have necessitated her repeated visits to the  GP's
    surgery, as well as on occasion admission to hospital.  This is plainly
    irrelevant in terms of the question of whether it would be unduly harsh
    to expect her to return to Jamaica with the  appellant.   That  contact
    with doctors has been with the full support of various  family  members
    who have taken her there.

89. In contrast to the situation in the UK, where B has close relationships
    with family members, even if there are members of the family in Jamaica
    the evidence does not indicate that B has, or has had, any contact with
    them.  There is inconsistency in the appellant's witness  statement  in
    terms of whether there are family members in  Jamaica.  She  states  at
    [12] that she does not have a home to return to  there  despite  having
    some family there but in the next paragraph states  that  there  is  no
    family left in Jamaica.  In Mr Horrocks' report there is  reference  to
    the appellant's mother having a history of mental  health  problems  as
    does a maternal uncle and two maternal cousins.   In  cross-examination
    it was put to the appellant that this  indicates  that  she  has  those
    relatives  in  Jamaica.   The  appellant  agreed  that  she  had  those
    relatives there but said that she does not know where they are.

90. The evidence therefore, does  indicate  that  there  are  relatives  in
    Jamaica.  However, the written  and  oral  evidence  is  consistent  in
    stating that the appellant has no contact with them, and I accept  that
    to be the case.  So far as B is concerned, as I say, this  is  relevant
    because it could not be said that the evidence shows that B,  on  going
    to Jamaica, would have the benefit of  being  welcomed  into  a  close,
    loving and supportive family.

91. Considering all the circumstances, B's age, her health conditions,  the
    stage of her education in the UK, the fact of her  British  citizenship
    and her close relationships with family in the UK, I am satisfied  that
    even though she would be with the appellant on return  to  Jamaica,  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect her to leave the UK with the appellant.
     It is true that in the social worker's report B said that she would go
    with her mother to Jamaica, but I consider that is because she  plainly
    wishes to remain with her mother.  That does not indicate  necessarily,
    and certainly not in this case, that it would not be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect her to leave the UK to be with the appellant.

92. The critical question it seems to me is  whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect B to remain in the UK without the appellant.   Clearly,
    remaining in the UK B would be able to continue with her education,  at
    least in the sense that there would  be  education  available  to  her,
    albeit that in the absence of the appellant the question arises  as  to
    whether she would be able to make the progress that  she  has  made  to
    date.  She would be able to continue to have access to  the  healthcare
    system of the UK.

93. When the appellant was in prison her sister, C, looked after her.  This
    was with the assistance of her other sister, P.  I accept  that  during
    that time B's schoolwork suffered, as is evident from  the  information
    from the school and the witness statements.  There is a letter dated 15
    October 2013 from her primary school at  page  23  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  It states that her  attendance  was  very  good  and  she  was
    regularly collected by the appellant, her primary carer.  The appellant
    engaged with  the  school,  liaising  with  the  school  and  attending
    meetings and parent consultations, and the  like.   Shortly  after  the
    appellant went to prison it states that B's  attendance  dropped  below
    the national average and although her sisters took very  good  care  of
    her in the appellant's absence, the school was  aware  that  it  was  a
    difficult situation as B's mother was not around for  her.   It  states
    that the absence of B's mother did have a  detrimental  impact  on  her
    education, both emotionally and academically.

94. To varying degrees both C and P explained why they would not be able to
    care for B if the appellant were removed to Jamaica.   I  am  satisfied
    that they gave credible evidence of the difficulties that each of  them
    in their own way would experience in looking after B, because of  their
    own family responsibilities, their  plans  for  the  future  and  their
    particular circumstances.  However, it is not suggested that they would
    see B taken into care if the appellant were removed to Jamaica.  Whilst
    I do not underestimate the practical difficulties  that  caring  for  B
    would create for either or both of them, the evidence does not indicate
    that they would not, either individually or together, be able to fulfil
    the role of primary carers, in the sense of facilitating B's education,
    access to  healthcare  and  in  growing  up  with  their  physical  and
    emotional support.

95. Whilst I acknowledge the expertise of Peter Horrocks in his  particular
    sphere of expertise, I do not accept what he says in his report at 4.19
    about the ability of C or P to  care  for  B.   As  I  have  indicated,
    undoubtedly there would be practical difficulties, even  hardship,  but
    the evidence does not indicate that they in either case are  unable  to
    care for  B,  or  collectively.   Thus,  I  reject  the  suggestion  at
    paragraph 5.3 that there are no alternative options other than for B to
    be cared for by the local authority.

96. Mr Horrocks describes B's  vulnerability,  referring  to  her  anxiety,
    which has manifested itself in  various  different  ways,  showing  her
    particular anxiety about being separated from the appellant and  indeed
    from other family members.  Whilst he suggests that she  is  vulnerable
    in terms of her  mental  health,  I  do  not  accept  as  suggested  at
    paragraph 4.9 that B believes that responsibility for the  decision  as
    to whether the appellant leaves the UK or stays here, remains  with  B.
    There is little to support the suggestion at  4.11  that  B  would  see
    herself as being punished for her mother's  actions  and  that  if  the
    appellant had to go to Jamaica B  would  blame  herself  for  what  had
    occurred which would be harmful for their relationship.

97. On the other hand, I do accept, as is  apparent  from  my  observations
    thus far, that as stated at paragraph 4.24, B's needs are for security,
    stability and continuity.

98. I also accept that returning the appellant  to  Jamaica  would  have  a
    negative impact on B, given her age, her closeness to the appellant and
    the anxieties she demonstrated when the appellant was imprisoned.

99. I have also taken into account the best interests  of  the  appellant's
    grandchildren, A and TW.  C's daughter A is about 5  months  old.   P's
    daughter, TW is aged 5.  The  evidence,  including  from  Mr  Horrocks'
    report, is that TW has an affectionate relationship with the appellant.
     He witnessed that when he went with the appellant and P to collect  TW
    from school.  It is reasonable to conclude that those  children's  best
    interests would also be best served by the appellant remaining  in  the
    UK, although plainly at their ages they are young enough  to  adapt  to
    her absence and I do not consider that a consideration  of  their  best
    interests is of very much significance in the overall circumstances.

100. It goes without saying that  the  appellant  has  a  strong  desire  to
    remain in the UK with her  children  and  grandchildren  and  that  her
    removal would have a  significant  emotional  impact  on  her.   Expert
    evidence  is  not  needed  to  come  to  that  view.   Similarly,   the
    matriarchal-type structure of the family, with  the  appellant  as  the
    head of it, and the close relationships with P and C suggest that  they
    would also be significantly emotionally  affected  by  the  appellant's
    removal. However, I do not consider that either the appellant's  wishes
    or the effect on P and C of her removal, are of very great significance
    on their own, when set against the powerful public interest factors  in
    play.

101. Whilst specific evidence of the family's  financial  circumstances  was
    not provided, there is sufficient evidence from which to conclude  that
    it would not be possible for visits by the appellant's children to take
    place on a very frequent basis.  In addition, the nature of the  family
    circumstances of C and P do not reveal that they would be able to leave
    the UK to live in Jamaica with the appellant.

102. The question of whether the appellant's removal,  and  separation  from
    her family, is unduly  harsh  must  be  informed,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, by the seriousness of the offence that was committed by her.
     I have referred to the judge's sentencing remarks.  It is  clear  that
    this was a serious offence.

103. There is nothing to contradict what is said about the low risk  of  the
    appellant's reoffending, and  her  behaviour  and  attitude  since  her
    conviction and after her release reinforces that view.  However, it has
    repeatedly been said that the risk of re-offending is but  one  factor,
    and not the most important factor, to be taken  into  account.   Regard
    must be had to the deterrent effect of deportation, and the  expression
    of the public's abhorrence of serious offending.  So much is clear from
    decisions such as SS (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  There is a potent public  interest  at
    play.

104. I consider however, that the fact that B has only  one  parent  in  her
    life, namely the appellant, is a very significant factor  to  be  taken
    into account.  It is also important  to  take  into  account  that  the
    separation between the appellant and B would be  for  a  period  of  at
    least ten years, during which time B would  not  have  the  direct  and
    close personal contact, guidance and emotional support  from  her  only
    parent, whatever  could  be  said  about  the  contact  that  could  be
    maintained by phone, Skype or the  like,  letters  and  the  occasional
    visit. B's age at which she would be separated from  her  mother  (13),
    and the fact that she would be deprived of the daily interactions  with
    her during an obviously very  important  developmental  period  of  her
    life, I consider to be of great significance.

105. Considering the evidence in the round,  and  reflecting  again  on  the
    potent public interest  factors  in  play,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    circumstances are such that on the particular facts  of  this  case  it
    would be unduly harsh for B to remain in the UK without the  appellant.
    For the reasons I have given, I also consider that it would  be  unduly
    harsh for B to leave the UK to live in Jamaica with the appellant.

106. The same conclusion results from an analysis  of  s.117C  of  the  2002
    Act. On the facts of this case the outcome under the Immigration Rules,
    and within a consideration of s.117C, is the same.

107. Accordingly, I allow the appeal because an exception to  the  automatic
    deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act  2007  applies,  i.e.  the
    appellant's deportation would involve a  breach  of  her  human  rights
    under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  applying  the  Immigration  Rules  with
    reference to paragraph 399(a).

    Decision

108. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside and the decision re-made, allowing the appeal.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

In order to preserve  the  anonymity  of  the  children  involved  in  these
proceedings, unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  16/06/15

