
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01133/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th February 2015                         |On 24th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Wiktor Kaminski
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Quigley
    made following a hearing at Glasgow on 25th August 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Poland  born  on  14th  March  1996.   He
    arrived in the UK with his parents when he was 3 years old on  4th  May
    1999.  The family claimed asylum, which was refused  on  12th  February
    2000, and the subsequent appeal was dismissed on  4th  September  2000.
    Thereafter the Appellant and his family were appeal rights exhausted.

 3. On 16th March 2004 the family were granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    in the UK exceptionally outside the Rules.

 4. Poland became a member of the European Union in May 2004.

 5. On 19th April 2013 the Appellant, together with his older brother,  was
    convicted of four counts of robbery and sentenced to  two  years  at  a
    young offenders institution.  On 5th June 2014 a decision was  made  to
    make  a  deportation  order  against  him  as  a  consequence  of   his
    convictions under Section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  and
    Regulations 19(3)(b) and 24(3) of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 for his removal to Poland.

 6. The Appellant, together with  his  older  brother,  came  before  Judge
    Quigley on 25th August 2014 and Judge Quigley dismissed  both  appeals.
    There is no appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  older
    brother.  Mr Diwncyz told me that a JR application had been  lodged  on
    6th January 2015 but he had no further information.

The Grounds of Application

 7. Grounds were submitted by Yorkshire  Immigration  Consultancy  Service.
    They attack the Judge's recording of the submission that the  Appellant
    should not be pursued for deportation because he was under the  age  of
    18 years of age at the date of his sentence.  It was said that he erred
    when it was the Home  Office's  own  policy  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant should  be  considered  under  the  exceptions  to  automatic
    deportation since he was under the age  of  18  when  the  offence  was
    committed.

 8. It was also argued that the Judge's Article 8 findings were  flawed  in
    relation to the two brothers.

 9. On 30th September 2014 Judge Cruthers refused to  grant  permission  in
    respect of the broader attack on the Judge's Article 8  findings  which
    he described as no more than speculation as to what beneficial  results
    might flow if the  Appellant's  older  brother  was  deported  but  the
    younger brother was allowed to remain in the UK.

10. With respect to the second point, Judge  Cruthers  said  that  arguably
    Judge Quigley had not addressed the Home Office's policy  on  automatic
    deportation which provides for an exception where the foreign  national
    offender was  under  the  age  of  18  at  the  date  of  the  relevant
    conviction.

11. On 10th October 2014 the Respondent served a  Reply  stating  that  the
    grounds were misconceived.  This was not a  decision  taken  under  the
    2007 Act because the Appellant is an EEA national and therefore  exempt
    from the  automatic  deportation  provisions  of  the  2007  Act.   The
    decision was taken under the EEA Regulations.  The decision  to  deport
    was taken when the Appellant was 18, and there was  nothing  preventing
    the Secretary  of  State  from  deporting  someone  who  has  committed
    criminal offences as a minor.

The Hearing

12. By the time that this appeal came before me the Appellant no longer had
    any representation.  He said that he was a changed man and he had  done
    a stupid thing which he regrets.  This was his country and he wanted to
    stay.

13. Mr Diwncyz relied on his reply.  In summary, he said that the Appellant
    fell to be treated as an EEA national even  though  he  had  indefinite
    leave to remain.  He referred to Schedule 4 paragraph  6  of  the  2012
    Amendment Regulations and submitted that the decision to  deport  under
    the Regulations was lawful.

Findings and Conclusions

14. Two arguments appear to have been made before the original  Immigration
    Judge in relation to the application of the  EEA  Regulations  and  the
    Immigration Rules.

15. It was the Appellant's  submission  that,  since  the  Appellants  were
    granted indefinite leave to remain on 16th March  2004,  before  Poland
    became a member of the EU, they did not need to  prove  that  they  had
    exercised their Treaty rights in order to remain in the UK lawfully and
    could  therefore  rely  on  the  domestic  law  of  the  UK,  i.e.  the
    Immigration Rules, in order to challenge the deportation order.

16. The argument has no merit.   The  Appellant  is  an  EEA  national  and
    accordingly, under the Regulations, may be  deported  under  Regulation
    19(3)(b) on the grounds that his removal is  justified  on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public health.  He cannot demonstrate
    that the Secretary of State's decision to apply the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations to him was unlawful.

17. Accordingly the deportation provisions of the 2007 Act  do  not  apply,
    and neither do the Immigration Rules.

18. The argument seems also to have been made before  the  judge  that  the
    period of residence had been counted incorrectly, and the Appellant was
    entitled to the benefit of his 5 years residence in the UK  before  the
    accession of Poland to the EU.

19. According to paragraph 6  of  Schedule  4  to  the  Regulations,  where
    someone resided in the UK before the accession to the EU of their State
    of nationality, an individual will be able to rely upon residence under
    domestic UK legislation as part of their five  year  qualifying  period
    for permanent residence only if, inter alia, they had leave  to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules.

20. However in this case the Appellant had no leave between 2000  and  2004
    when he was appeal rights exhausted and remained in the UK  unlawfully.
    He therefore cannot seek to benefit from paragraph 6 of Schedule 4, and
    cannot argue that his period of residence between 2000 and 2004  should
    count for the purpose  of  deciding  whether  Regulation  21(4)  should
    apply, i.e. where a person has resided  in  the  UK  for  a  continuous
    period of at least ten years prior to the relevant  decision  where  it
    may not be taken except on imperative grounds of public security.

21. The  Appellant  had  continuous  residence  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulations for at least five years but less than ten  because  periods
    of imprisonment are not counted.  Accordingly the  relevant  dates  are
    between 16th March 2004, when the family was  granted  ILR,  and  April
    2013.

22. The correct provision, which was applied by the  Judge,  is  Regulation
    21(3) which states that

         "a relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with a
         permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 except on  serious
         grounds of public policy or public security."

23. So far as the merits of the decision are concerned, the  Appellant  has
    not been granted permission to argue  that  the  Judge's  decision  was
    flawed, but in any event, this is a thoughtful, detailed  consideration
    of all of the relevant factors and the conclusion reached was one  open
    to him.  He was entitled to conclude  that  the  Appellant  presents  a
    medium risk of serious harm to the public, that he has family relatives
    in Poland who would support him, that  he  was  fluent  in  the  Polish
    language and that he would be able to  readjust  to  life  there.   The
    grounds disclose no arguable error of law in  the  Judge's  conclusions
    and were properly refused  by  the  Judge  who  granted  permission  in
    respect of the automatic deportation policy point

Decision

24. The Judge did not err in law.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


