
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01787/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 July 2014                                |On 15th Aug 2014             |
|Judgment given orally at hearing              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Jose Alberto Oliveira De Almeida
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Thus, the appellant is a citizen  of  Portugal  who  was
    born on 7 October 1971.

 2. The appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  arose  in  the  following
    circumstances.  In April 2013 in the Crown Court sitting  at  Maidstone
    the appellant was convicted of an offence of assault occasioning actual
    bodily harm whereby he was sentenced to  a  term  of  imprisonment  for
    fifteen months.  In consequence of that  conviction  the  Secretary  of
    State decided on 13 August 2013 to make a deportation order  under  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the   EEA
    Regulations").

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    a panel of the First-tier Tribunal consisting  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McMahon and Ms C.  St.  Clair,  a  non-legal  member.  The  panel
    allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.  One of  the  issues  for
    the First-tier Tribunal to  determine  was  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant was able to resist removal to Portugal as an EEA national  in
    terms  of  the  level  of  protection  against  removal  that  the  EEA
    Regulations afford him.  That in part depended on the extent  to  which
    he was resident in the UK exercising Treaty rights and for what period.



 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant has been in employment
    in the UK.  Unequivocally it found at [13] of the determination that he
    had lived in the UK continuously since 1995, from the age of 24  years.
    Mr Norton on behalf of the Secretary of State does not  challenge  that
    conclusion.  What is however challenged is the  further  conclusion  in
    terms of his having been in employment since that time.  In relation to
    employment the First-tier Tribunal stated as follows at [13]:

          "He has supported that account [of the period of  residence]  with
         detail as to the nature of his employment  since  1995.   There  is
         nothing implausible about the account.  Although the respondent has
         doubt as to that aspect of the claim  there  is  nothing  from  the
         respondent which  goes  to  show  the  claim  in  that  respect  is
         unreliable."

 5. One of the arguments on behalf of the Secretary of  State  is  that  in
    that respect the First-tier Tribunal appeared to reverse the burden  of
    proof, given that the burden of proof was on the appellant to establish
    the extent to which he was exercising Treaty rights.  Of  course,  that
    the appellant bears the burden of proof is uncontentious. The matter of
    the appellant's employment since he has been in the UK has always  been
    in issue, ever since the decision to remove him.

 6. I am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  apparently
    concluding that it was for the  respondent  to  rebut  the  appellant's
    assertions in relation to employment or, put another way,  bearing  the
    burden of proving that the appellant was not in employment.  It was for
    the appellant to establish those facts.  I also  note  in  this  regard
    that directions were issued on 3  October  2013  in  relation  to  what
    further evidence might be expected from the appellant  as  regards  his
    employment.

 7. The notice of decision refers to the lack of  documentary  evidence  of
    his employment.  The only evidence that  he  has  been  in  employment,
    which is the basis on which he suggests that  he  has  been  exercising
    Treaty rights, was his own evidence,  unsupported  by  any  documentary
    evidence.  I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion
    in terms of the appellant's exercise of Treaty rights is sustainable in
    these circumstances bearing  in  mind  it  was  for  the  appellant  to
    establish the fact of his exercise  of  Treaty  rights.   Although  the
    panel referred at [29] to what was said to be the significance  of  his
    receiving incapacity benefit  and  employment  and  support  allowance,
    those benefits do not establish that the appellant  has  actually  ever
    worked.

 8. Subsequent to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  some  records
    have  been  provided  in  terms  of  the  appellant   having   received
    jobseekers' allowance. At the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    appellant stated that at the time of the hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal he did not have his "tax" records. He  then  referred  to  the
    records in respect of  jobseekers'  allowance.  It  would  appear  that
    having been in  receipt  of  jobseekers'  allowance  he  therefore  was
    entitled to credits for national insurance purposes  but  that  record,
    apart from not assisting in terms of establishing any error of  law  on
    the part of the First-tier Tribunal given  that  it  was  not  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal, says  very  little  about  whether  the
    appellant has in fact been working.

 9. In these circumstances, I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in its assessment of the extent to which the appellant has
    been exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  That, it seems to  me,  is  a
    sufficient basis from which to conclude that the decision should be set
    aside because it has a fundamental impact  on  the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's 'removability' in terms of the level of "protection" he  is
    afforded by the EEA Regulations.

10. I am also satisfied that there were errors of law  in  other  respects.
    Firstly, in terms of whether the appellant had established that he  was
    entitled to resist removal on imperative grounds  of  public  security.
    That conclusion failed  to  take  into  account  the  decision  of  the
    European Court of Justice in Case C-400/12 MG  which  establishes  that
    the ten year qualifying period is to be  calculated  by  counting  back
    from the date of the  decision.   Periods  of  imprisonment  break  the
    continuity of residence which again affects the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant would be entitled to claim that he is able to resist  removal
    on imperative grounds.

11. I am further satisfied that the assessment by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    of the risk of re-offending was vitiated by legal error.  Although  the
    panel referred to the fact that the appellant had received a number  of
    criminal convictions and referred, to some degree, to  the  seriousness
    of those offences, and considered evidence of rehabilitation, I am  not
    satisfied that the panel took full account of the numerous and repeated
    offences that the appellant has been convicted of and which are set out
    in detail in the PNC printout.

12. It is also evident that the appellant has on  many  previous  occasions
    failed to respond to non-custodial sentences.  Again, that is a  matter
    that ought to have been taken into account by the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The National Offender  Management  Service  report  or  'NOMS'  report,
    assessed  the  appellant's  risk  of  offending  as  high.   The  panel
    concluded that his risk of reoffending was  'medium'.   A  Tribunal  is
    perfectly entitled to disagree with an assessment of the  risk  of  re-
    offending provided legally  sustainable  reasons  are  given  for  that
    conclusion.  I am not satisfied that in this case, bearing in mind  the
    extent of the appellant's offending, sustainable reasons on that  issue
    were given by the First-tier Tribunal. Although there is  criticism  of
    the NOMS report and its conclusions, there is  no  recognition  on  the
    part of the First-tier Tribunal, in its reasons, of the fact  that  the
    risk of reoffending is said in the report to be high (see page 8 of the
    report). Paragraph 2 of the determination does refer to that assessment
    in the NOMS report but that paragraph only rehearses the  Secretary  of
    State's reasons for the decision to remove the appellant.

13. Furthermore, I am not satisfied that even if the panel was entitled  on
    the evidence to conclude that  he  represents  a  medium  risk  of  re-
    offending, it was then entitled to find that he does  not  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society, as it did at [40]. The panel  appears
    to have concluded that because the risk of reoffending was medium, that
    did not  represent  a  "genuine"  and  "present"  threat.  Although  it
    concluded that his past offending has been at  the  level  of  'medium'
    seriousness, that does not take into account  the  seriousness  of  the
    most recent offence of  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily  harm,  as
    indicated in the sentencing remarks which are quoted  at  [17]  of  the
    determination.

14. Having concluded that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  the
    respects to which I have referred, I am satisfied that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.   Having  heard  submissions
    from Mr Norton in terms of whether it was appropriate for the appeal to
    be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing,  I  am
    satisfied that that is the appropriate course,  having  regard  to  the
    Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.



                               DIRECTIONS

    1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de
         novo with none of the contested findings preserved.

    2.   The appeal is to be heard by a  differently  constituted  Tribunal
         from that which heard the original appeal.

     3.  Further directions as to listing are left to the discretion of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            15/08/14
