
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01110/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 August 2016                            |On 13 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     L W
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Singh, counsel, instructed by the Government
Legal
      Department
For the respondent:    Mr P Eleftheriadis, counsel, Bar Pro Bono Unit,
instructed by
      Ineyab solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant or his wife.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission granted by the Court  of
    Appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against her decision to deport him to his country  of
    origin, Jamaica.

 2. The claimant is a foreign criminal within the meaning  of  sections  32
    and 33 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007.   On  29  February  2012  he  was
    sentenced to a period of 6 years'  imprisonment  for  possession  of  a
    class A drug (crack cocaine) with intent to supply.

 3. The Secretary of State made a deportation order on 29 May 2013 pursuant
    to s32 (5) UK Borders Act 2007.   The  claimant  appealed  against  the
    decision.  His appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal both under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds,  with  reference  to
    Article 8 ECHR (private and family life).

Permission to appeal and error of law

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by both the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the Upper Tribunal. On 19 April 2016, the Court of Appeal in  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v LW (Jamaica)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  369
    granted permission to appeal and  remitted  the  matter  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for reconsideration in light of the Court of Appeal's judgment
    [37].

 5. The Court of Appeal considered that the Upper  Tribunal  had  erred  in
    upholding the First-tier Tribunal decision and that both Tribunals  had
    erred in their approach to the  new  Immigration  Rules.  Lord  Justice
    Gross, with whom the President of the Queen's Bench Division  and  Lord
    Justice Elias agreed, considered that the First-tier Tribunal had erred
    in law in approaching Article 8 ECHR on a  free-standing  basis  rather
    than through the prism of the Immigration  Rules  and  failed  to  give
    sufficient  weight  to  the  public  interest  in   deporting   foreign
    criminals,  or   direct   itself   that   exceptional   or   compelling
    compassionate circumstances  are  required  if  deportation  is  to  be
    successfully resisted on human rights grounds.

 6. Lord Justice Gross said this at [33]-[38]:

         "33.     While by no means decisive, the FTT's unhappy reference to
         [the claimant] as a  "home-grown  offender"  (at  [54])  is  itself
         revealing. Although, at first blush, there is an attractive ring to
         this  description,  it  cannot  survive  analysis.  Consider,   for
         instance, the example of a foreign national who first comes to this
         country at 16 and is then of  good  character.  Over  the  next  10
         years, he commits a string of serious  offences  in  this  country.
         That he is a "home-grown offender" would not for a moment stand  in
         the way of his deportation, absent other and compelling reasons. It
         is the offending in this country which makes the person in question
         a "foreign criminal"; such offending, in this country  rather  than
         elsewhere, is the reason for deporting him, not a  reason  for  not
         doing so.

         34.      Rightly or wrongly (given the particular facts),  the  FTT
         made much of the position of ... ([the claimant's]  son,  mentioned
         above). Suffice to say that as he is now over 18, the  significance
         attached to his interests must necessarily diminish.

         35.      I would not gainsay that  the  fact  of  [the  claimant's]
         residence in this country for approximately 40 years, is a point of
         importance. But to found "compelling  reasons"  for  not  deporting
         him, considerably more is required ...

         36.      ...The relationship between the length of  residence,  the
         length of sentence and the gravity of the offending (consider,  for
         example,  murder,  rape  and  terrorism)  would   require   careful
         consideration on a fact specific basis, always keeping in mind that
         the reasons need to be  compelling  to  outweigh  the  very  strong
         public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. ...

         38.      For my part, by way of postscript, I am  far  from  saying
         that, on the facts of this case it might not be open to the FTT (or
         UT) to conclude that there are compelling reasons for not deporting
         [the claimant] - based especially on the fact of 40 years' (lawful)
         residence so as to  make  deportation  unconscionable  despite  his
         sentence for dealing in class A drugs. But - an important but -  it
         matters to public confidence that  any  such  decision  is  reached
         appropriately, after due regard is had to the great  weight  to  be
         attached to the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals and with "exceptional circumstances" properly  understood
         as meaning "compelling reasons".

 7. That decision stands as the error of law decision in the Upper Tribunal
    and we now proceed to the substantive remaking of the decision.

Transfer order

 8. The appeal was listed on 13 July 2016 before the President, Mr  Justice
    McCloskey, and Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington.  The  claimant  appeared
    in person, as his previous solicitors  had  terminated  their  retainer
    several years earlier.  The appeal was adjourned to give  the  claimant
    an opportunity to seek representation, and the Secretary of State  time
    to deal with a significant quantity of documents which had  been  late-
    served.

 9. On 3 August 2016, Principal Resident Judge Dawson made a Transfer Order
    directing that the appeal be heard  before  a  differently  constituted
    Tribunal, because he was satisfied that it was not  practical  for  the
    original Tribunal to give its decision without undue further delay.

Adjournment application

10. The claimant and his family were present at the Upper Tribunal  hearing
    but no attempt had been made to comply with the standard directions  in
    relation to bundles, authorities, and witness statements.

11. Mr Eleftheriadis, for the claimant, made an application for  a  further
    adjournment. He stated that he had recently been instructed by the  Bar
    Pro Bono Unit, referred to the claimant's appearance at the hearing  on
    13 July 2016, and asserted that those instructing him had not  received
    from the claimant the Tribunal's directions for production  of  witness
    evidence or bundles.

12. Mr Eleftheriadis indicated that  the  claimant  wished  to  update  his
    evidence relating to events between the date of hearing in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal hearing today, with  reference  to
    Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (as
    amended).

13. Mr Eleftheriadis submitted that  new  evidence  was  required  for  the
    matter to be decided fairly and sought a  further  adjournment  of  5-6
    weeks in order to produce such evidence.  He  was  unable  to  indicate
    what the nature of the new evidence  would  be.   He  argued  that  the
    appeal was inadequately prepared through no fault of the claimant,  who
    had been unable to afford representation.

14. Mr Eleftheriadis told the Tribunal that both he and Ineyab  Solicitors,
    whom he described as his instructing solicitor, were acting  pro  bono.
    In answer to questions from the Tribunal,  Mr  Eleftheriadis  clarified
    the position:  the claimant had been represented by the same individual
    solicitor throughout, albeit there had been  a  change  of  solicitors'
    practice when the solicitor in question left one firm for another.

15. We were not prepared to adjourn the hearing out of the list:  there had
    already been a delay of just over a month since  the  previous  hearing
    and the claimant himself had been served with the standard  directions.
    We put the appeal to the back of our  list,  with  a  marking  of  'not
    before 2 p.m.' which we considered would enable  Mr  Eleftheriadis  and
    his solicitor to prepare witness statements and a  proper  rule  15(2A)
    application.  We indicated that we expected the solicitor to attend  at
    2 p.m. and explain  why  when  he  accepted  instructions  he  had  not
    ascertained, either from the claimant or the Tribunal,  what  were  the
    outstanding directions with  which  he  needed  to  comply  before  the
    substantive hearing.

16. In the event, the appeal was not reached in the list until 16:30 hours,
    by which time the claimant's counsel had prepared a written application
    under Rule 15(2A)(a) appending various witness statements.

17. For the Secretary of State, Mr Singh indicated he had no  objection  to
    that evidence being adduced and that he did not seek  to  cross-examine
    the witnesses.  The witness statements therefore stand unchallenged and
    we proceeded on the basis of submissions only.

18. The parties indicated that, notwithstanding the late  hour,  they  were
    content to proceed with the substantive hearing.   After discussing the
    matter with the parties, it was agreed that the findings of fact in the
    First-tier Tribunal decision should be preserved, with  the  claimant's
    new evidence dealing with events since that hearing.

19. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

20. The Secretary of State provided a bundle for the appeal in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. This included documents submitted by  the  claimant  for
    that appeal.  The claimant also submitted a bundle  to  that  tribunal,
    with a skeleton argument.  We  have  been  provided  with  the  Judge's
    sentencing remarks and associated court papers;  prison  documentation;
    grounds of appeal and case law on which the  parties  relied  in  those
    proceedings.

21. In addition, the claimant has  now  provided  witness  statements  from
    himself, his wife, and two of his younger sisters.

22. We have had regard to the skeleton argument produced by  Mr  Singh  for
    the Secretary of State, and to Mr  Eleftheriadis'  speaking  note.   We
    have been referred to the following judgment: Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department v LW (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 369 (the  claimant's
    case).  In addition, the Secretary of State relied  on  MM  (Uganda)  &
    Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  450
    and NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662.  We consider below the effect of those decisions  on  the
    facts of this appeal.

Facts and chronology

23. The claimant is now 59 years old.  He is a  Jamaican  citizen  who  has
    lived lawfully in the UK since the age of 16,  a  period  of  about  43
    years.   He initially entered the UK as a dependent  child.   Prior  to
    coming to the UK to join his father, the claimant had been  brought  up
    in Jamaica by his grandmother who has since died.

24. The claimant has 22 convictions  between  1976  and  2011:  8  offences
    against the person; 1 offence against property; 19  theft  and  kindred
    offences;  2  public  disorder  offences;  3   offences   relating   to
    police/courts/prisons  and  3  drug  offences.  The  majority  of   the
    convictions were between 1976 and 1996. There then  followed  a  period
    without convictions until the claimant was  convicted  of  supplying  a
    Class A drug (cocaine) and possession of cannabis in September 2002. He
    was sentenced to a community punishment order for those  two  offences.
    He was given a conditional discharge of 18 months in  May  2010  for  a
    public order offence.  On 6 December 2011 he was sentenced to 6  years'
    imprisonment for possession  and  supply  of  a  Class  A  drug  (crack
    cocaine). The sentencing judge in December 2011 described the  claimant
    as "a middle range operator", not a street  dealer,  but  "someone  who
    deliberately  and  wilfully  chose  for  whatever  reasons  to  involve
    [himself] in this trade".  The judge was in no doubt the  claimant  was
    "involving [himself] in the supply of Class A drugs".  The judge  noted
    the claimant had a previous conviction for a similar offence nine years
    earlier (albeit he had largely kept out of trouble since then). He  had
    returned to that sort of offending "in a fairly substantial way".   The
    claimant was released from prison in December 2014  and  has  not  been
    convicted of any offences since that date.

25. The claimant has a large family including his wife, adult children  and
    step-children (whom he  treats  as  his  own)  and  grandchildren.  The
    claimant and his wife have been in a relationship for about  26  years,
    albeit they only married in June 2011. Their relationship is a  genuine
    and subsisting one.  One of the claimant's children, aged  20,  suffers
    from sickle cell anaemia and asthma.  The claimant's family is British.
    His wife was born here and has her own family here.  She is  unwilling,
    and considers it impossible, to live in Jamaica.

26. The claimant has only visited Jamaica twice since his  arrival  in  the
    UK: once for his grandmother's funeral and, on the second  occasion  in
    2010, for a short holiday. He has no  relatives  there;  his  relatives
    (apart from two sisters in Canada) live  in  the  UK.  His  grandmother
    lived in rented accommodation. He has no home in Jamaica.

27. The claimant has Type  1  insulin-dependent  diabetes  with  associated
    symptoms. The claimant would have  to  pay  for  medical  treatment  in
    Jamaica; when he visited Jamaica in 2010 he had to  take  insulin  with
    him.  The claimant says he would  be  deprived  of  family  support  in
    relation to his health conditions.  At the date of hearing in 2013  the
    overall control of the claimant's diabetes had not been good; his blood
    sugars were high; he had developed an eye problem and "seem[ed]  to  be
    developing renal failure".

28. The claimant's mother is aged 80 and was, in 2013, very concerned about
    the prospect of her son's deportation because he would not have a  home
    or financial support and may become destitute; he would not be able  to
    obtain quality medical attention for his condition; he would  not  have
    family support or contact; the family would not be able  to  travel  to
    Jamaica from the UK.  Her evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    2013 was that her health was being affected  by  the  prospect  of  his
    deportation.  The claimant was close to his mother and  had  telephoned
    and written to her from prison.

29. The claimant has now updated the evidence which was before  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal.   His  evidence  before  us  is  that  his  health  has
    deteriorated further; he has also developed a stomach  condition  which
    is under investigation. He believes he would not  be  able  to  receive
    appropriate treatment in Jamaica; it is not available and he could  not
    afford it. He has no family or friends to help him there.

30. The claimant also told us he has been rehabilitated as a result of  the
    latest period in prison. He was released in December  2014  (after  the
    hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  August  2013).  He  is  very
    remorseful and determined not to  commit  offences  again.  He  has  an
    excellent record in prison, assisting others and  acting  as  race  and
    diversity coordinator for prisoners.  He has attended  various  courses
    whilst in prison.  He does not want to be  separated  from  his  family
    again and is aware he has caused his family great  emotional  distress.
    He has complied with reporting  restrictions  since  his  release  from
    prison. He also sees a probation officer every  6  weeks  and  has  not
    missed an appointment. He wants to do  some  voluntary  work,  9am-5pm,
    once his probation has finished; he is not able to do so at the  moment
    due to his immigration status. He has been offered a voluntary position
    with a Youth Offenders' organisation in Bath. The claimant  knows  what
    he did was wrong; he has accepted the consequences of going to  prison;
    he suffered a lot in jail where he became very stressed and  depressed.
    He now sees life differently.

31. The claimant is a practising  Christian  and  now  takes  some  of  his
    grandchildren to church every Sunday. He also helps his dyslexic  step-
    granddaughter, taking her to and from school  and  assisting  with  her
    school work. He is proud of the impact his help has  had  on  her.  The
    claimant wants to provide support for his children  and  step-children,
    particularly his adult son  with  sickle  cell  anaemia  who  also  has
    behavioural problems. His  stepchildren  have  no  contact  with  their
    natural father.

32. The claimant's wife found it difficult to cope with the children  alone
    when the claimant was in prison. She visited him weekly in prison.  She
    has  been  diagnosed  with   depression   and   takes   anti-depressant
    medication.  She also has asthma.  Her children and grandchildren  were
    born in the UK and know only life here. The  culture  and  language  in
    Jamaica would be alien to her and to them.  She has elderly parents  in
    the UK whom she visits three times a week.  She does not wish to  sever
    her ties with her family here.  She  supports  the  claimant  with  his
    treatment for diabetes.   The  claimant's  wife  suffers  from  a  knee
    problem and, on bad days, the claimant has to help her with daily tasks
    such as getting in and out of the bath or walking upstairs. He  is  her
    main carer. If he were to be deported  she  would  have  no  access  to
    medical treatment.  She currently has problems  with  both  knees:  she
    wears a leg brace for 6 hours a day. She receives physiotherapy once  a
    week and is awaiting surgery. Her other knee is also  problematic.  She
    takes painkillers for these conditions.  She is registered disabled and
    in receipt of state benefits due to her reduced mobility.  The claimant
    and his wife moved home about nine months ago to make  a  fresh  start.
    Their adult son is living with them as their dependent; he has  applied
    to start college in September.  The claimant's wife says her husband is
    a changed person since his release in December 2014; she cannot imagine
    life without him but believes it would be "impossible" for her to  move
    to Jamaica:  she  could  not  leave  her  children  and  grandchildren;
    travelling to the UK  would  be  unaffordable;  her  parents  are  both
    elderly and her father,  who  is  86,  suffers  from  "early  signs  of
    dementia".  Her mother has heart problems. The claimant's wife is  also
    very involved in the lives of her children and  grandchildren;  one  of
    her adult daughters is a single  mother  with  five  children  and  the
    claimant's wife sometimes looks after them.

33. One of the claimant's younger sisters lives in Bromley; her evidence to
    us is that her relationship with the  claimant  is  close.  She  is  so
    convinced of his being a changed man that  she  was  a  surety  on  his
    release from detention on bail. She  speaks  to  him  by  telephone  on
    Sundays and they see each other regularly.  She says he has  changed  a
    great deal since his latest conviction.

34. The claimant's updated evidence for the hearing before us is  that  his
    mother had a knee replacement operation in February 2016 and cannot yet
    walk. The claimant's father has  diabetes  and  prostate  cancer.   The
    claimant sees his deportation as not only breaking up the  family  unit
    but as a death sentence for him; he believes  he  would  be  unable  to
    survive at his age and in his state of physical and mental health.

35. The evidence before us is that, since the claimant and his  wife  moved
    house, the claimant has been able to avoid former criminal contacts. He
    finds comfort in going to church.  He regrets all the problems  he  has
    caused his family and society. He wants to give back to his family.  If
    given a new chance, he would not  make  the  same  mistakes.  He  would
    ensure his grandchildren do not grow up in the wrong  environment.   He
    has been supportive of his  sisters  since  leaving  prison,  including
    sitting with one sister during dialysis sessions in London. He had also
    visited that sister in hospital in London after  a  kidney  transplant,
    travelling from Bath to do so.

Submissions

36. We have had regard to all of  the  evidence,  both  oral  and  written,
    including the supplementary witness statements  of  the  claimant,  his
    wife and two of his sisters, submitted at the  hearing,  together  with
    the oral and written submissions of both representatives.

37. For the Secretary of State, Mr Singh relied on the Secretary of State's
    skeleton argument.  He relied on the judgment of Lord  Justice  Jackson
    in the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at [29]-[30] and  [37]  as  setting
    out the correct approach to paragraph 399A and Exceptions 1 and 2 under
    section 117C.   We refer to that decision in more detail below.

38. In his oral submissions, Mr  Singh  submitted  that  the  claimant  was
    indeed a serious offender.  However, he argued that the claimant's case
    did not involve  circumstances  of  the  kind  described  in  paragraph
    399(a); nor did he have a child under the age of  18  in  the  UK;  his
    relationship with his wife was formed at a time when he was in  the  UK
    lawfully and his  immigration  status  was  not  precarious  (paragraph
    399(b)(i)), but it would not  be  unduly  harsh  for  her  to  live  in
    Jamaica. Consideration of harshness involved taking into  account,  not
    only the impact on the claimant's  wife,  but  also  his  criminal  and
    immigration history (MM (Uganda) at [24]).

39. Whilst it might be harsh for her to live in Jamaica, Mr Singh submitted
    that  it  was  not  unduly  so  because  there   were   no   compelling
    circumstances over and above those in paragraph EX.2  of  Appendix  FM,
    that is to say, "very significant difficulties ... which could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very  serious  hardship".   Nor  would  it  be
    unduly harsh for the wife to remain in  the  UK  without  the  claimant
    (paragraph 399(b)(iii)), if that was what she chose to  do.   Mr  Singh
    argued that there were no very significant obstacles to the  claimant's
    integration into Jamaica  (paragraph  399A).   Therefore  the  claimant
    failed at the first stage of the NA test. In the  alternative,  he  did
    not meet the test at [30] of NA.

40. Mr Singh submitted that while medical treatment  in  the  UK  might  be
    better than in Jamaica and  more  accessible,  on  the  facts  of  this
    appeal, that was not sufficient to amount to very significant obstacles
    to the claimant's integration.  In any  event,  there  was  no  medical
    evidence on the issue.  The time spent by the claimant in  the  UK  was
    not a weighty factor, given the number of offences committed.  Nor  was
    the public interest in  deportation  was  lessened  by  the  claimant's
    remorse and the low risk of reconviction; such factors are present in a
    high proportion of cases and cannot be said to  be  "very  compelling".
    The new evidence, which was similar to that in 2013,  highlighted  that
    this case fell very far short of the threshold.

41. Mr Eleftheriadis, for the claimant, relied on  his  speaking  note  and
    made oral submissions. In his speaking  note,  Mr  Eleftheriadis  noted
    that permission had been given by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Hesham  Ali
    (Iraq) on whether the Immigration Rules are a complete code in relation
    to deportation. The decision was expected in autumn 2016.   He  applied
    for an adjournment on the basis  that  the  claimant  had  only  lately
    instructed Counsel and that further time was required.    The  claimant
    would rely on the guidance given by the European Court of Human  Rights
    in Maslov v Austria 1638/03 [2007] ECHR 221, [2009] INLR 47 and on  the
    factors therein set out.

42. In his oral submissions, Mr Eleftheriadis relied on the decision in NA,
    in particular at paragraphs [31] and [37] thereof.  He  submitted  that
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal were  sufficient  to  meet  the
    test   of   "compelling   reasons".   Alternatively,   the   claimant's
    circumstances in 2016 were such that such reasons  existed  now.  There
    should be no search for a silver bullet.

43. Mr Eleftheriadis reminded the Upper Tribunal of the preserved  findings
    in the First-tier Tribunal decision concerning the  claimant's  private
    and family life. He noted the obiter dictum of Gross LJ in the Court of
    Appeal on  the  claimant's  situation.   The  claimant  had  a  medical
    condition and did not believe  he  would  have  access  to  appropriate
    treatment in Jamaica. He had lived most of his life, 40 years,  in  the
    UK where treatment was  free.  He  had  no  relatives,  connections  or
    accommodation in Jamaica. The difficulty in obtaining treatment for his
    health  conditions  did  amount  to  "very  significant  obstacles"  to
    reintegration in Jamaica;  the  claimant  did  not  have  the  physical
    constitution for life in Jamaica; and the  claimant  had  a  legitimate
    expectation that he would live in the UK for the rest of his life  with
    access to free healthcare.

44. The claimant's wife was a qualifying  partner.  She  had  attended  the
    hearing. There was a strong bond between the couple; she  had  suffered
    whilst he had been in prison.  The wife took medication for depression.
    She was disabled. The wife had family in the UK but  the  claimant  was
    her main carer. No support was given by Social Services.

45. Mr Eleftheriadis submitted there was a distinction between  the  public
    interest in addressing criminality and the objectives of sentencing but
    accepted there were no authorities on the issue.

46. Mr Eleftheriadis submitted that if the claimant were to be returned  to
    Jamaica, the effect on his wife would be catastrophic, as the  evidence
    made clear. The wife had two options: to go to Jamaica where she  would
    not have access to medical care and  which  would  sever  contact  with
    children and grandchildren here. Alternatively,  she  could  remain  in
    this country in which case she would lose the emotional bond  with  her
    husband which had been sustained over many difficult years.  Since  his
    release from prison in December 2014, the  claimant  had  provided  his
    wife  with  emotional   and   practical   support,   brought   up   his
    grandchildren,  taken  them  to  church  and  moved  away  from  former
    temptations. The family unit would be destroyed if he were removed.

47. Mr Eleftheriadis submitted that the claimant met Exceptions 1 and 2  in
    section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended). Whilst it was accepted there was no single compelling ground,
    the factors should be considered in the round, particularly the  health
    of the claimant and his wife. Furthermore, the tribunal could  consider
    relevant factors twice: both under the Rules and under s117C(c), per NA
    (Pakistan) [31]. Such relevant factors included the disabilities of the
    parties and the considerable length of the claimant's residence in  the
    United Kingdom.  Also of relevance was the  impact  on  the  claimant's
    grandchildren.  The claimant had spent all his adult life in the UK; he
    had no life at all in Jamaica. The claimant had committed  no  offences
    since 2014. These various factors made the case unique.

The Law

48. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007  makes  provision  for  automatic
    deportation of "foreign criminals" as there defined,

         "32      Automatic deportation

          (1)     In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a) who is not a British citizen,

             (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

             (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

         (2)      Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months. ...

         (4)      For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act
         1971 (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to
         the public good.

         (5)      The Secretary of State must make a  deportation  order  in
         respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33). ..."

49. The relevant exception in section 33 for the purposes of this appeal is
    Exception 1  in  section  33(2)(a),  with  reference  to  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights:

         "33 (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the  foreign  criminal  in
         pursuance of the deportation  order  would  breach-(a)  a  person's
         Convention rights, ..."


50. The relevant parts of Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules provide:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years.
                  ...

             The Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

51. Paragraph 399 states that it applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
    applies, that is to say, where the deportation decision is based  on  a
    sentence of less than 4 years or is made because in  the  view  of  the
    Secretary of State, the offending has caused serious harm or the person
    is a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the  law.
    The Secretary of State's decision in this appeal  relies  on  paragraph
    398(a), to which paragraph 399 is not applicable.

52. Paragraph 399A is applicable in this appeal as the  claimant  has  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  most  of  his  life.   We
    accept  that  he  is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  here,  but
    paragraph 399A will only avail the claimant where:

         "399A(c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
         integration into  the  country  to  which  it  is  proposed  he  is
         deported."

53. Part 5A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended), identifies the public interest considerations in an Article 8
    claim. Those of relevance here are as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
         cases


         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest. ...


         117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal. ...


         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-


             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship  with  a  qualifying  child,  and  the
             effect of C's deportation on the partner  or  child  would  be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least 4  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.


         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."    (Emphasis added)


Case law

54. In RU (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 651 the Bangladeshi claimant had spent over 30 years here with
    indefinite leave to remain from the age of 14. In 1999 he was sentenced
    to 15 years for assault with intent  to  cause  grievous  bodily  harm.
    Lord Justice Aikens, giving the judgment of the  Court  and  dismissing
    the claimant's appeal, said this:

         "The point about "deterrence" is not whether the deportation  of  a
         particular "foreign criminal" may  or  may  not  have  a  deterrent
         effect on other prospective offenders.  It  concerns  a  much  more
         fundamental concept which is explained by Judge LJ at [83]  of  his
         judgment in N (Kenya). The UK operates  an  immigration  system  by
         which control is exercised over non-British citizens who enter  and
         remain in the UK. The operation of that system must take account of
         broad issues of social cohesion in the UK. Moreover, the public has
         to have confidence in its operation. Those requirements are for the
         "public good" or are in the "public interest". For both of those to
         requirements to be fulfilled, the  operation  of  the  system  must
         contain an element of deterrence to non-British  citizens  who  are
         either already in the UK (even if refugees) or who are thinking  of
         coming to the UK, "so as to ensure  that  they  clearly  understand
         that, whatever  the  circumstances,  one  of  the  consequences  of
         serious crime may well be deportation".  That  element  of  "public
         interest" or "public good" is a part  of  the  legislative  policy,
         declared by Parliament in section  32(4)  of  the  UKBA,  that  the
         deportation of "foreign  criminals"  is  conducive  to  the  public
         good."


    That decision predates the current statutory scheme but the observation
    that those non-British citizens who are considering serious crime  must
    be aware of the possible consequences remains a valid observation,  and
    indeed, it may be seen as underpinning the statutory scheme  which  now
    exists.

55. The Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 held  that  the  Immigration  Rules  on
    deportation constituted a complete code in relation to Article 8  ECHR,
    such that there was no additional  possibility  of  granting  leave  to
    remain  on  the  basis  of  exceptional  or  compelling   compassionate
    circumstances, other than those for which the Rules provide.

56. In MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450  the  Court  of  Appeal  resolved  a
    perceived conflict between the decisions of the Upper Tribunal  on  the
    meaning of 'unduly harsh' and what must  be  taken  into  account  when
    assessing it MAB (para 399: 'unduly harsh')  (USA)  [2015]  UKUT  00435
    (IAC) and KMO (Section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria  [2015]  UKUT  00543
    (IAC), in favour of the analysis in  KMO  that  assessment  of  whether
    deportation is 'unduly harsh' requires regard to  be  had  to  all  the
    circumstances, including a foreign criminal's immigration and  criminal
    history.  As to the meaning of 'unduly harsh', MM did not criticise the
    formulation used in both MAB and in KMO at [26]:

         "Whether the conditions of deportation will be 'unduly  harsh'  for
         an individual  involves  more  than  'uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
         undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely  difficult   and   challenging'
         consequences and imposes a considerably  more  elevated  or  higher
         threshold.


         The consequences for an individual will be 'harsh' if they are
         'severe' or 'bleak' and they will be 'unduly' so if they are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into account all of
         the circumstances of the individual.".


57. Lord Justice Laws, giving the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  MM,
    said this:

         "22.     I turn to the interpretation of the phrase 'unduly harsh'.
         Plainly it means the same  in  section  117C(5)  as  in  Rule  399.
         'unduly harsh' is an ordinary English expression. As so often,  its
         meaning is coloured by its context. Authority is hardly needed  for
         such a proposition but is anyway provided, for example by VIA  Rail
         Canada [2000] 193 DLR (4th) 357 at paragraphs 35 to 37.


         23.      The  context  in  these  cases  invites  emphasis  on  two
         factors,  (1)  the  public  interest  in  the  removal  of  foreign
         criminals and (2) the need for a proportionate  assessment  of  any
         interference with Article 8 rights. In my judgment,  with  respect,
         the approach of the Upper Tribunal in MAB ignores this  combination
         of factors. The first of them, the public interest in  the  removal
         of foreign criminals, is expressly vouched by Parliament in section
         117C(1).  Section 117C(2) then provides (I repeat the provision for
         convenience):


             "The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
             the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
             criminal."


         24.       This  steers  the  tribunals  and  the  court  towards  a
         proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in any given
         case. Accordingly, the more pressing the  public  interest  in  his
         removal, the harder it will be to show that the effect on his child
         or partner will be unduly harsh. Any other approach in my  judgment
         dislocates the 'unduly harsh' provisions  from  their  context.  It
         would mean that the question of undue  hardship  would  be  decided
         wholly without regard to  the  force  of  the  public  interest  in
         deportation in the particular case.  But  in  that  case  the  term
         "unduly" is mistaken for  "excessive"  which  imports  a  different
         idea. What is due or undue depends on all  the  circumstances,  not
         merely the impact on the child or partner in the given case. In the
         present  context  relevant  circumstances  certainly  include   the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history."


58. The correct approach to a human rights appeal in a deportation case was
    set out by the Upper Tribunal in Chege (section  117D  -  Article  8  -
    approach)  Kenya  [2015]  UKUT  165  (IAC).   The  guidance  given   is
    summarised in the judicial headnote:

         "The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds  has
         been brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to consider:


         i. is the appellant a foreign criminal as defined by s117D (2) (a),
         (b) or (c);


         ii.      if so, does he fall within paragraph 399 or 399A of the
         Immigration Rules;


         iii.     if not are there very compelling  circumstances  over  and
         beyond  those  falling  within  399  and  399A  relied  upon,  such
         identification to be informed by the seriousness of the criminality
         and taking into account the factors set out in s117B.


         'Compelling' as an adjective has the meaning of having  a  powerful
         and irresistible effect; convincing.


         The purpose of paragraph 398 is to recognize circumstances that are
         sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
         deportation but do not fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         The task of the judge is to assess the competing interests  and  to
         determine whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
         for private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  or
         whether   the   public   interest    arguments    should    prevail
         notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8.


         It follows from this that if an appeal does not  succeed  on  human
         rights grounds,  paragraph  397  provides  the  respondent  with  a
         residual  discretion  to  grant  leave  to  remain  in  exceptional
         circumstances where an appellant cannot succeed by invoking  rights
         protected by Article 8 of the ECHR."


59. In NA (Pakistan) Lord Justice  Jackson,  giving  the  decision  of  the
    Court, helpfully referred to those whose  sentences  are  less  than  4
    years as 'medium  offenders'  and  those,  like  this  claimant,  whose
    sentences are longer than 4 years as 'serious  offenders'.   The  Court
    held that, despite the language used in section 117C(3), the fall  back
    provided in section 117C(6) is available to both medium  offenders  and
    serious offender.  Applying Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    v JZ (Zambia) [2016] EWCA Civ 116, the rule 399 and 399A  and  now  the
    Exception  1  and  Exception  2  factors  were  not  ring  fenced  when
    considering the fall back in section 117C(6).

60. The most important parts of the  judgment  in  NA  (Pakistan)  for  our
    purposes are as follows:

         "29.     In our view, the reasoning of the Court of  Appeal  in  JZ
         (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase  used  in  section
         117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have  held  is
         to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean  that  a  foreign
         criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from  seeking
         to rely on matters falling within the scope  of  the  circumstances
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that "there
         are very compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
         in Exceptions 1 and 2". As  we  have  indicated  above,  a  foreign
         criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he  would  need
         to be able to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned  in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the  2014  rules),
         or features falling outside the circumstances  described  in  those
         Exceptions and those paragraphs, which  made  his  claim  based  on
         Article 8 especially strong.


         30.      In the case of a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
         circumstances in his own case which could be said to correspond  to
         the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and  2,  but  where  he
         could only just succeed in  such  an  argument,  it  would  not  be
         possible to describe his situation  as  involving  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2. One might describe that as a bare case of the kind described  in
         Exceptions 1 or 2. On the other hand, if he could point to  factors
         identified in  the  descriptions  of  Exceptions  1  and  2  of  an
         especially compelling kind in support of an Article 8 claim,  going
         well beyond what would be necessary to make out a bare case of  the
         kind described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
         constitute "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2", whether taken by themselves or in
         conjunction with other factors relevant to application  of  Article
         8.


         31.      An interpretation of the relevant phrase to  exclude  this
         possibility would lead to violation of Article  8  in  some  cases,
         which plainly was not Parliament's intention. In terms of relevance
         and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under  Article  8,  the
         factors singled out for description in  Exceptions  1  and  2  will
         apply with greater or lesser force depending on the specific  facts
         of a particular case. ...


         33.      Although there  is  no  'exceptionality'  requirement,  it
         inexorably follows from the statutory  scheme  that  the  cases  in
         which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the
         high public interest in deportation will be rare.  The  commonplace
         incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in poor health  or
         the  natural  love  between  parents  and  children,  will  not  be
         sufficient.


         34.      The best  interests  of  children  certainly  carry  great
         weight, as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy Prosecutor of the
         Italian Republic  [2012]  UKSC  25;  [2013]  1  AC  338  at  [145].
         Nevertheless,  it  is  a  consequence  of  criminal  conduct   that
         offenders may be separated from  their  children  for  many  years,
         contrary to the best interests of those children. The  desirability
         of children being with both parents  is  a  commonplace  of  family
         life. That is not usually a sufficiently compelling circumstance to
         outweigh the high public interest in deporting  foreign  criminals.
         As Rafferty  LJ  observed  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department v CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:


             "Neither the British nationality of the respondent's  children
             nor their likely separation from their father for a long  time
             are  exceptional  circumstances  which  outweigh  the   public
             interest in his deportation."


         35.      The Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) that  paras.  398
         to 399A of the 2012 rules constituted a complete code. The same  is
         true of the sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act, read in conjunction
         with paras. 398 to 399A of the 2014 rules. The scheme  of  the  Act
         and the rules together provide the following structure for deciding
         whether a foreign criminal can  resist  deportation  on  Article  8
         grounds. ...


         37.      In relation to  a  serious  offender,  it  will  often  be
         sensible first to see whether his case  involves  circumstances  of
         the kind  described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  both  because  the
         circumstances so described set out particularly significant factors
         bearing upon respect for private life (Exception 1) and respect for
         family life (Exception 2) and because that may  provide  a  helpful
         basis on which an assessment can be made whether  there  are  "very
         compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described   in
         Exceptions 1 and 2" as is required under section 117C(6).  It  will
         then be necessary to look to see whether any of the factors falling
         within Exceptions 1 and 2 are of such force, whether by  themselves
         or taken in conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered
         by the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as to satisfy
         the test in section 117C(6).


         38.      Against that background, one may ask what is the  role  of
         the Strasbourg jurisprudence? In particular, how does one take into
         account important decisions such as Uner v  Netherlands  (2007)  45
         EHRR 14 and Maslov v Austria? ... Anyone applying these  tests  (as
         required by our own rules and legislation) should heed the guidance
         contained in the Strasbourg authorities. As we have  stated  above,
         the scheme of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and paras.  398-399A  of  the
         2014 rules is to ensure compliance with the requirements of Article
         8 through a structured approach, which is intended to  ensure  that
         proper weight is given to the public interest in deportation whilst
         also having regard to other relevant factors as identified  in  the
         Strasbourg and domestic case law. The new regime is not intended to
         produce violations of Article 8.


         39.      Even then it must be borne in mind that assessments  under
         Article  8  may  not  lead  to  identical  results  in  every  ECHR
         contracting state. ... In England  and  Wales,  the  weight  to  be
         attached to the public interest in deportation of foreign offenders
         has   been   underlined   by   successive   specific    legislative
         interventions:  first  by  enactment  of  the  2007  Act,  then  by
         promulgation of  the  code  in  the  2012  rules  and  now  by  the
         introduction of further primary legislation in the form of Part  5A
         of the 2002 Act and  the  new  code  in  the  2014  rules.  Statute
         requires that in carrying out Article 8 assessments in relation  to
         foreign  criminals  the  decision-maker  must  recognise  that  the
         deportation of foreign criminals is "conducive to the public  good"
         (per section 32(4) of the 2007 Act) and "in  the  public  interest"
         (per section 117C(1) of the 2014 Act)."


61. That is the legal framework within which we approach the factual matrix
    in this appeal.

Discussion

62. It is not in dispute that  the  claimant  is  a  foreign  criminal,  as
    defined by section 117D(2)(c)(i).  The Immigration Rules are a complete
    code.  Following NA  (Pakistan),  we  approach  them  as  follows:  the
    claimant is a serious offender, because he was sentenced  to  6  years'
    imprisonment  for  the  offence  of  supplying  Class  A  drugs  (crack
    cocaine).

63. Paragraph 399 of the  Rules  is  not  relevant,  since  the  provisions
    thereof apply only to medium offenders.  We therefore do  not  consider
    at this stage his relationship with his wife, or whether it  is  unduly
    harsh for her to move to Jamaica with him, or to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom without him.  Those considerations are contained  in  paragraph
    399 and do not come  into  play  where  the  sentence  of  imprisonment
    exceeds 4 years.

64. Paragraph 399A is applicable.  We accept that  the  claimant  has  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life, and  that
    he is socially and culturally integrated here.  The question for us  is
    that posed in paragraph 399A(c), that is to say, whether there would be
    'very significant obstacles to his integration into [Jamaica]'.

65. We are not satisfied, in relation to the claimant, that there are  such
    obstacles.  We bear in mind that he has lived in the United Kingdom for
    a very long time, since he was 16 years old, and  that  he  is  now  59
    years old.  He has had the last few years of his childhood, and all  of
    his adult life here.  However, he was in Jamaica  until  his  mid-teens
    and speaks English, which is the language there.  He is  familiar  with
    its culture and society; he is still a Jamaican citizen and has visited
    Jamaica as an adult, both for  his  grandmother's  funeral  and  for  a
    holiday, in  2010.    The  claimant  has  produced  no  evidence  which
    satisfies us that he could not  resume  friendships  and  relationships
    which he had, or make new ones.  He is willing to work  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and could do so in Jamaica also.  In relation to  his  general
    social circumstances, we are not satisfied that there is any reason why
    the claimant cannot lawfully be returned to Jamaica.

66. We next consider the appeal from the perspective of section 117C.   The
    claimant meets the requirements of Exception 1(a) and (b)  in  that  he
    has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life.
    He is now a good member of his local community.  He helps his wife, his
    son, and his grandchildren and step-grandchildren.  He goes  to  Church
    and he has now stayed out of trouble for about 2 years.  He wants to be
    allowed to work, to help young people if he can.

67. We have considered the claimant's ill health.  We accept  that  he  has
    Type 1 insulin-dependent diabetes, currently poorly controlled, despite
    the available medication and treatment here.  He has high blood  sugar,
    an eye problem, and may be developing kidney  failure.  It  is  unclear
    whether he complies poorly with the present  medication  and  treatment
    regime for his diabetes, or whether the disease is  simply  progressing
    through no fault of this claimant, as appears to have been the case for
    one of his sisters.

68. The claimant produced no new medical evidence and no objective evidence
    about the available medical treatment for diabetes in Jamaica.  All  we
    have is his assertion  that  when  he  visited,  some  years  ago,  the
    claimant took his insulin with him.  We do not find that the  evidence,
    including  the  health  evidence,  reaches  the   standard   of   'very
    significant  obstacles'  to  return  as  required  by  Exception  1  at
    subsection 117C(4)(c).   It  is  not  therefore  necessary  for  us  to
    consider whether, in addition to the Exception 1  circumstances,  there
    are 'very compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2' as required by section 117C(7).

69. We turn, therefore, to Exception 2, and we accept that the claimant has
    a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  wife,  who  is  a
    qualifying partner.  He does not have  such  a  relationship  with  his
    grandchildren  since  his  relationship  with  them  is   that   of   a
    grandfather, not parental.  His own son is now an adult.

70. The next question is whether the effect on the wife of  the  claimant's
    removal would be 'unduly harsh', having regard to his criminal history,
    the seriousness of his offence, and all other  relevant  circumstances.
    The claimant's wife has stood by him through his incarceration  and  it
    is clear that she, and the family, are very glad to have him  back  and
    that he is being a helpful husband,  grandfather,  and  member  of  his
    local Church and community.  There was no independent  evidence  as  to
    the best interests of any of the claimant's grandchildren; his evidence
    is that one of them is dyslexic and he helps that child;  there  is  no
    evidence that other help for dyslexia is unavailable,  either  to  that
    child, or generally.

71. The evidence in relation to the claimant's wife is  not  sufficient  to
    reach the standard for being 'unduly harsh'.  As set out by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MAB and KMO, what is required is to show that the effect of
    deportation   involves   more   than   'uncomfortable,    inconvenient,
    undesirable,   unwelcome   or   merely   difficult   and   challenging'
    consequences  and  imposes  a  considerably  more  elevated  or  higher
    threshold. We remind ourselves that:

         "...The consequences for an individual will be 'harsh' if they  are
         'severe' or 'bleak' and they  will  be  'unduly'  so  if  they  are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account  all  of
         the circumstances of the individual."

72. The claimant's wife is British, aged 59 and  has  a  number  of  health
    problems. Their 20-year old  son,  who  has  sickle  cell  anaemia  and
    asthma, lives with her and is about to go to college.  The wife  has  a
    large extended family in the United Kingdom.  She was born here and  is
    unwilling, indeed she considers it impossible, to live in Jamaica.  The
    consequences relied upon for the wife are that she will have difficulty
    in managing her own and her son's health problems, and that she and her
    extended family will miss the claimant.   That, as Lord Justice  Aikens
    remarked, is one of the consequences of serious crime  for  non-British
    citizens.

73. We have had regard to the claimant's length of residence  and  that  he
    arrived in the UK at an important time of his personal and  educational
    development but we must give considerable weight to the seriousness  of
    his offence and the public  interest  in  deportation.  We  acknowledge
    that, irrespective of the low risk of  harm  and  reconviction  in  the
    claimant's  case,  the  public  interest  extends  to   deterring   and
    preventing serious crime generally and to upholding  public  abhorrence
    of such offending as that of the claimant.

74. We accept that the claimant helps his wife with daily tasks  but  there
    was no medical evidence or other expert evidence to indicate she  would
    be unable to manage physical tasks or personal hygiene if he were to be
    deported.  We take  judicial  notice  of  the  availability  of  Social
    Services assistance, which does not seem yet to have been explored, and
    of course, the parties' son still lives at home. The wife could receive
    emotional and practical support from family members in the UK  (one  of
    whom lives nearby).

75. Overall, having regard to all of the  factors  in  the  Rules  and  the
    statutory provisions, we are satisfied that the degree of  interference
    with the claimant's and his wife's protected rights under Article 8  is
    proportionate to the public interest in his deportation.

76. The factual matrix in this case does not meet  either  Exception  1  or
    Exception 2.  Accordingly, there are also no  compelling  circumstances
    of the type envisaged in section 117C(6)  (what  Lord  Justice  Jackson
    called the fall-back provision).

DECISION

77. For the foregoing reasons, our decision is as follows:


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on
      a point of law.   We set aside the previous decision.


      We remake the decision by dismissing the claimant's appeal.


Signed      A M Black                        Date    12 October 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



