
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01171/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th September 2013                          |On 9th October 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR
                         upper tribunal judge reeds

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   ms t h

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Adler, Counsel, instructed by Hereward & Foster
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell and  Mrs  A  F  Cross  De  Chavannes  made
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 14th March 2013.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  25th  December  1983.
    She came to the UK on a spouse visa on 5th September 2007.  On 9th July
    2009 she was sentenced to imprisonment for a five year  term  following
    her plea of guilty to the single count of attempted murder on 10th June
    2009 of her daughter A.  On 28th November 2012 an order  was  made  for
    her deportation in accordance with Section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act
    2007.

 3. On 25th July 2011 Mr Justice Mostyn in the Family Division of the  High
    Court made an Order that the child remain a ward of court in  the  care
    and control of her father and that there be supervised contact  between
    the child and her mother three times per annum  for  a  period  of  one
    hour.

 4. The claimant appealed against the deportation decision, and her  appeal
    was allowed. The panel heard oral evidence from the claimant  and  from
    the cousin with whom she lived.  They had a transcript  of  Mr  Justice
    Mostyn's judgement, and the psychiatric reports which were prepared for
    the Crown Court in 2009 and documents from CAFCASS dated January  2013.



 5. The panel recorded the evidence and the submissions  and  set  out  the
    legal framework which governed their decision.  The confirmed that they
    had taken all of the evidence into account and recorded that they  were
    mindful of the views expressed by the Upper Tribunal  in  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2012] UKUT 00393 when it was stated that there was a requirement for a
    two stage approach  in  the  consideration  of  appeals  which  include
    grounds relating to Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The panel stated that there were a number of  factors  which  they  had
    taken into account in reaching their conclusion that removal would  not
    be proportionate.   They  stated  that  the  relevant  authorities  and
    agencies which had  been  involved  in  the  relationship  and  contact
    between the claimant and her daughter  played  a  significant  part  in
    their conclusions.  They carefully noted the relevant case law and  the
    sentencing remarks of  the  judge.   They  also  took  account  of  the
    decision made by Mr  Justice  Mostyn  with  respect  to  the  issue  of
    wardship and contact which in turn took  into  account  the  views  and
    professional opinions expressed in reports before the court  which  had
    also been made available to the Tribunal.

 7. They wrote as follows:

         "In consideration of Section 55 of the 2009 Act, of  the  terms  of
         Article 3 of the United Nations Convention on  the  Rights  of  the
         Child 1989 and all other factors, it is the view of  this  Tribunal
         that the Appellant should be permitted to continue to have  contact
         with her daughter in this country.  It is entirely appreciated that
         it is on a very limited basis at the present time, but in our  view
         it is overwhelmingly significant that contact  has  been  permitted
         and endorsed by the courts.  As to what might happen in the future,
         the Appellant would be at liberty to make further applications  for
         a variation of contact.  This Tribunal does not  believe  that  the
         Appellant poses any risk to society in terms of  re-offending.   It
         is significant that the  Probation  Service  has  been  content  to
         endorse her residence in a home where there are two young  children
         and no problems have been encountered in that regard.  It  is  also
         significant that contact already exists and this Tribunal considers
         that it would be a very cruel decision indeed  effectively  to  end
         such contact for both the Appellant and Ameera.  That would be  the
         situation if the Appellant were deported."

 8. The Tribunal stated that  if  deportation  were  not  contrary  to  the
    provisions of the Human Rights Act 1998 they would in any  event  find,
    with reference to paragraph 397 of HC 395 that the circumstances before
    them were exceptional and  that  accordingly  the  public  interest  in
    deportation was outweighed.

 9. On that basis they allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  essentially  on  2
    grounds.

11. Ground 1  states,  in  summary,  that  the  Tribunal  made  a  material
    misdirection of law in applying a two  stage  test  in  the  Article  8
    assessment.  Their approach derived from MS and was based upon the view
    that the Immigration Rules do  not  fully  reflect  the  Maslov/Boultif
    principles.  However this is a view based upon a  misinterpretation  of
    the Rules.  The Tribunal should  not  have  regarded  the  Rules  as  a
    starting point before moving on to  a  second  freestanding  Article  8
    assessment.

12. If the Tribunal considered factors not addressed in  paragraph  399  or
    399A merited allowing a deportation appeal it  should  have  considered
    them when looking at whether there were any  exceptional  circumstances
    under paragraph 397 or 398 of the Rules.

13. The Rules are now a clear expression of the  public  interest  and  the
    weight attached to it as set out by the Secretary of State and endorsed
    by Parliament.  The Tribunal must have regard to the nature and  weight
    of that public interest and  the  reflection  of  the  public  interest
    contained in  the  Rules  must  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
    assessment.

14. Secondly, the Secretary of State argued that the Tribunal had failed to
    give adequate reasons for findings on material matters.   The  claimant
    has only limited contact with her daughter and the Tribunal had  failed
    to provide adequate reasons as to why it could not be  maintained  from
    abroad. Her daughter does not even fully recognise who she is and since
    2010 she has only seen her mother on  seven  occasions.  There  was  no
    evidence of how the deportation would negatively  affect  the  daughter
    given the limited contact which she has with her.  The daughter may not
    even want to know the claimant when she is older  and  knows  what  has
    happened. The appropriate authorities have determined that  she  should
    only have limited contact which is evidence that they do not think that
    the claimant should be heavily involved  in  the  daughter's  life.  It
    suggests  that  she  has   damaged   her   daughter   emotionally   and
    psychologically and further contact would cause her daughter harm.

15. Finally, the Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons as to  why
    the  daughter's  best  interests  outweighed  the  public  interest  in
    deporting the claimant.  They found that the claimant was of  low  risk
    of re-offending but failed to  make  any  findings  in  regard  to  the
    claimant's  risk  of  harm.   She  is   still  perceived  as  posing  a
    significant risk to her daughter.

16. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Designated  Judge  Zucker
    on 7th May 2013.  He stated that the findings  cannot  be  said  to  be
    perverse and the reasoning was adequate.

17. The Secretary of State renewed the application and, on 17th  June  2013
    Upper Tribunal Judge Latter granted permission and stated that  all  of
    the grounds may be argued.

Submissions

18. Ms Everett relied on her grounds and submitted that  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to grapple with the significant  public  interest  in  deporting
    this claimant. It had not considered what the claimant's absence  would
    mean for the welfare of her daughter.  She said that the  claimant  did
    not fall into any of the exceptions set out in  the  Immigration  Rules
    and the Tribunal had not been explicit about what they were.

19. Too much weight had been put upon the judgment in the family court. The
    Tribunal had not properly considered the impact on Ameera's welfare  if
    the  claimant  was  not  there.   She  accepted  that  there  would  be
    difficulties in maintaining contact if the claimant  were  deported  to
    Bangladesh but the Tribunal should have dealt with the fact  that  some
    form of contact could continue.

20. Ms Adler submitted that this was a detailed  and  carefully  considered
    determination.  The Tribunal had accepted that the claimant  could  not
    meet the requirements of the new Rules and therefore  was  entitled  to
    make its own decision on proportionality. It was open to  the  Tribunal
    to find that the facts were indeed exceptional.

21. She accepted that the Tribunal had placed  significant  weight  on  the
    wardship proceedings but said that it would have been very  strange  if
    they had not.  Mr Justice Mostyn had made  a  very  detailed  judgment.
    There were  many  reasons  why  contact  in  Bangladesh  would  not  be
    appropriate, for example there would be a lack of  ability  to  control
    what was said to the child on the telephone. In face  to  face  contact
    the psychiatrist could evaluate what was being said.

22. She accepted that the rights of the child were not absolute but neither
    was the public interest.  There would be a stronger public interest  in
    deportation if a person was deemed to continue to be at  risk,  and  it
    was not an error for the Tribunal to bear in mind that  the  sentencing
    judge  had  accepted  that  the  claimant  was  not  considered  to  be
    dangerous.

23. The  Tribunal   found  the  claimant  and  her  uncle  to  be  credible
    witnesses.  There was a moving description of contact with the daughter
    and it was accepted that the daughter did know who her mother was.  The
    experts all agreed that contact with  the  mother  was  appropriate  in
    person, albeit supervised.

24. By way of reply Ms Everett repeated that it was  not  clear  where  the
    consideration of the public interest was.  She said that  she  was  not
    making a perversity challenge to this determination  but  repeated  her
    view that the reasoning was not adequate.

Findings and Conclusions

The factual background

25. In June 2009, the date of the offence, the claimant was  25.   She  had
    been in the UK for two years following her wedding in  Bangladesh  with
    her cousin and on her arrival  she  moved  in  with  his  family.   The
    marriage was unhappy.  On 2nd  March  2009  her  husband  purchased  an
    airline ticket to Bangladesh for the claimant to fly out the  following
    day.  He also  obtained  an  interim  injunction  forbidding  her  from
    removing the child from the jurisdiction.  He returned  home  and  gave
    her the ticket together with some luggage and later  that  evening  she
    was served with it.  At around 11 o'clock that evening the claimant was
    left alone with the baby for a short while.  When her husband  returned
    he realised that she had a knife in her hand and he saw  her  push  the
    knife into the baby's stomach.  Paramedics arrived  and  the  baby  was
    found to have a four centimetre incised wound to the left upper abdomen
    with some bowel protruding through the wound, which  was  caused  by  a
    single stab movement. The knife had penetrated the abdominal  wall  but
    hit the rib cage  which  prevented  it  from  penetrating  further  and
    causing deeper injury.  Very fortunately, the baby recovered well.

26. The claimant was reported to have said that she told her  husband  that
    if she could not have her baby then he could not.   If  she  could  not
    have her baby then no one would and that is why she cut her.  There was
    no evidence that she had a serious depressive illness at the time.

27. The sentencing judge accepted that  the  injunction  and  the  one  way
    ticket came out of the blue and it was a cruel act which  left  her  no
    room to take advice about her situation.  He accepted that the claimant
    was in an overpowering situation and that the events of  the  preceding
    day or the same day led to a huge emotional turmoil and said there  was
    some evidence that she intended not only to take the life of her  child
    but also her own life as well.

28. He took into account the fact that the claimant  felt  genuine  remorse
    and pleaded guilty to a most serious charge at the  first  opportunity.
    He also said that the sooner she was able to return to  Bangladesh  the
    better.

29. On her release from prison on 2nd December 2011 the claimant  moved  in
    to live with her uncle M A and his family.

30. In the meantime, on 25th July 2011 Mr Justice Mostyn made a  supervised
    contact order allowing the child and the claimant contact  three  times
    per annum for a period of one hour.  Indirect contact was also allowed,
    namely monthly cards/letters, the father being directed  to  provide  a
    written report on the child's progress at four monthly intervals and an
    annual video.

31. In the transcript of the judgment Mr Justice Mostyn stated:

         "I am quite clear in my mind that it is positively in the interests
         of this little girl for her to see her mother at the frequency  and
         in the environment suggested by the  psychiatrist,  Dr  Olsen,  and
         endorsed by the guardian.  I think that it  almost  goes  beyond  a
         question of mere identity because, as  I  pointed  out  to  Counsel
         during argument, identity  could  be  dealt  with  by  reports  and
         photographs.  I think it is positively necessary  for  this  little
         girl not only to  know  that  her  mother  exists  but  to  have  a
         relationship with her, even if  it  is  of  the  highly  attenuated
         nature that has been proposed.  From these small beginnings it  may
         well be that, as time progresses, something more meaningful can  be
         built up, although that will  inevitably  be  a  difficult  process
         given the nature of the crime which was committed by the mother.

         So I am clearly of the view that the contact in this  country  that
         has been proposed is in the interests of  this  little  girl.   The
         alternative, which is annual contact in Bangladesh, which has  been
         mentioned by Dr Olsen should  the  immigration  authorities  deport
         this mother, is replete with problems which are almost too  obvious
         to spell out.  It would be a highly unfamiliar environment for this
         little girl even if it could be organised, which must  be  doubtful
         given the obvious pitfalls  which  lie  ahead  and  the  fact  that
         Bangladesh is not a Convention country.  So I  am  perfectly  clear
         that the alternative is not really in the same category of  benefit
         as the contact in this jurisdiction which has been mentioned by  Dr
         Olsen."

Decision.

32. Under paragraph 397 a  deportation  order  will  not  be  made  if  the
    person's removal pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's
    obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or   the   Human   Rights
    Convention.   Where  deportation  would  not  be  contrary   to   these
    obligations it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    public interest in deportation is outweighed.

33. Under paragraph 398, where a person claims that their deportation would
    be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
    Convention and

    (a)  the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
         which they have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at
         least four years;

    (b)  the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
         which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less
         than four years but at least twelve months; or

    (c)  the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,  their
         offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender
         who shows a particular disregard for  the  law,  the  Secretary  of
         State in assessing that claim will consider whether  paragraph  399
         or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only be in exceptional
         circumstances that the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  be
         outweighed by other factors.

34. The claimant's conviction is one which falls under  paragraph  398A  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Ms Everett submitted that it was  incumbent  on
    the Tribunal to set out what the exceptional circumstances  were  which
    permitted the Tribunal to find, at paragraph 50 such  that  the  appeal
    ought to be allowed with respect  to  paragraph  397,  given  that  the
    claimant's case does not fall within the requirements of paragraph  399
    or 399A since she was given a sentence of imprisonment  for  more  than
    four years.  However we consider the facts of this case,  as  found  by
    the FTT to be self evidently exceptional. Deportation would in practice
    mark the end of the relationship between a mother and her young child.

35. We consider it unarguable that the Tribunal erred in  law  in  applying
    the two stage test in  the  Article  8  assessment  and  following  the
    approach set out by the Upper Tribunal in MF.  In doing  so  the  panel
    were following the guidance set out  by  the  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, guidance which has been endorsed in the higher  courts.   The
    fact that the  Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  397  and  398  permit
    exceptional circumstances to be taken account in deciding  whether  the
    public interest in deportation should be outweighed  does  not  relieve
    the Tribunal of its obligation to consider whether  there  would  be  a
    breach of the UK's obligations with respect to Article 8  by  reference
    to the Razgar principles.

36. We also consider that, when read as a whole,  the  Tribunal  does  give
    adequate reasons for its decision with respect to  the  Rules,  in  the
    context of its reasoning under Article 8.

37. Ms Everett also submitted that it was not clear from the decision  what
    the Tribunal's reasoning was  with  respect  to  the  public  interest,
    particularly since MF stated that the new Rules have "enhanced judicial
    understanding  of  the  public  interest.   She  submitted   that   the
    reflection of the public interest contained in the Rules must be  given
    significant weight.

38. The Tribunal recorded that they took particular account of the terms of
    the Respondent's deportation decision letter setting  out  the  reasons
    for making the deportation order.  They also stated that they took note
    of the terms of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Masih  (Pakistan)
    [2012] UKUT 46 which set out basic principles concerning the  issue  of
    the  public  interest  in  relation  to  the  deportation  of   foreign
    criminals, namely inter alia:

         "(a) In a case of automatic deportation full account must be  taken
             of the strong public interest  in  removing  foreign  citizens
             convicted of serious offences, which  lies  not  only  in  the
             prevention of further offences on the part of  the  individual
             concerned, but in deterring others from committing them in the
             first place.

         (b)   Deportation  of   foreign   criminals   expresses   society's
             condemnation of serious criminal activity and promotes  public
             confidence in the  treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
             committed them.

         (c)  The starting point for assessing the facts of the  offence  of
             which an individual has been committed  and  their  effect  on
             others, and on the public as a whole, must be the  view  taken
             by the sentencing judge."

39. We accept that the First-tier Tribunal could have been a little clearer
    in setting out in terms the very strong public interest in deporting  a
    person who has been convicted of such a serious offence, but we do  not
    consider however that the Secretary of State has established  that  the
    panel did not properly take it into  account.  The  panel  recorded  in
    detail the submissions of the Presenting  Officer,  in  particular  the
    fact that the offence was committed against an 8 month  old  child  and
    the fact that the claimant had  been  poorly  treated  by  her  husband
    should not obscure the significance  and  seriousness  of  the  offence
    committed.

40. We conclude  that  the  grounds  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision.  The weight which the Tribunal put upon the  judgment  of  Mr
    Justice Mostyn was a matter for them.  Ms Everett  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had not grappled with the impact on the child's welfare if the
    mother was not there.  However the Tribunal quoted from the judgment of
    Mr Justice Mostyn who concluded that it was  positively  necessary  for
    the child to have a relationship with her mother.   Mr  Justice  Mostyn
    also set out why he considered that contact in Bangladesh would not  be
    appropriate.     Of  course  Mr  Justice  Mostyn  was,  in  the  family
    proceedings, applying the test of paramountcy of the best interests  of
    the  child  rather  than  primacy,  and  his   conclusions   were   not
    determinative of the outcome of deportation proceedings.  However we do
    not consider that the Tribunal considered them to be so.

41. The Tribunal recognised that contact at the present  time  was  limited
    but rightly also placed emphasis on the fact that, if the claimant  was
    allowed to remain in the  UK,  it  was  likely  that  the  relationship
    between the claimant and her daughter would  develop  over  time.   The
    alternative, if the claimant was removed to  Bangladesh  would  be  the
    complete severance of the parent/child relationship.

42. We note that it has not been submitted by the Secretary of  State  that
    the decision made was one which was not open to the Tribunal.  This  is
    a reasons challenge and we find that it has not been made out.

43. We consider that whilst another panel might have  resolved  the  appeal
    differently, appeal to the Upper Tribunal is on a point  of  law  only,
    and an appellate Tribunal should always be careful not to second  guess
    a decision of the FTT, which has had the benefit of  hearing  the  oral
    evidence. We remind ourselves of the observation by the  Supreme  Court
    in B (a child) re [2013] UKSC 33:

44. "Into its review of a trial judge's determination of a  child  case  an
    appellate court needs to factor the advantages which the judge had over
    it in appraising the case.  In Piglowska v Piglowska [1999] 1 WLR  1360
    Lord Hoffman said, at p1372:

         "The appellate court must bear in  mind  the  advantage  which  the
         first instance judge had  in  seeing  the  parties  and  the  other
         witnesses.  This is well-understood on questions of credibility and
         findings of primary fact.  But  it  goes  further  than  that.   It
         applies also to the judge's evaluation of those facts.   If  I  may
         quote what I said in Biogen inc v Medeva Plc [1997] RPC1, 45:

             'The need for appellate caution in reversing the child judge's
             evaluation of the facts is based upon much more solid  grounds
             than professional courtesy.  It is because  specific  findings
             of fact, even by the most meticulous judge, are inherently  an
             incomplete statement of the impression which was made upon him
             by the primary evidence.  His expressed  findings  are  always
             surrounded by  a  penumbra  of  imprecision  as  to  emphasis,
             relative weight, minor qualification and  nuance...  of  which
             time and language do not permit exact  expression,  but  which
             may  play  an  important   part   in   the   judge's   overall
             evaluation'."

45. Furthermore in Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 Carnwath LJ  as  he
    then was said:

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis. It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
         tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same  case  (as  is  indeed  illustrated  by  Mr
         Fountain's decision after the second hearing). The mere  fact  that
         one tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view
         of the facts of a particular case does not mean that it has made an
         error of law, so as to justify an appeal under the old  system,  or
         an order for reconsideration under the new. Nor does it create  any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the  future.
         However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of  the
         specialist tribunal should be respected."

46. We note that this was a very experienced Tribunal.  Both the judge  and
    the lay member have  many  many  years  of  experience  in  sitting  on
    deportation appeals.  They were clearly very impressed by the  evidence
    of the claimant and of her uncle.  . This was an appallingly  difficult
    case; the decision was generous but do not find any legal error.





Decision



47. The original decision will stand.  The Secretary of State's  appeal  is
    dismissed.




Signed                              Date 9th October 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
