
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01225/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 August 2013                                |On 17 December 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  Jose Adao
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Jose Adao, was born on  15  May  1991  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Portugal.  On 14 June 2013,  I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law  and  I  set  aside  its  determination.   My
    reasons for reaching for that decision are as follows:

    The respondent, Jose Adao, was born on  15  May  1991  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Portugal.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the respondent dated 13 November 2012  to  deport
    him to Portugal under the provisions of Section 5(1) of the Immigration
    Act 1971.  On 12 January 2012, the respondent  had  been  convicted  at
    Blackfriars  Crown  Court  of  possession  with  intent  to  supply  of
    controlled class A drugs (cocaine; MDMA) and possession with intent  to
    supply of a controlled drug of class C.  On 16 February  2012,  he  had
    been sentenced to eighteen months' detention  at  the  Young  Offenders
    Institution.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (Judge  McIntosh;  Sir
    Jeffrey  James  CVE,  CMG)  allowed  his  appeal  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 18 April 2013.

    There are two grounds of appeal.  First, it is asserted that the  panel
    materially erred in law in failing to make adequate findings  regarding
    how the appellant has obtained his permanent right of residency  before
    he was imprisoned.  Secondly, it is asserted that the panel  materially
    erred  in  law  in  failing  to  have  adequate  consideration  of  the
    appellant's risk of re-offending and failing to note an NOMS assessment
    that the appellant was at medium risk of re-offending and harm.

    At the initial hearing at Field House on 14 June 2013,  the  respondent
    attended in person.  I have a letter  from  the  respondent's  previous
    representatives (Mordi & Co) informing the Tribunal that  they  are  no
    longer representing him.  I was careful to explain  the  procedures  of
    the Tribunal to the appellant and to give him every opportunity to  put
    his case to the Tribunal.

    At [22], the Tribunal wrote:

         "It is the appellant's case that he has been present in the  United
         Kingdom continuously since August 2004.   The  appellant  maintains
         that after concluding compulsory education he has been  in  gainful
         employment or has been actively engaged in looking for  employment.
         In those circumstances, the appellant maintains that he is eligible
         for the level of protection under Regulation 15 of the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The appellant  produced
         evidence from his secondary school that he  had  been  enrolled  at
         Eastbury Comprehensive  School  in  January  2006.   There  was  no
         independent evidence of an earlier enrolment with another secondary
         school.  We found from the evidence before us  that,  at  the  very
         least, the appellant was present and resident in the United Kingdom
         prior to 10 January 2005.  The appellant  also  produced  a  letter
         from New College London who confirmed the appellant's attendance at
         New College London from 25 February 2008 to 5 February 2008  on  an
         English course for young adults.  The more recent documents in  the
         form of P45 dated February 2013 and  recent  academic  awards  from
         prison relate to recent events and do not go  towards  evidence  of
         the appellant's continued presence in the United Kingdom."

    Subsequently, at [25], the Tribunal wrote:

         "In the circumstances we concluded on the balance of  probabilities
         that the appellant had established that he  had  been  present  and
         resident in the United Kingdom at the very least since  2005.   The
         appellant received  his  notice  of  intention  to  deport  him  in
         September 2012 following his imprisonment on 16 February 2012.  The
         appellant's  total  period  of  residence  prior  to  sentence  was
         calculated at six years.   We  concluded  that  the  appellant  has
         permanent residence in the United Kingdom by virtue of the fact  of
         continuous residence of more than five years in the United Kingdom,
         in accordance with Regulation 15(1)(a)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
         Regulations 2006."

    Mr Hayes challenged the adequacy of the reasoning at [22].

    Mr Hayes submitted that the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  deal  with  the
    requirement in paragraph 15 of the 2006 Regulations (permanent right of
    residence) which provides a right of residence only to an EEA  national
    who  had  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with   the
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years.  The  appellant  had
    to show that he was a qualified person as defined by paragraph 6.   The
    Tribunal had  failed  to  consider  whether  or  not  the  respondent's
    education at secondary school  level  counted  towards  the  period  of
    continuous residence.  If it did not do so (and Mr Hayes submitted that
    it did not), then the Tribunal may have found that the  respondent  had
    been resident continuously in the United Kingdom for a period  of  less
    than five years.  As a consequence, different considerations would have
    arisen as to whether it was appropriate  for  him  to  be  deported  to
    Portugal. In short, by failing to calculate the respondent's continuous
    residence in the United  Kingdom,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  have
    applied the wrong in test in determining the appeal.

    It is necessary to clarify the dates in the quotations from the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination which I have set out above.   The  letter
    from Eastbury Comprehensive School states that, "Jose Adao was involved
    at Eastbury Comprehensive from 10 January 2005 to  21  July  2006.   He
    left in year 11 when his statutory education  requirement  came  to  an
    end."  There is  a  typographical  error  at  [22]  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination where it is stated  that  the  respondent  had
    been "enrolled at Eastbury Comprehensive School in January  2006."   He
    had, in fact, been enrolled on  10  January  2005.   The  typographical
    error is not material to the reasoning of the Tribunal because, in  the
    same paragraph, it goes on to find that the respondent "was present and
    resident in the United Kingdom prior to 10 January 2005."  However, the
    Tribunal has not indicated  in  its  determination   (i)  exactly  when
    "prior to 10 January 2005" the respondent had commenced his  period  of
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom and (ii) whether any  period
    of residence accrued whilst  he  was  student  in  secondary  education
    counted towards the period of "continuous residence"  required  by  the
    Regulations.  I find that the  Tribunal  should  have  addressed  those
    matters and made findings accordingly.  Its failure to do so amounts to
    an error of law and I set aside the determination. I consider  that  it
    would  assist  both  parties  to  consider  the  matter   further   and
    consequently I shall remake the decision  at  or  following  a  resumed
    hearing at Field House on a date to be fixed.

    DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  18  April
    2013 is set aside.  The Upper Tribunal will remake the decision  at  or
    following a resumed hearing at Field House on a date to be fixed.





 2. At the resumed hearing at Field House on 6 August 2013, the  respondent
    did not attend nor was he represented.   Further,  the  respondent  had
    failed to comply with the directions that I had  issued  following  the
    June hearing which read as follows:

         (1)  The parties shall, within 14 days of receipt by them of  these
             directions,  confirm  whether  or  not  they  agree  that  the
             Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and the Directives  of  the
             European Union from which  those  Regulations  derive  exclude
             periods of compulsory secondary education from the calculation
             of periods of continuous residence in the United Kingdom.  The
             Upper Tribunal is aware that the respondent is  not  currently
             legally represented.  He should, however, seek to comply  with
             these directions.  If he  does  not  respond  in  writing,  it
             should be assumed that he expresses no view as  to  the  issue
             described in this paragraph but he should make every effort to
             comply with  direction  (2)  below  which  requires  no  legal
             knowledge or understanding.

         (2)  The respondent shall, within fourteen days of receipt  by  him
             of these directions, write to the Upper Tribunal  and  to  the
             appellant to state  when  exactly  he  began  any  studies  at
             college or school after he  had  left  secondary  school.   He
             should send to the Upper  Tribunal  copies  of  any  documents
             which may support such evidence.

         (3)  The parties shall file to the Upper Tribunal and send  to  the
             other party any documentary evidence no later than  five  days
             before the resumed hearing.

         (4)  A resumed hearing shall be fixed at Field  House  as  soon  as
             possible.  The respondent should make every effort  to  attend
             that hearing.

 3.  Following  the  hearing,  on  8  August  2013,  I  learned  from   the
    administration at Field House that the respondent had attended on  that
    day having mistaken the date of the resumed hearing.

 4. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the respondent and the standard
    of proof is a balance of probabilities.  In the light of the failure of
    the respondent to provide the evidence referred to  in  the  directions
    and in [8] of my error of law decision of 23 June 2013, I am unable  to
    conclude that the respondent has discharged the burden of proving  that
    he has been continuously resident in the United Kingdom for a period of
    at least five years.  Consequently, I find that the respondent has  not
    acquired a right of permanent residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   By
    Regulation 19 of  the  2006  Regulations  the  respondent,  not  having
    acquired a right of permanent residence, may be removed if his  removal
    is justified on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
    health.  As noted  previously,  the  respondent  was  convicted  on  12
    January 2012 at Blackfriars Crown Court of possession  with  intent  to
    supply of a controlled drug  of  class  A  (cocaine):  possession  with
    intent to supply a controlled drug class A (MDMA): and possession  with
    intent to supply a controlled drug of class C.  He was sentenced, on 16
    February 2012, to a period of eighteen months'  detention  at  a  young
    offenders' institution (YOI).

 5. The removal of the respondent is to  be  considered  according  to  the
    provisions of paragraph 21(5) and (6) of the 2006 Regulations:


    (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy or
    public security it shall, in addition to complying with the preceding
    paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
    with the following principles-
    (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
    (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct of
the person concerned;
    (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
of society;
    (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which relate
to considerations of
    general prevention do not justify the decision;
    (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
justify the decision.
    (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public policy
or public security in
    relation to a person who is resident in the United Kingdom the decision
    maker must take account of considerations such as the age, state of
    health, family and economic situation of the person, the person's
    length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social and
    cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of the
    person's links with his country of origin.

 6. I find that the respondent's personal conduct does represent a genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.  I note from the decision  letter  of
    the Secretary of State dated 13 November 2012 that:

         In completing your NOMS1 assessment the offender manager found that
         you posed a medium risk of harm to the known  adults,  your  peers,
         possibly your younger  sister  and  your  child  and  partner.   In
         assessing you as medium risk it has been acknowledged that you have
         potential to do harm.

 7. I have received no evidence which would contradict those  observations.
    Further, although I acknowledge that the respondent is a young man,  he
    is apparently  in  good  health  and  I  have  no  up-to-date  evidence
    regarding his family circumstances.  He has a child  but  is  separated
    from the child and his mother and I was given no details whatsoever  of
    any contact arrangements between the respondent and his child.   I  had
    not details of the respondent's economic  situation.   As  regards  his
    social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom, again  I  have
    no evidence save for the documents which were before me (as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal) which indicates the efforts made by the
    respondent to obtain educational qualifications whilst in detention.  I
    am aware that the respondent has taken drugs from a very early age  and
    there was no evidence at all that he has overcome that problem.  I find
    that this respondent is entitled only to the lowest form of  protection
    from removal afforded to citizens of the EU who  are  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom and does constitute a  sufficiently  serious  threat  to
    public security to justify his removal by way of deportation.  With  so
    little evidence before the Tribunal, it is difficult to reach any other
    conclusion.  Had the respondent attended the hearing it would have been
    possible to have  heard  oral  evidence  from  him  but  there  was  no
    indication at all that he intended to come to  the  Tribunal  with  any
    documentary evidence.  Whilst I am aware that  he  did  attend  on  the
    wrong day, I consider that the Tribunal  was  justified  in  proceeding
    with the hearing in his absence on 6 August 2013 as  he  had  given  no
    explanation for his failure to attend and further I did  not  see  that
    there was any reason, after I  had  learned  of  his  attendance  on  8
    August, to reconvene the hearing nor did he invite me to do  so.   Such
    evidence as I have throws very little light indeed on the  respondent's
    circumstances to be  considered  under  paragraph  21(6)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

 8. I have also considered Article 8 ECHR.  The public  interest  concerned
    with the removal of a criminal who has been sentenced for serious  drug
    offences is a compelling one.   As  I  have  noted  above,  I  have  no
    evidence that the respondent continues to have any contact at all  with
    his child.  I have no evidence of any other private life or family ties
    which he may have within this jurisdiction.  I find that  the  decision
    to remove him was proportionate both in terms of Article 8 ECHR and  in
    the application of paragraph 21 of the 2006 Regulations.

DECISION

 9.  Having  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    promulgated on 18 April 2013, I have remade the decision.  This  appeal
    is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 29 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
