
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01542/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 29th January 2014                          |On 31st January 2014         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RJ
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Miss L Appia instructed by JF Law Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gurung-Thapa
        and Dr J.O De Barros (hereinafter referred to as 'the  Panel')  who
        in a determination promulgated on the 23rd October 2013 allowed the
        appeal of RJ against the order for his deportation from the  United
        Kingdom.



Error of law finding


     2. RJ was born in 1992 and is a citizen of Dominica. He has  lived  in
        the UK for a considerable period of time, having initially  entered
        on 11th March 1993, as a visitor with his mother, who then  married
        his father in the UK on 2nd June 1993. Infinite leave granted to RJ
        and his mother on 8th March 1996, on the basis of the marriage, was
        invalidated when it  was  discovered  the  marriage  was  bigamous.
        Accordingly RJ and his mother returned to Dominica in January 1998.
        His mother's first marriage was dissolved allowing her to  re-marry
        lawfully on 3rd October 1998. RJ re-entered the UK  on  16th  April
        2001 with his mother, lawfully.  On 21st March 2002 RJ was  granted
        leave to remain as a dependant of his mother.


     3. RJ's criminal convictions include offences of burglary with  intent
        of a dwelling and assault on a Police  Officer  committed  on  31st
        August 2010 for which he received a Community Order at Inner London
        Crown Court, on 31st  March  2011,  with  two  requirements  at  an
        Attendance Centre of 24 hours and Curfew of 2  months.   The  index
        offence which led to the deportation  decision  is  an  offence  of
        Robbery. RJ was convicted on 2nd September 2011 and sentenced to  2
        years and 6 months imprisonment on 11th November 2011. He  did  not
        appeal against conviction or sentence.


     4. The Panel allowed the appeal  having  set  out  in  detail  in  the
        determination the factors  in  RJ's  favour  that  they  felt  were
        determinative of the  outcome  of  the  Article  8  ECHR  balancing
        exercise. The primary issue that  arises  from  a  reading  of  the
        determination is that it is clear why RJ won his appeal but not why
        the Secretary of State lost.


     5. The Panel refer to the case of  Masih  and  I  accept  that  in  RG
        (Automatic deport - Section 33(2)(a) exception) Nepal  [2010]  UKUT
        273 (IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) when considering the automatic
        deportation provision in s. 32(5) UK  Borders  Act  2007,  and  the
        exemption at s.33(2)(a) relating  to  the  claimant's  private  and
        family life (Article  8  ECHR),  the  Tribunal  must  give  careful
        consideration to the factors set out at paragraphs 70-73 of  Maslov
        v Austria [2009] INLR 47 ECHR; and (ii) particular care is required
        in relation to the consideration of the Article 8  ECHR  impact  on
        those who were lawfully resident in the UK at  the  time  when  the
        offence was committed. What this case did not say was that this  is
        all the Tribunal  must  consider  and  it  is  incumbent  upon  any
        Tribunal considering appeals against deportation orders to  take  a
        balanced view of the evidence and set out a proper analysis of  the
        competing interests and give adequate reasons for the weight  given
        to that evidence and for the conclusions reached.


     6.  In Maslov the ECtHR, First Chamber, said that in assessing whether
        the  Austrian  authorities  struck  a  fair  balance  between   the
        claimant's right to family and private life and the  prevention  of
        disorder and crime, the relevant criteria were (i) the  nature  and
        gravity of the claimant's offences (ii) the length of his  stay  in
        the host  country  (iii)  the  period  which  elapsed  between  the
        commission of  the  offences  and  the  impugned  measure  and  the
        claimant's conduct during that period and (iv) the solidity of  the
        social, cultural and family ties with  the  host  country  and  the
        country of destination.


     7. Another legal error in the determination is a lack of  analysis  of
        the  weight  given  to  the  fact  RJ  is  unable  to  satisfy  the
        requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  In  paragraph  35  of  the
        determination there is reference to the application  of  paragraphs
        399 and 399A and a statement that as the  SSHD  has  decided  these
        rules do not  apply  it  will  only  be  in  the  most  exceptional
        circumstances that the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  be
        outweighed by other factors, but no more.


     8. The Immigration Rules define  the  government's  interpretation  of
        Article 8.  Since the above decisions were published  and  the  day
        before the Panel promulgated the determination under challenge  the
        Court of Appeal handed  down  its  judgement  in  the  case  of  MF
        (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 in which the  Master  of  the  Rolls
        indicated that where the "new rules" apply in a  deportation  case,
        the "first step that has to be  undertaken  is  to  decide  whether
        deportation would be contrary to an individual's article  8  rights
        on the grounds that (i) the case falls within para 398 (b)  or  (c)
        and (ii) one or more of the conditions set out in para 399  (a)  or
        (b) or para 399A (a) or (b) applies.  If the case falls within para
        398 (b) or (c) and one or more of those  conditions  applies,  then
        the new rules implicitly provide that deportation would be contrary
        to article 8" (paragraph 35).   Paragraphs  399  and  399A  can  be
        thought of as setting out the exceptions to deportation  (paragraph
        14).


     9. There is no mention of this important judgment in the determination
        which, it is arguable, should have been  considered  prior  to  the
        promulgation of the decision.   If, as  appears  to  be  the  case,
        although no specific finding is made it was accepted by  the  Panel
        that RJ is unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Rules  the
        position is as set out in  paragraph  35  of  their  determination,
        namely that the key questions revolved around  the  'exceptionality
        issue'.


    10. In MF (Nigeria) the Master of the Rolls stated that the main  issue
        concerned  the  position  when  the  appellant  could  not  succeed
        substantively under paragraphs  398  or  399  of  the  rules  on  a
        deportation and the determinative question  is  whether  there  are
        "exceptional  circumstances"  such  that  the  public  interest  in
        deportation is outweighed by other factors (see  paragraph  398  of
        the new rules).  Here the Court accepted a submission for the  SSHD
        that "the reference to exceptional circumstances serves the purpose
        of emphasising that, in the balancing exercise, great weight should
        be given to the public interest in deporting foreign criminals  who
        do  not  satisfy  paras  398  and  399  or  399A.    It   is   only
        exceptionally that such foreign criminals will succeed  in  showing
        that their rights under article 8(1) trump the public  interest  in
        their deportation" (paragraphs 39 and 40).  The Court  went  on  to
        say:  "In  our  view,  [this]  is  not  to  say  that  a  test   of
        exceptionality is being applied.  Rather it is that, in approaching
        the question of whether removal  is  a  proportionate  interference
        with an individual's article  8  rights,  the  scales  are  heavily
        weighted in favour of deportation  and  something  very  compelling
        (which will be "exceptional") is required to  outweigh  the  public
        interest in removal" (paragraph 42).  Although the Court  disagreed
        with the Upper Tribunal in MF's case on the question  of  form,  it
        did not disagree in substance (paragraphs 44 and 50).  It  differed
        from the UT in considering that the rules did mandate or  direct  a
        decision  maker  to  take  all  relevant  criteria   into   account
        (paragraph  44).   Accordingly,  the  new   rules   applicable   to
        deportation cases should be  seen  as  "a  complete  code  ...  the
        exceptional  circumstances  to  be  considered  in  the   balancing
        exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality  test  as
        required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence"  (ibid).    "Even  if  we
        were  wrong  about  that,  it  would  be  necessary  to   apply   a
        proportionality test outside the new rules as was done by  the  UT.
        Either way, the result should be the same".


    11. There is  no  analysis  in  the  determination  of  how  the  Panel
        interpreted the phrase 'exceptional circumstances' and although the
        later  decision   of   Kabia   (MF:   para   298   -   "exceptional
        circumstances")  2013  UKUT  00569  (IAC)  was  not  at  that  time
        promulgated, the definition referred to by  the  Tribunal  in  that
        case is that contained in the SSHD's  guidance  to  caseworkers  to
        which the Panel had access. In Kabia it was held that (i)  The  new
        rules relating to article 8 claims advanced  by  foreign  criminals
        seeking  to  resist  deportation  are  a  complete  code  and   the
        exceptional  circumstances  to  be  considered  in  the   balancing
        exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality  test  as
        required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence:  MF  (Nigeria)  (ii)  The
        question being addressed by a decision maker applying the new rules
        set out at paragraph 398 of HC 395 in considering a  claim  founded
        upon article 8 of the ECHR and that being addressed  by  the  judge
        who carries out what was referred to in MF (Nigeria) as the  second
        step in  a  two-stage  process  is  the  same  one  that,  properly
        executed, will return the same answer; (iii) The new rules speak of
        "exceptional circumstances" but, as has  been  made  clear  by  the
        Court of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria),  exceptionality  is  a  likely
        characteristic of a claim that  properly  succeeds  rather  than  a
        legal test  to  be  met.   In  this  context,  "exceptional"  means
        circumstances in which deportation would  result  in  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the individual or their family such  that  a
        deportation would not be proportionate".


    12. The  determination  contains  a  number  of  factual  findings  but
        findings of fact are not the ultimate decision but stepping  stones
        on the way to reaching such a decision. The Panel makes a number of
        findings in paragraph 47 but fail to adequately analyse the  effect
        of deportation and  how  such  an  effect  amounts  to  exceptional
        circumstances. This is important for in Maslov the Court state that
        for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major  part
        of his or her childhood and youth in [this]  country  very  serious
        reasons are required to justify expulsion, whereas the Rules  apply
        an arguably different test which is that if a person is  unable  to
        satisfy the requirements reflecting the will of Parliament they can
        only  remain  if  they  prove   the   existence   of   'exceptional
        circumstances'.

    13. The Panel also failed to consider if Maslov is in fact relevant  to
        this case as when RJ committed the index offence he was an adult  -
        see Onur v. the UK (Application no. 27319/07) ECtHR Fourth  Section
        where offences committed as  a  young  adult  meant  the  case  was
        readily distinguishable from Maslov and Balogun  v  United  Kingdom
        (Application no. 60286/09) ECtHR (Fourth  Section),  May  2012,  in
        which the nature of the Applicant's offending and  the  fact  that,
        with the exception of one conviction, all of his offences  appeared
        to have been committed when he was over the age of  eighteen  meant
        that his case could be  clearly  distinguished  from  that  of  the
        applicant in Maslov.


    14. In assessing the public interest the Panel  should  also  have  had
        regard to the case of Masih (deportation - public interest -  basic
        principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046(IAC) in which the Tribunal
        said that so long as  account  is  taken  of  the  following  basic
        principles, there is at present no need  for  further  citation  of
        authority on the public interest side of  the  balancing  exercise.
        The following basic principles can be derived from the present case
        law concerning the issue of the public interest in relation to  the
        deportation of foreign  criminals:  (i)  In  a  case  of  automatic
        deportation, full account  must  be  taken  of  the  strong  public
        interest  in  removing  foreign  citizens convicted  of   serious
        offences, which lies not only in the prevention of further offences
        on the part of the individual concerned, but  in  deterring  others
        from committing them  in  the  first  place.  (ii)  Deportation  of
        foreign  criminals  expresses  society's  condemnation  of  serious
        criminal activity and promotes public confidence in  the  treatment
        of foreign citizens who have committed them. (iii)   The  starting-
        point for assessing the facts of the offence of which an individual
        has been committed, and their effect on others, and on  the  public
        as a whole, must be the view taken by the  sentencing  judge.  (iv)
        The appeal has to be dealt with on the basis of  the  situation  at
        the date of the hearing. (v) Full account should also be taken  of
        any developments since sentence was passed, for example the  result
        of any disciplinary adjudications in prison or  detention,  or  any
        OASys or licence report.


    15. There is no mention of this case in the determination and, whilst I
        accept this is not necessarily a legal error if  it  is  shown  the
        required principles have been properly considered and  applied,  it
        was conceded before me that there is no mention  of  the  deterrent
        element which is relied upon by the SSHD.


    16. This is an automatic deportation case and so the Panel in assessing
        proportionality needed to have regard to the guidance given by  the
        Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 in which
        the appellant had been sentenced to 3 years for dealing  drugs.  He
        appealed relying on the best interests of his children.  The  Court
        of Appeal said that in previous cases in which potential  deportees
        raise claims under article 8 relying on the  children's  interests,
        insufficient attention had been paid to the weight attached to  the
        policy of deporting  foreign  criminals  which  came  from  primary
        legislation. The deportation was upheld. The finding in relation to
        the weight to be given to the fact the deportation order  reflected
        the will of Parliament was confirmed by the  Court  in  Richards  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  244  in
        which the Court of the Appeal upheld  the  decision  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal to dismiss the appeal saying that the important point  was
        that the strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals  was
        not merely the policy of the Secretary of State but the judgment of
        Parliament. That gave it special weight which the courts needed  to
        recognise.


    17. There is no analysis of the weight given  to  this  factor  by  the
        Panel and it is not  possible  to  infer  from  a  reading  of  the
        determination if this element was considered and, if so, how it was
        resolved - other than the fact RJ succeeded which  implies  it  was
        given little weight which may be arguably irrational.


    18. I find the legal errors identified to be material to the  decision.
        The determination shall be  set  aside  although  as  there  is  no
        challenge to the factual findings made these shall be preserved.




The remaking of the decision





Discussion



    19. RJ's case is based upon the fact he has  been  in  the  UK  and  is
        settled in this country  and  has  lost  ties  with  Dominica.  The
        preserved findings are as follows:


              i.  Family life recognised by Article 8 had not been proved to
   exist                   between RJ and JR [38].


              ii. Although RJ's parents and sibling are in the  UK  [39]  it
   had not been                 proved family life recognised by  Article  8
   exists.  The  relationships  do                   not  go  beyond  normal
   emotional ties [41].


              iii.     RJ has established a considerable private life simply
   on the basis of                  his length of residence in the UK  [41].
   The  issue  in  relation  to  Article                    8  is  that   of
   proportionality [41].


              iv. RJ was 17 when he committed the first offences  for  which
   he was                  convicted and 18 when he  committed  the  Robbery
   [47(i)].


              v.  RJ has had continuous leave to remain since 2001. There is
   no                      indication he has overstayed his leave [47(ii)].


              vi. There is no evidence RJ  has  committed  further  offences
   since June                   2011  although  he  has  been  in  detention
   since.  He  has  obtained  a                    number   of   educational
   certificates whilst in detention [47(iii)].


              vii.     RJ has spent the majority of his childhood in the UK.
   He attended                   primary  and  secondary  school  here.  The
   majority of his immediate                 family are in the UK.  When  RJ
   returned to Dominica with his mother               in 1998 he lived  with
   his mother and younger brother and attended                 school there.
   They   lived   with   a   friend   of   his   mother.    RJ    has    not
   maintained  a   link   with   Dominica.    RJ   has   been   offered   an
     apprenticeship. He has a genuine  desire  to  take  up  employment  [47
     (iv)]


    20. It is not suggested before me  that  RJ  is  able  to  satisfy  the
        requirements  of  the  Rules  and  so  this  is  a  case  in  which
        consideration must be  given  to  establishing  whether  there  are
        circumstances in which deportation would  result  in  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the individual or their family such  that  a
        deportation  would   not   be   proportionate.   To   enable   such
        circumstances  to  be  assessed  I  have  considered  the  guidance
        provided by the case of Boultif v Switzerland [2001] ECHR 54273  as
        confirmed by Uner v the Netherlands [2007] Imm  AR  303.  In  those
        cases the Court said that in order to assess whether  an  expulsion
        measure was necessary in a democratic society and proportionate  to
        the legitimate aim  pursued,  the  following  criteria  had  to  be
        considered.


          (i) The nature and the seriousness of the offence committed by the
      Appellant;
          (ii)     The length of the Appellant's stay in  the  country  from
      which he or she was       to be expelled;
          (iii)    The time that had elapsed since the offence was committed
      and the               claimant's conduct during that period.
          (iv)     The nationalities of the various parties concerned;
          (v) The Appellant's family situation, such as length  of  marriage
      and  other         factors  expressing  the   effectiveness   of   the
      Appellant's family life;
          (vi)     Whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time  he
      or she entered        into the family relationship;
          (vii)    Whether there are children in  the  marriage  and  if  so
      their ages;
          (viii)   The seriousness and the difficulties which the Spouse  is
      likely to             encounter in  the  country  of  the  Appellant's
      origin;
          (ix)     The best interests and well being of any children of  the
      Appellant;  and  in          particular   the   seriousness   of   any
      difficulties that they would  be  likely  to        encounter  in  the
      country to which the Appellant would be expelled;
          (x)      The solidity of social, cultural and family ties with the
      host country and          with the country of destination.


    21. RJ is a single man with no children and it is a  preserved  finding
        that he has no family life in the UK recognised by Article  8.   In
        relation to the offence, His Honour Judge  Price,  sitting  in  the
        Crown Court at the Kingston Upon Thames, stated in  his  sentencing
        remarks:


          At about two o'clock in the morning of the 15th June of this  year
   all three of you        decided to attack and rob [TJ], who was  lawfully
   walking the streets.  He was          talking on the phone, and I have no
   doubt that this was the motivating factor          behind  your  actions.
   He was attacked and kicked, which caused him to lose  his         balance
   and then fall  to  the  ground.   He  hit  his  elbow  and  arm,  causing
   bleeding and considerable pain. Even then he tried  to  hold  on  to  his
   shoulder       bag.  He was then kicked three times, hard, on his  torso,
   kicked on his leg, and       it is clear that attempts were made to  kick
   him in the head.  He was able to          ward off those kicks  with  his
   arm, whereupon he was kicked in that part of his       body.


          His bag was taken.  He says that all three of you then started  to
   laugh and say       "We've got it." You all then ran  off.   Happily  for
   justice you were  soon             apprehended.   You  have  all  pleaded
   guilty.....


          ....The aggravating features are that this was a robbery with  all
   three of you        playing a part, and so  obviously  outnumbering  your
   victim.   It  was  at  two            o'clock  in  the  morning,  another
   aggravating feature. Each of you is  responsible         for  meting  out
   gratuitous violence in the way  I  have  outlined.   This  is,  in  other
   words, as is accepted, a level two offence so the custody  threshold  has
   been       passed.


          I now turn to consider each of  you  individually,  starting  with
   you, [RJ]. You are      the eldest being now 19.  You frankly admitted to
   the  author  of  the  pre-sentence         report  that  you   were   the
   ringleader.  You must take the greatest responsibility,          both  by
   that admitted fact and your  age.   You  have  previous  convictions  for
   burglary of a dwelling and common assault.  You put  forward  the  excuse
   that       you were desperately short of money, because you had debts  to
   drug dealers. It         is  an  excuse  which  these  Courts  hear  with
   regularity. It may well be true, but I        have to  say  that  affords
   little mitigation.


          I consider than an immediate custodial sentence of imprisonment is
   justified      and, indeed, required.


    22. The Sentencing Judge  clearly  considered  this  to  be  a  serious
        offence, which was accepted by the Panel [47(i)] and is a crime  of
        violence.  In the Pre-sentence report dated 19th October 2011 there
        is reference to RJ misusing drugs. In the section dealing with  the
        assessment of serious risk of serious harm the author of the report
        states:


          "... Having considered the nature of the current offence and  past
   offences, I am          of the view that [RJ] does not satisfy the  above
   criteria and is not, in my            opinion, dangerous.   I  do  assess
   him as posing a high risk of harm to members        of  the  public.   In
   reaching  this   decision,   I   have   considered   the   following   in
   respect of the offence and [RJ]; that it was carried out at night, with 2
   co-            defendants on a lone victim, the  fact  that  he  admitted
   that he was one who          suggested the robbery and appeared  to  take
   the main protagonist role in it, his      seniority in the group and that
   violence was used albeit from what information         I have it  appears
   no serious long term injuries were sustained by the victim.  I       have
   also taken into account his past offending behaviour and  the  compliance
   position on his current community order.


    23. In relation to the risk of re-offending  the  author  of  the  Pre-
        Sentence report concluded that as a result of the above issues, his
        guilty plea, victim empathy, acknowledgment of the  impact  of  his
        crime, and the fact he has re-offended within a year, that RJ posed
        a medium risk of re-offending. The Panel refer in paragraph  45  of
        their determination to what they describe as a contradiction in the
        evidence in relation to the level of risk, This has occurred  as  a
        result of the existence of a letter from HMP Littlehay  dated  26th
        January 2012 stating RJ did not  meet  the  criteria  for  the  TSP
        programme due to his assessed low risk of reoffending although  the
        reasons  for  the  same  and  the  detailed  basis  on  which  this
        assessment was made have not been disclosed.


    24. In any event risk of reoffending is not determinative.  In Gurung v
        SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 62 the Court of  Appeal,  when  overturning  a
        Presidential Upper Tier panel, said that the absence of a  risk  of
        reoffending, though plainly important, is not the "ultimate aim" of
        the deportation regime. We are troubled, too, by the proposition in
        paragraph 40(iii) (cited above) that the nature and seriousness  of
        the offence do not by themselves justify interference  with  family
        and private life without prospective regard to the public interest.
        Although Mr Bourne does not seek to characterise this as  an  error
        of law, he is right, in our view, to suggest that it misplaces  the
        emphasis. The Borders Act by  s.32  decides  that  the  nature  and
        seriousness of the offence, as measured  by  the  sentence,  do  by
        themselves justify deportation unless an  exception  recognised  by
        the Act itself applies.


    25. The contradictoery nature of the evidence was not  resolved  before
        me and the Tribunal  has  a  detailed  Pre-sentence  report  and  a
        memorandum from the prison containing no analysis of the facts that
        formed the basis of the conclusions as to risk. If RJ  is  alleging
        he only poses a low risk he  must  adduce  sufficient  evidence  to
        prove this upon which due weight may be placed.  I have  noted  the
        evidence of co-operation within the prison environment and lack  of
        evidence of adjudications and the expressions of remorse and it may
        be that ongoing good behaviour is the basis for the assessment that
        the risk has reduced.


    26. The period of time RJ has been in the UK is set out above.  He  has
        resided here continuously since 2001, a period of twelve  years.  I
        accept that RJ has not offended since the  index  offence  but,  as
        recognised by the Panel, he has been  in  custody  and  immigration
        detention since. It is reasonable to expect that he  will  not  re-
        offend in such a controlled environment and that even if  the  risk
        of further offending may be low on release, this is the  case  only
        if he remains drug free.


    27. In relation to nationality, RJ is Dominican.


    28. In relation to the solidity of social,  cultural  and  family  ties
        with the host country and with the country of  destination,  it  is
        accepted RJ has strong ties to the UK  where  he  has  developed  a
        private life which includes his friends,  family,  his  girlfriend,
        and where he has lived for most of his formative  years.  It  is  a
        preserved finding that RJ has not maintained a link with  Dominica.




    29. In relation to the removal of RJ, Miss  Appia  submitted  that  the
        fact RJ has his entire support network  in  the  UK  makes  removal
        unreasonable. It was accepted that  the  public  interest  argument
        applied to all deportation cases but that  this  was  not  a  trump
        card. It was further submitted that it would be harsh for RJ to  be
        expected to return and this should tip the balance of the  case  in
        his favour. He will find it difficult in Dominica.


    30. The fact his main family are in the UK has not  been  shown  to  be
        determinative of the appeal, although I accept life will be  easier
        for RJ if he is permitted to remain in the UK.  It may be difficult
        and possibly very hard for him to adapt to life  in  Dominica.   He
        has not lived in that country for a number of years  although  does
        have extended family  there.  His  mother  refers  in  her  witness
        statement to two of her sons from  her  first  marriage  living  in
        Dominica and,  although  RJ  may  not  personally  have  maintained
        contact with them, it is suggestive of a network which may possibly
        be able to assist if his mother asks  for  the  same  at  times  of
        difficulty. Dominica also has a relatively low crime rate  for  the
        Caribbean and it is not suggested RJ faces  a  real  risk  of  harm
        sufficient to engage Article 3 in relation to  any  aspect  of  the
        case.  Ms Appia confirmed that it is not being argued  that  return
        will  result  in  destitution  or  a  breach  of  Article  3  on  a
        humanitarian basis.


    31. Against these elements are  the  fact  RJ  is  the  subject  of  an
        automatic deportation order, he has been convicted of non  juvenile
        criminal  offences  involving  violence.  He   was   the   admitted
        ringleader  of  the  gang  that   attacked   the   victim   without
        provocation.  He is a young male with some education who is capable
        of developing skills. There is no evidence of health issues  and  I
        note in the statements his mother's comment that she  supports  him
        financially and emotionally.  There  is  no  evidence  the  support
        provided by what is a close family will be lost if RJ  is  deported
        and it has not been shown that any support that could  be  provided
        whilst he obtains work and adapts  to  life  in  Dominica  will  be
        insufficient to meet at least his basic needs.


    32. In the case of Masih it was recognised that the public interest  in
        the prevention of crime and disorder  includes  two  elements,  the
        first of which relates to the risk of re-offending and  the  second
        to the deterrent element. Even if the risk of  RJ  re-offending  is
        low there is a very strong argument that he be removed  to  provide
        an example to others who may be considering involving themselves in
        crimes of violence or gang type conduct that the UK Government will
        take firm steps to remove them from the country.  There is  a  real
        issue with gangs and related street criminality  in  this  country,
        especially  in  the   inner   cities,   and   anything   that   can
        constructively serve to deter individuals from crimes  of  violence
        of this nature must be in the public interest.


    33. The key element is the need to consider the question set out above,
        namely whether it has been proved there are circumstances in  which
        deportation would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
        the individual or their family such that a deportation would not be
        proportionate. This is not only an issue under the Rules  but  also
        reflects the greater weight to be given to an automatic deportation
        order as per the cases of SS (Nigeria) and  Richards  v  SSHD.  The
        evidence and submissions have focused on the current  circumstances
        and an allegation of  hardship  on  return  such  as  to  make  the
        decision unreasonable, but RJ has failed to substantiate his  claim
        that removal will make the decision unlawful  in  relation  to  his
        case when a properly conducted balancing  exercise  is  undertaken.
        The facts relied upon by the SSHD establish the  decision  is  both
        lawful and proportionate, notwithstanding the time RJ has  been  in
        the UK. As stated in MF, the scales are heavily weighted in  favour
        of  deportation  and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
        "exceptional") is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
        removal". Such very compelling circumstances have not been shown to
        exist in this case.


Decision

    34. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    35. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I
        continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30th January 2014





