
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01079/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 August 2017                     |On 13 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                THOMAS GIRMAY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:        Ms L. Hooper of counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant was born in Saudi Arabia on 19 August  1984.  He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in 1990 with his mother and three  siblings.  His
    mother applied for  asylum  but  her  application  was  refused  on  30
    September 1990. She was granted exceptional leave to  remain  until  30
    September 1993 and the Appellant and his  siblings  were  also  granted
    exceptional leave to remain for the same period of time. The  Appellant
    and his family members  were  subsequently  granted  further  leave  to
    remain until 30 September 1996 and then indefinite leave to remain.

2.   Between September 1997 and September 1999, the Applicant was  convicted
    on seven occasions and received  a  series  of  fines  and  supervision
    orders.  On  28  September  1999  he  was  sentenced  to   42   months'
    imprisonment for robbery, attempted robbery and  the  supply  of  crack
    cocaine.

3.   As a consequence, his application to naturalise as  a  British  citizen
    was refused on 4 December 2002.

4.   On 13 July 2004, the Applicant was sentenced to eleven years in  prison
    for robbery and causing grievous bodily harm with intent.

5.   A deportation order was signed on 28 September 2009 and  the  Appellant
    did not lodge an appeal.  But  on  25  March  2013  his  current  legal
    representatives applied for his deportation order to be revoked on  the
    basis that his removal to Eritrea would breach the  Refugee  Convention
    and Article 3 of the ECHR.

6.   On 3 February 2014, the Appellant was granted immigration bail  and  on
    29 May 2014 the Respondent refused his application for a revocation  of
    his deportation order.  He appealed on 12 June 2014 and his appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Goodrich, who dismissed  his  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 20 January 2017. First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Chohan refused him permission to appeal against this decision.  But  on
    11 May 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith  did  grant  him  permission  to
    appeal and on 27 June 2017  I  found  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Goodrich did make errors of law in  her  decision  and  set  it  aside,
    whilst retaining some of her findings in relation to Article 3  of  the
    ECHR.

THE HEARING

7.   Counsel for the Appellant handed up a  further  skeleton  argument  and
    also a supplementary witness statement by the Appellant's solicitor.  I
    also heard brief oral evidence from the Appellant  and  his  solicitor,
    Rahath Abdar.  Counsel also accepted that the Appellant was potentially
    entitled to Eritrean citizenship. The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    provided me with further case law and informed me that  the  Respondent
    had not been able to locate the Appellant's mother's asylum file.

8.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made detailed oral submissions and I have referred to  the  content  of
    these submissions, where relevant, in my  decision.   Counsel  for  the
    Appellant  handed  up  a  further  skeleton   argument   and   also   a
    supplementary witness statement by the Appellant's solicitor.

DECISION

EXCLUSION FROM ENTITLEMENT TO REFUGEE STATUS

9.   Article 33 of the Refugee Convention states that:

    "1.  No contracting state shall expel or return a refugee in any manner
         whatsoever to the  frontiers  of  territories  where  his  life  or
         freedom would be threatened  on  account  of  his  race,  religion,
         nationality, membership of a particular social group  or  political
         opinion.
    2.   The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be  claimed
         by a refugee whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding  as  a
         danger to the security of the country  in  which  he  is,  or  who,
         having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious
         crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that country".

10.  This Article has been incorporated into national  law  through  section
    72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which states
    that:

     "A person shall be presumed to have been convicted by a final  judgment
    of a particularly serious crime and  to  constitute  a  danger  to  the
    community of the United Kingdom if he is-

     (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
     (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years".

11.  Sub-section 72(6) also states that:

     "A  presumption  under  subsection  (2),  (3)  or  (4)  that  a  person
    constitutes a danger to the community is rebuttable by that person".

12.  In paragraph 45 of EN (Serbia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 630 Stanley Burnton LJ found that "the words
    "particularly  serious  crime"  are  clear,  and  themselves   restrict
    drastically the offences to which the article  applies".  However,  the
    sentencing remarks made by His Honour Judge Roberts QC on 5  July  2006
    indicate that the Appellant had  been  party  to  the  targeting  of  a
    vulnerable woman and to subjecting her to a  gang  attack  in  her  own
    flat. It  is  also  noteworthy  that,  even  taking  into  account  the
    mitigating factors which arose from the fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    only 19 at the time of the offence and had been under the influence  an
    older and violent gang leader, he was still sentenced to eleven  years'
    imprisonment. In the light of this evidence, counsel for the  Appellant
    accepted that he had committed a particularly serious crime.

13.  However, counsel also submitted that the evidence relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant rebutted the presumption that he constituted a danger to  the
    community of the United Kingdom.

14.  I accept that in paragraph 43  of  EN  (Serbia)  Lord  Justice  Stanley
    Burnton found that "to construe "danger" [for the purposes  of  Article
    33.2 of the Refugee Convention] as restricted to "very serious  danger"
    is to add words that the Member States did not include".

15.  The Home Office Presenting Officer  submitted  as  long  as  there  was
    evidence of some danger to the community,  the  presumption  would  not
    have been rebutted. However, the test formulation  in  EN  (Serbia)  by
    Lord Justice Burnton was more nuanced. He found in  paragraph  45  that
    "so far as "danger to the community" is concerned, that danger must  be
    real, but if a person is convicted of a particularly serious crime, and
    there is a real risk of its repetition, he is likely  to  constitute  a
    danger to the community". I accept that in paragraph  46,  he  rejected
    the submission that the  danger  to  the  community  must  be  causally
    connected to the particularly serious crime of  which  the  person  had
    been convicted. But he went on to find "that  normally  the  danger  is
    demonstrated by proof of the particularly serious offence and the  risk
    of its recurrence or of the recurrence of a similar offence".  He  also
    accepted that "the wording of Article 33(2) reflects this expectation".

16.  In addition, in  paragraph  66  he  found  that  "once  the  State  has
    established that a person has been convicted of what is on the fact  of
    it a particularly serious crime, it will be for him to show either that
    it was not in fact particularly serious, because of mitigating  factors
    associated with its commission, or that because there is no  danger  of
    it repetition he does  not  constitute  a  danger  to  the  community".
    Therefore, in the circumstances of this appeal, the question of whether
    the Appellant would re-offend by committed another particularly serious
    crime was of central importance.

17.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that it was not  necessary
    to consider whether the danger was a present one. However, in paragraph
    EN (Serbia) Lord Justice Burnton also found in paragraph 112  that  "on
    reconsideration, it will be open to KC to dispute both the  seriousness
    of his crime and that at the date his case falls to  be  considered  by
    the Tribunal he is a danger to the community".  Therefore,  I  have  to
    consider whether he poses a danger, as defined above, at  the  date  of
    this hearing.

18.  The  factual  background  to  this  assessment  was  accepted  by  both
    parties. The Appellant had committed a particularly serious crime  when
    he was nineteen years of age and he is now thirty three years old. This
    was also his last conviction and occurred on  13  July  2004.  For  the
    purposes of assessing the danger he poses, it is also relevant that  he
    was released on immigration bail on  February  2014  and  there  is  no
    suggestion that he had committed any further offences of  any  sort  or
    failed to meet the conditions of his bail. There is also no evidence to
    indicate that he still has any contact with  members  of  any  gang  or
    anyone involved in criminal behaviour.

19.  No OAYS report has  been  provided  but  the  Appellant  relies  on  an
    independent psychological  report  by  Lisa  Davies,  a  chartered  and
    registered forensic psychologist, dated 5 September 2016. She has  been
    a consultant forensic psychologist since 2011 and has  practiced  as  a
    psychologist since 1996. I also note that much of her past  experiences
    has involved the treatment of serious offenders. Therefore, I find that
    she has the necessary qualifications and experience to provide such  an
    expert report. I also note that she had been provided with all relevant
    evidence before completing her report and referred  to  this  evidence,
    where appropriate, in her report. She also  referred  to  a  number  of
    academic articles and reports, which  constituted  relevant  background
    evidence.

20.  Much of her report addressed the key issue  of  whether  the  Appellant
    did now constitute a danger to the community in the United Kingdom.

21.  Her report, explained in detailed how she had  assessed  what,  if  any
    danger, he posed to the community  using  the  Level  of  Service  Case
    Management Inventory, the Historical Clinical Risk Management tool  and
    SAPROF Assessment of Protective Factors. In paragraph 10.3.3.   of  her
    report, Lisa Davies explained that the  nature  of  his  past  offences
    alone was sufficient to put the Appellant in the category  of  moderate
    risk and that this was a static factor  which  could  not  be  changed.
    However, it was her opinion that it was the other  factors  which  were
    more indicative of any current risk.

15.  At paragraph 4.4.7. she noted  that  his  score  on  the  dynamic  need
    index, a measure of treatment and management needs, placed him  in  the
    low range with a t-score of 39 and percentile score  of  17.  She  also
    explained that higher scores on  this  index  (percentiles  of  75  and
    above) reflected higher levels of treatment  and  management  need  and
    higher levels of recidivism.

16.  In addition, she found in  paragraph  4.4.9.  that  his  score  on  the
    Protective Strength Index fell at the 77th  percentile.  She  explained
    that this scale is a measure of the presence of  protective  influences
    and strengths. She noted that he fell in the high range with respect to
    his cognitive and behavioural regulation  skills  and  in  the  average
    range with respect to anger regulation abilities. She acknowledged that
    he fell in the low range in  respect  to  education  and  training  but
    concluded that the scores taken together suggested that the presence of
    protective factors was high with respect to his ability to regulate his
    emotions although gaining employment and  improving  his  employability
    would be beneficial in further reducing his  risk  and  increasing  the
    level of protection although risk overall  is  noted  to  fall  in  the
    average range. This conclusion served to meet the  concerns  raised  by
    the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer   that  he  had  no  history  of
    employment.

17.   In  paragraph  4.4.10.  she  concluded  that  his  profile  of  scores
    indicated that his static risk was mitigated by the presence of a range
    of protective strengths and low treatment needs.

18.  As a consequence, she concluded in paragraph  5.0.10    of  her  report
    that it was only likely that the Appellant had the potential  to  cause
    serious harm (through the commission of further offences) if there  was
    a significant change in his current circumstances for example, a return
    to consistent gang associations, a return to consistent  use  of  drugs
    and a perceived need for financial gain.

19.  Furthermore, in paragraph 10.3.2 of her report, she concluded that  the
    Appellant had begun the process of desistance from gang membership  and
    there is no current evidence to indicate the  presence  of  violent  or
    offence supportive attitudes or beliefs or beliefs  supportive  of  the
    use of weapons or gangs. He currently expresses pro-social  orientation
    and is hopeful of being given the opportunity to live an  offence  free
    lifestyle for himself in the UK. I am confident that he  will  continue
    to  desist  from  engagement  in  criminal  activity   and   has   been
    successfully rehabilitated".

 20. The Appellant had been on bail since 29 May  2014  and,  therefore,  it
    was possible to assess his behaviour since that date and  when  he  was
    living in the community. It was not disputed that he  was  living  with
    his parents and was devoting his time to charity work, going to the gym
    and playing other sports. It was also not disputed that he had not  re-
    offended and had broken all ties with his previous associates.  He  had
    also developed a business plan and was very keen to  obtain  employment
    when his immigration status permitted him to do so. Therefore, applying
    a balance of probabilities I find that the Appellant has  rebutted  the
    presumption that he constitutes a danger to the community.

21.  As a consequence, I find that the Appellant  is  not  excluded  from  a
    grant of asylum.

RETURN TO ETHIOPIA

22.  The Appellant accepts that he is entitled to Eritrean  citizenship  but
    it is his case that he  would  suffer  persecution  there.  It  is  the
    Respondent's case that this fear of persecution is  irrelevant  as  the
    Appellant is also entitled to Ethiopian  citizenship  and  he  has  not
    expressed a fear of persecution there. In  particular,  the  Respondent
    submitted that the Appellant is entitled to  Ethiopian  citizenship  as
    his mother used an Ethiopian passport to enter the United Kingdom.

23.  This is not denied by the Appellant but it is his case that he  has  no
    access to that passport and, therefore, cannot not provide  it  to  the
    Ethiopian Embassy in connection  with  any  application  for  Ethiopian
    citizenship. He is supported in this assertion by his  mother.  In  her
    own witness statement she explained that, when she came to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1990,  she had to travel on an Ethiopian passport as Eritrea
    was not yet an independent state.  She added that it was  when  Eritrea
    became independent in 1993 that she applied for  an  Eritrean  identity
    card. (I note that this timing is  historically  accurate.)  She  added
    that once she  received  her  Eritrean  identity  card,  she  sent  her
    Ethiopian passport to the Home Office.

24.  I have  also  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  in  the  note  and
    directions, promulgated by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Peart
    on 28 September 2015, it is recorded that the Respondent,  through  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer, accepted that both of  the  Appellant's
    parents had been born in Asmara, which is now in Eritrea and  that  the
    Appellant had been  born  in  Saudi  Arabia  and  had  never  lived  in
    Ethiopia.

25.  Designated First-Tribunal Judge Peart had also directed the  Respondent
    do use her best endeavours to forthwith locate and  produce  copies  of
    the Appellant's mother's Ethiopian passport to  the  Appellant  on  the
    basis that he understood that it was lodged with the Respondent in 1993
    of thereabouts.  (At the start of the current hearing, the Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, informed the Tribunal that the Respondent had  been
    able to comply  with  this  direction  or  to  locate  the  Appellant's
    mother's file.)

26.  This is relevant as  it  is  the  Respondent's  case  that  it  is  the
    Appellant who has not taken all reasonable steps to establish  that  he
    is entitled to Ethiopian citizenship. She relies  on  MA  (Ethiopia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 289 in which
    Elias LJ held at paragraph 50 that:

     "In my judgment, where the essential issue before the  AIT  is  whether
    someone will or will not be returned, the Tribunal should in the normal
    case require the applicant to act bona fide  and  take  all  reasonably
    practicable steps to seek to obtain the requisite documents  to  enable
    her to return. There may be cases where it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    require this, such as if disclosure of identity might put the applicant
    at risk, or perhaps third parties, such as relatives of  the  applicant
    who may be at risk in the home state if it is known that the  applicant
    has claimed asylum.  That is not  this  case,  however.   There  is  no
    reason why the appellant should not herself visit the embassy  to  seek
    to obtain the relevant papers.  Indeed, as I have said, she did so  but
    wrongly told the staff there that she was Eritrean".

27.  In the current case, it is accepted that the Appellant was not born  in
    Ethiopia and, therefore, cannot provide a birth certificate  from  that
    state. It is also accepted that he was not born in Eritrea when it  was
    still part of Ethiopia. Therefore, at best he will be able to establish
    that he is entitled to Ethiopian citizenship by descent.

28.  It is also the case that the Appellant has not tried  to  disguise  his
    origins from the Ethiopian Embassy as was the case in MA (Ethiopia). He
    has also visited the Embassy to try to apply for Ethiopian citizenship.
    At the hearing the Appellant and his solicitor gave oral evidence about
    the time they visited the Ethiopian Embassy in London  together.  Their
    oral evidence was  consistent  and  it  appeared  that  the  Appellant,
    assisted by his solicitor, tried to both obtain information  about  his
    entitlement  to  citizenship  and  to   pursue   an   application   for
    citizenship. They managed to pursue  a  member  of  the  staff  at  the
    Embassy to speak to them in a private room but that they were told that
    the Appellant did not have the necessary  documents  to  even  make  an
    application.

29.  The Appellant's Bundle also contained a copy  of  an  Application  form
    for an Ethiopian origin Identification Card.  There was provision for a
    foreign national of Ethiopian origin to  apply  for  an  Identification
    Card. However, the form and the accompanying notes stated that he would
    have to provide two copies of a supporting document that showed that he
    was of Ethiopian origin.  As stated above, it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been born in Saudi Arabia and, therefore,  there  was  no
    question of him being able to provide a copy of his  birth  certificate
    as authenticated through the Ethiopian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  In
    addition, the Respondent did not submit that  the  Appellant  would  be
    able to obtain a  court  document  authenticated  by  the  Ministry  of
    Foreign Affairs which confirmed that he was of Ethiopian origin or that
    his parents or grandparents were Ethiopian or that  he  was  the  legal
    inheritor of biological parents who are or were Ethiopian citizens.

30.  The Respondent merely relied on the failure by the Appellant to  submit
    a copy of the Ethiopian passport held by  his  mother  when  she  first
    entered the United Kingdom in 1990. However, the notes provided by  the
    Embassy do not suggest that a copy of  his  mother's  old  passport  of
    itself would meet the requirements of the Embassy. He would  also  have
    to obtain a court document attesting to her citizenship which had  been
    authenticated by the Ethiopian Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs.  However,
    Ethiopian Nationality Law 2003 states at 12.1 that  any  Ethiopian  who
    voluntarily acquires  another  nationality  shall  be  deemed  to  have
    voluntarily renounced his Ethiopian nationality.

31.  The Application Form also required the Appellant to  provide  the  name
    and address of a parent or close relative with an address  in  Ethiopia
    and it was accepted that the Appellant's parents did not live there and
    there had been no suggestion that he had  any  close  relatives  living
    there. At best, if the Appellant had been able to provide a copy of his
    mother's passport, it would have shown that she had been born  in  what
    was now Eritrea.

32.  The Home Office asked why the Appellant's solicitor  had  not  followed
    up his visit by letters and telephone calls. However, the solicitor had
    explained that an application could only be make at the Embassy  as  it
    was necessary for an applicant to be fingerprinted at the same time  as
    making the application.

33.  I have also taken into account the fact  that  in  his  expert  report,
    dated 21 September 2016, Gunter Schroder noted that section 3.1 of  the
    Ethiopian Nationality Law 2003 states  that  any  person  shall  be  an
    Ethiopian national by descent where both or either of  his  parents  is
    Ethiopian. However, at paragraph 17 of his report,  he  concludes  that
    the Appellant's mother undoubtedly lost her Ethiopian nationality  when
    she applied for and was issued an Eritrean  National  ID-Card  in  1993
    and, at paragraph 20, he added that it  was  also  his  view  that  the
    Appellant would have lost his Ethiopian citizenship in 1993 through the
    verification of the Eritrean nationality of his  mother.  I  have  also
    reminded myself that, in paragraph 16 of CS & Others (Proof of  Foreign
    Law) India [2017] UKUT 00199, it was confirmed  that  "foreign  law  is
    capable of  being  proved  by  the  evidence  of  a  person  possessing
    demonstrated expert credentials".

34.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the passage in paragraph
    49 of MA (Ethiopia) where the Court of Appeal noted that "speculation
    by the AIT about the embassy's likely response, and reliance on expert
    evidence designed to assist them to speculate in a more informed manner
    about that question, would not be necessary". However, the Appellant
    had visited the Embassy twice and on the first occasion he had been
    accompanied by his solicitor, who had provided both a written witness
    statement and oral evidence about his visit. The Appellant had also
    obtained an application form and accompanying notes which indicated
    that he was not in possession of the necessary supporting documents.

35.  The Home Office Presenting Office submitted that the expert in the
    current appeal had speculated in paragraph 20 of his report when he
    said that that there was no reason whatsoever to assume that the
    Appellant's mother had informed the Ethiopian authorities that she
    wanted the Appellant to retain his Ethiopian citizenship. In my view,
    this was a statement of fact and not a speculation about the law. It
    was also entirely proper for the expert to give his opinion in relation
    to the practices adopted by the Ethiopian Embassy based on his own
    knowledge and experience in paragraph 19 of his report.

36.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that the expert did not
    have the requisite expertise in relation to Ethiopian nationality law.
    However, his report displayed a detailed understanding of the issues
    involved and he referred to relevant legislation and practice. There
    was also no doubt that he was an expert in relation to the situation in
    Eritrea.

37.  I have taken into account the fact that in paragraph 74 of  ST  (Ethnic
    Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011]  UKUT  00252  (IAC)
    the Upper Tribunal held that:

     "Although the question of  whether  a  person  is  a  national  of  any
    particular state is a matter of law  for  that  state  (KK  and  Others
    (Nationality: North Korea) [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC), the question whether a
    national of a particular state has been lawfully or unlawfully deprived
    of the nationality of that state is a legitimate issue for a  court  or
    tribunal in another state to determine, in the  course  of  deciding  a
    person's entitlement to international protection.  This is evident from
    the judgments in EB (Ethiopia) and MA (Ethiopia)".

38.  I have also noted that in paragraph 94 of ST the  Upper  Tribunal  also
    found that:

     "On this basis, it is important to make plain the ambit of any  country
    guidance to be given by the Upper Tribunal on this issue.  The  general
    attitude and practices of the Ethiopian Government,  operating  through
    its London Embassy, as disclosed by the evidence in the  present  case,
    are no more than the backdrop against which each individual claimant in
    an Ethiopian asylum case of the present kind must take  all  reasonably
    practicable  steps  on  a  bona  fide   basis   to   secure   Ethiopian
    acknowledgement of his or her Ethiopian nationality. That attitude  and
    practice will also, of course, inform judicial fact-finders in deciding
    whether an individual has, in fact, taken all such steps".

39.  I have also noted that in  paragraph  97  of  ST,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    accepted evidence from a  witness,  which  indicated  that  owever,  an
    ID/birth certificate would be expected by the  embassy,  in  connection
    with an  application  for  return  as  a  citizen,  failing  which  the
    situation "becomes much more difficult", in that  the  relevant  kebele
    would need to make enquiries about family in  Ethiopia,  failing  which
    information as to the  applicant's  last  permanent  address  would  be
    needed, so that that could  be  verified.   The  efficiency  of  kebele
    record keeping, as regards house numbers and who live in those  houses,
    has been attested by the expert witnesses".

40.  Therefore, taking this and the totality of the evidence into account  I
    find on a balance of probabilities that the  Appellant  had  taken  all
    reasonable steps to obtain an Ethiopian Identity card to show  that  he
    is entitled to Ethiopian citizenship and that, as a consequence, I find
    on a balance of probabilities that he  is  not  entitled  to  Ethiopian
    citizenship.

RETURN TO ERITREA

41.  The Appellant accepts that he is entitled to Eritrean  citizenship  but
    it is his case that he will be  subjected  to  persecution  if  removed
    there because he would have to undertake military service.  When I made
    by error of law decision, I retained the findings  made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Goodrich in paragraphs 80 to  89  of  his  decision.  He
    found in paragraph 88 of the decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    concluded that if the Appellant were to be removed to Eritrea he  would
    be at real risk of being required to perform national Service. He  also
    found that a real risk on return of having to perform military national
    Service duties (including civilian national service but  not  with  the
    people's militia) was likely to constitute a flagrant or a mere  breach
    of Article 4(3) as well as a breach of Article 3  of  the  ECHR".  When
    reaching this decision, he also relied on country guidance provided  in
    MST and Others (national service -  risk  categories)  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00443, where the Upper Tribunal found that:







     "2.      The  Eritrean  system  of  military/national  service  remains
    indefinite and since 2012 has   expanded to include a people's  militia
    programme, which although not part of national    service,  constitutes
    military service.
     3.  The age limits for national service are likely to remain  the  same
    as stated in MO,  namely 54     for men and 47 for  women  except  that
    for children the limit is now likely to      be 5 save for  adolescents
    in the context of family reunification. For peoples' militia the    age
    limits are likely to be 60 for women and 70 for men.
     11.      While likely to be a rare case, it is possible that  a  person
    who has exited lawfully may      on  forcible  return  face  having  to
    resume or commence national service. In such a case   there is  a  real
    risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  by  virtue  of  such  service
    constituting  forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and Article  3  of
    the ECHR.
     12.      Where it is specified above that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
    persecution  in  the  context  of    performance  of  military/national
    service, it is highly likely  that  it  will  be  persecution  for    a
    Convention reason based on imputed political opinion".

42.  The Appellant is thirty years old and does not fall into  any  category
    of person who may be exempt from military service. Therefore,  applying
    the requisite lower standard of proof I find  that  his  liability  for
    service amounts to a breach of Article 3 of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights and the Refugee Convention.

43.  Therefore, the Appellant  falls  within  the  exceptions  contained  in
    section 33(2) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and  the  Respondent  has  the
    power to revoke the Appellant's deportation order under section  32  of
    the Act.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 11 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
