

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01067/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 June 2014                               |On 01 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                     ...
                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         HENRY BJORN MITCHARDO BELL
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Ms Lesley Longhurst-Woods (of Counsel)
Respondent:       Mr John Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the  Determination  of
      the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") promulgated on 20  February  2014.
      By this Determination the FtT allowed the Appellant's appeal under the
      Immigration  Rules.   The  decision  which  was  thereby  successfully
      challenged was the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to revoke a
      deportation order in respect of the Appellant.

   2. The presentation of the appeal on behalf of the Secretary of State  by
      Mr Parkinson has helpfully refined, or telescoped, the written grounds
      of appeal.  Mr Parkinson correctly agreed with the Court's  suggestion
      that the centrepiece  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  may  be
      summarised as follows.

   3. In paragraph 238 of an impressively  detailed  determination  the  FtT
      acknowledged,  firstly,  that  the  best  interests  of  the  children
      affected constituted a primary consideration  to  be  weighed  in  the
      balancing exercise.  Secondly,  the  Tribunal  identified  the  public
      interest in removing this Appellant as a very weighty  factor  in  the
      proportionality assessment.  It is appropriate to observe that the FtT
      was directing itself impeccably having regard to the decided cases.

   4. Next the FtT made a specific finding, which was that the Appellant had
      established a very strong relationship with his partner and  with  the
      relevant children that he had done so during a lengthy  period  of  11
      years and that strong  bonds  had  been  formed.   This  prompted  the
      tribunal to say that the Appellant's  removal  would  cause  permanent
      emotional harm to the children  concerned  and,  further,  that  their
      family life with the Appellant would be permanently destroyed  by  his
      removal.

   5. The statement to which I have just referred  forms  the  core  of  the
      Secretary of State's appeal.  It is, in my view,  correctly  described
      as an evaluative assessment or judgment.  It is incorrectly  described
      as a finding of fact: that is plainly not appropriate.   I  am  in  no
      doubt that the appropriate touchstone to be applied to this evaluative
      assessment is the Wednesbury principle.  Thus the question of law  for
      this Tribunal in  this  error  of  law  appeal  is  whether  this  key
      evaluative assessment is vitiated by  irrationality.   The  answer  to
      that question is  provided  fundamentally  by  a  combination  of  the
      evidence which was available to the Tribunal, the facts which were not
      in dispute and the  facts  in  respect  of  which  the  Tribunal  made
      findings, explicit or implicit.  Viewed through this prism, I conclude
      that this evaluative assessment lay within  the  range  of  reasonable
      assessments open to the Tribunal having regard to the factual  matrix.
      Specifically, I reject the argument that this conclusion was  open  to
      the Tribunal only with the support of expert evidence  of  some  kind,
      whether medical or psychiatric or social work or a combination of  all
      these. That contention is putting the matter altogether too  strongly.
      Expert evidence is desirable in some cases, expert evidence can assist
      in  some  cases  but  this  particular  assessment  is  based  upon  a
      combination of life experience, common sense and judicial notice.   In
      the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case  it  did  not   require
      supporting expert evidence in my view.

   6. The secondary ground of  appeal  which  featured  to  a  substantially
      lesser extent in Mr Parkinson's submissions was that the Tribunal  may
      not have applied the correct test in law.  It is quite  clear  from  a
      consideration of the determination as a whole and, in particular, from
      a consideration of paragraph 238 as a whole that the Tribunal did  not
      lapse in this manner.  Accordingly, emphasising once again  that  this
      is an error of law appeal and that this court's opinion  of  what  the
      Tribunal decided and this court's opinion of the  factual  matrix  are
      both irrelevant, I find no substance in this ground.


   7. I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  not
      vitiated by any error of law in the manner suggested on behalf of  the
      Secretary of State.  Accordingly the appeal must be dismissed.







                       Signed:

                  [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                        Date:  26  June 2014


