
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01462/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham City Centre Tower    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 October 2016                       |On 20 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms E Rutherford, instructed by TRP Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 2. This is an appeal against the  determination  dated  16  June  2016  of
    Designated Immigration Judge McCarthy  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett which allowed appellant's appeal against  deportation  on  the
    basis that she was found to be a refugee.

 3. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department as the respondent  and  to  LB  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The grounds of appeal were as follows (verbatim):

             "Failing to give reasons, or adequate reasons for finding on a
             material matter

             It is respectfully submitted that the Panel of the  FTTJ  have
             failed to give adequate reasons for their positive finding  in
             relation to the appellant's sexuality and subsequent  risk  on
             return to Jamaica. It is asserted that they have  based  their
             conclusions purely on the evidence of the appellant's  alleged
             ex partner LH and in doing so have neglected to  consider  the
             credibility issue raised both in the RFL  and  highlighted  in
             the determination at paragraphs 17-20.

             It is asserted that the Panel  have  failed  to  look  at  the
             evidence holistically and  balance  the  extensive  issues  of
             credibility including the fact of a number of  witnesses  were
             found to have given completely contradictory evidence  against
             the evidence given by LH. It is  respectfully  submitted  that
             the  substantial  errors  in  evidence  is  indicative  of   a
             manufactured claim and it is incumbent upon the FTTJ  to  give
             reasons for why they are satisfied  these  errors  in  witness
             evidence and fabrications [17-20] by the  appellant  have  not
             been found to be material to the outcome. They have failed  to
             do so and as such it  is  asserted  that  their  findings  are
             therefore misdirected and the determination in error."

 5. Permission was granted on 1 August 2016 by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic.

 6. It was not my conclusion that the grounds made out an error on a  point
    of law for the following reasons.

 7. At [13], at the outset of their  findings,  the  Tribunal  specifically
    indicates that it made the credibility findings only after  considering
    "the evidence as a whole" i.e. holistically.

 8. The Tribunal reminds itself at [15] of the possibility of some parts of
    the account being credible and others not.  It  is  difficult  to  see,
    certainly materially so, how the First-tier Tribunal  can  be  said  to
    have been unaware of the need to  bear  in  mind  all  aspects  of  the
    evidence, both positive and negative, when reaching their  conclusions,
    given that additional self-direction.

 9.  At [17]-[20] adverse credibility  findings  are  made  concerning  the
    claim by the appellant to have manifested her sexual orientation  at  a
    young age and to have been perceived as a  lesbian  in  Jamaica  before
    coming to the UK in 2000. The panel found this to be so because she had
    been in heterosexual relationships  in  Jamaica,  because  the  written
    evidence in unsigned letters was not sufficiently reliable to make  out
    this part of the case and because there would be  no  reason  for  this
    perception to have arisen given that the applicant specifically did not
    claim to have been in same-sex relationships before coming to the UK.

10. The respondent's argument is that having found the applicant  and  some
    of her witnesses not to be reliable regarding her profile  in  Jamaica,
    this should have been weighed more heavily when  deciding  whether  the
    evidence about her being in a genuine lesbian relationship with  LH  in
    the UK was credible.

11. Read fairly, the First-tier  Tribunal  gave  a  rational  and  adequate
    explanation for finding the relationship with LH  and  the  appellant's
    sexuality  credible.  Although  the  account  of  her  activities   and
    perceived profile whilst in Jamaica was not accepted, the  decision  is
    clear as to the evidence of LH and supporting written and oral evidence
    of CW and SG, the appellant's siblings, being sufficient  to  make  out
    the claim on the appellant's sexuality.  Having made  those  clear  and
    rational findings and having indicated that the evidence  was  assessed
    holistically it was not incumbent on the panel to state in  terms  that
    the credibility findings on the "Jamaican" part of the claim  were  not
    sufficient to undermine the "UK" part of the claim.

12. In addition, although it was not found that the appellant was perceived
    to be lesbian in  Jamaica  before  she  left  in  2000,  this  was  not
    necessarily something that was fatal to the  evidence  of  SG  and  CW,
    relied on by the panel at [22] as capable of supporting  the  claim  to
    have been in a  relationship  with  LH.  SG  and  CW  provided  witness
    statements and gave oral evidence to the Tribunal, putting the panel in
    a good position to judge their credibility on the relationship with  LH
    whatever was said about the appellant when she was in Jamaica.

13. Further, [22] makes it clear that a significant aspect of the  positive
    finding on the relationship with LH was the  evidence  of  LH  herself,
    stating "The evidence  of  LH  was  very  persuasive  being  clear  and
    detailed." That was a finding open to the panel, additionally so as the
    evidence of LH relating only to events in the UK and not being  capable
    of being undermined by referring to events in Jamaica and the  negative
    credibility findings. that were found not to have  occurred.  That  was
    also true regarding the evidence of the appellant's brother, CW,  whose
    written evidence did indicate that he knew or heard that the  appellant
    was perceived to be lesbian when she was in Jamaica.

14. It is my conclusion that the decision assesses  the  material  evidence
    within the correct legal framework and does not disclose a legal error,
    the grounds really seeking to disagree with the weight put by the panel
    on the evidence of the core aspect of the claim, the relationship  with
    LH.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law such that it should be set aside and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 19 October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

