

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01197/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Victoria Law Courts                |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 6th June 2013                            |On : 12th June 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                               jhangir barjani

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Shahnaz Nowaparast of Duncan Moghal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Jhangir Barjani was 22 years old when he  arrived  here  from  Iran  in
    September 2006.  He claimed asylum on the basis of involvement with the
    banned Komala Party, but the claim  was  rejected  and  the  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed by the AIT, neither the Secretary of State nor the
    immigration judge having found the claim to be credible.  This all took
    place within the space of a few months, but Mr Barjani  did  not  leave
    the United Kingdom,  and  in  January  2010  his  solicitors  submitted
    further representations based upon  what  purported  to  be  an  arrest
    warrant, issued in Iran on 20th June 2009.  The Border Agency  did  not
    decide whether  to  treat  these  representations  as  a  fresh  claim.
    Instead, in August 2010 Mr Barjani  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, based - according to the Notice of Decision issued in  November
    2012 - on "4 years residency in the United Kingdom."  I am  unaware  of
    any policy to grant indefinite leave after four years' residence,  most
    of it unlawful.  It may be that indefinite leave  was  granted  by  the
    Case Resolution Directorate under the 'legacy' programme, although this
    was intended for asylum seekers with 'unresolved'  claims.   One  might
    have thought that Mr Barjani's claim, once he had become 'appeal rights
    exhausted', would have been regarded as 'resolved'.   It  might  strike
    some as odd that an asylum seeker who is found to have  fabricated  his
    claim but who is unwilling  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  should  be
    rewarded with indefinite leave  if  he  stays  here  long  enough.   Mr
    Barjani was fortunate indeed.

2.    This good  fortune  did  not  last.   In  June  2011  Mr  Barjani  was
    convicted of possessing a Class A drug with intent to supply,  and  was
    sentenced  to  four  years  in  prison.    This   triggered   automatic
    deportation under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, and at this
    point the Home Office rejected  the  further  representations  made  in
    January 2010, finding that Mr Barjani was not at risk, such as to bring
    him within Exception 1 of section 33.  On the Tanveer Ahmed  principle,
    no reliance was placed on the purported  arrest  warrant.   The  asylum
    claim was  also  certified  under  section  72  of  the  2002  Act.   A
    deportation order was duly signed on 6th November 2012.

3.   An appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 7th February, and  was
    dismissed by a panel  comprising  Judge  William  Khan  and  Mr  Martyn
    Griffiths, JP.  They too placed no  reliance  on  the  arrest  warrant,
    finding that the only issue which might  get  the  appellant  into  any
    trouble with the authorities was  his  illegal  exit  from  Iran.   But
    following the 'country guidance' in SB (risk on return - illegal  exit)
    [2009] UKIAT 53, the panel did not think  that  this  would  result  in
    persecutory ill-treatment.  They rejected the argument that the Iranian
    authorities would have learnt about the appellant's  conviction  for  a
    drugs offence because of publicity about it on the Internet,  and  that
    this publicity would cause the appellant to  incur  'double  jeopardy',
    leading to further punishment, and even  execution,  in  Iran.   People
    convicted of drugs offences committed in  Iran  itself  were  certainly
    liable to be executed, but there was no  credible  evidence  that  this
    happened to Iranians who had been convicted of drugs offences committed
    abroad.

4.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Designated
    Judge Lewis, who was concerned that the First-tier Tribunal  might  not
    have dealt adequately with the background evidence of double  jeopardy,
    particularly in light of the publicity generated in the United  Kingdom
    by the appellant's offences.  Judge Lewis said  nothing  about  another
    ground of appeal, namely that the appellant would be at risk on  return
    for having "presented/ used/ created" a forged document  purporting  to
    come from the Iranian judiciary, i.e. the arrest warrant.

5.   When the matter came before me today, both  issues  were  canvassed  by
    Miss Nowaparast and resisted by Mr Smart.  I shall deal first with  the
    issue of the forged arrest warrant.  It seemed to me at first that Miss
    Nowaparast was trying to have her cake and eat it, because  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  she  was  arguing  that  the  arrest  warrant  was
    genuine.  It was the proof that her client's claim to have belonged  to
    the Komala party was true, and that he would be at risk for that reason
    on return.  But now she was saying that, as it was  false,  her  client
    would be at risk on return for using a false document.

6.   Nevertheless, once I had looked at Judge Khan's handwritten  record  of
    proceedings it became clear that Miss Nowaparast  did  in  her  closing
    submissions assert that the Iranian authorities  would  discover,  from
    what Iranians living in South Wales had posted on  the  Internet,  both
    that the appellant had been convicted of a drugs offence  and  that  he
    had produced a forged arrest warrant in support of  his  asylum  claim.
    The latter submission did not  appear  in  the  determination,  and  no
    finding was made on whether use of the arrest warrant  would  create  a
    separate risk for the appellant.  This omission seemed to me  an  error
    of law, and Mr Sharp did not demur.  But I may have  gone  too  far  in
    supposing this to be a material error of law.

7.   Nearly all of what Miss Nowaparast said in  her  submissions  has  been
    faithfully transcribed from the handwritten Record  of  Proceedings  to
    paragraph 15  of  the  First-tier  determination.   Thus,  we  read  at
    paragraph 15 that the authorities in Iran monitor Internet  operations,
    and are likely thereby to have learnt about the appellant's  conviction
    for drug-dealing.  Drug-dealers are hanged in Iran by the hundred every
    year, a fate which the appellant too was likely to  suffer  on  return.
    The hand-written note is somewhat longer  :  "Likely  authorities  will
    find out about his conviction + his claim about presenting a forged doc
    - i.e. the arrest warrant which the Iranian community in Sth Wales  say
    is  not  genuine."   No  submission  was  made,  it  would  seem,  that
    presenting a forged document  would  give  the  Iranian  authorities  a
    separate and free-standing reason for persecuting the  appellant.   The
    whole thrust of the submissions was that what had been  posted  on  the
    Internet would be read by the authorities, who would hang the appellant
    for committing a drug offence, regardless  of  where  the  offence  was
    committed.  Unsurprisingly, the tribunal  went  on  to  deal  with  the
    submission that the appellant was at real risk of suffering  the  death
    penalty as a drugs offender.  They also dealt  with  Miss  Nowaparast's
    submission  that  the  arrest  warrant   was   genuine,   having   been
    authenticated by  an  expert.   They  can  hardly  be  blamed  for  not
    realising that there  was  an  alternative  submission,  viz  that  the
    warrant was not genuine and that the appellant would  be  punished  for
    uttering a false instrument.

8.   However, having  indicated  at  the  hearing  that  there  had  been  a
    material error, I then had to re-make the decision on the  appeal.   It
    was agreed on all hands that this would be by way of submissions  only.
    Miss Nowaparast was able to adduce a document which had not been before
    the First-tier Tribunal,  namely  the  Country  of  Origin  Information
    Report on Iran, issued on 16th January  2013.   At  11.48  there  is  a
    section on crimes committed outside Iran, which mentions Article  5  of
    the Penal Code.  This article is the evidence relied  on  to  establish
    that Mr Barjani risks punishment for proffering a false arrest warrant.
     But  what  Article  5  actually  penalizes  is  forgery  of  documents
    emanating from the Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic or  from  the
    President and from a small number of other very high-ranking officials,
    such as the head of the judicial branch and the  head  of  the  Supreme
    Court.  A forged arrest warrant purporting to have been issued  by  the
    Deputy Enforcement Officer at the  Babol  Court  would  simply  not  be
    covered by this, as Mr Sharp pointed out.

9.   That puts paid to the arrest warrant as a  separate  head  of  risk  on
    return.  It features among a small number of Internet postings set  out
    in the main Appellant's Bundle, consisting of  two  articles  about  Mr
    Barjani in the South Wales Evening Post, quoting comments from  members
    of the Iranian community in Swansea,  who  express  the  hope  that  Mr
    Barjani will be deported for drug-dealing, and allege that he bought an
    arrest warrant in Iran "in a bid to persuade the  authorities  that  he
    would be in danger should he return to  Iran."   One  of  the  articles
    quotes a response from the UK Border Agency that "there was no evidence
    that Barjani had produced a  forged  document",  but  that  issue  need
    trouble us no longer.

10.  What needs to be assessed is whether the posting of these two  articles
    from the South Wales Evening Post in July 2011 is reasonably likely  to
    have brought Mr Barjani's conviction of a drug offence to the attention
    of the Iranian authorities.  Miss  Nowaparast  relies  on  5.3  of  the
    Operational Guidance Note on Iran for October 2012, which says that the
    Iranian government monitors Internet communications, especially  social
    networking websites such as Facebook, Twitter  and  YouTube,  and  that
    returning  Iranian  citizens   are   sometimes   stopped   at   Teheran
    International Airport and asked to log into their YouTube and  Facebook
    accounts.  But the two articles about Mr Barjani  in  the  South  Wales
    Evening Post do not appear on social networking websites.  True  it  is
    that if one Googles 'Jahangir Barjani', those articles about  him  will
    appear.  But the background  evidence  does  not  say  that  passengers
    returning to Iran are routinely looked up on Google  to  check  whether
    they have been indulging in nefarious activities abroad.

11.  Miss Nowaparast also relies on BA (Demonstrators in Britain -  risk  on
    return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) for the contention  that  Iranians
    returning from Britain are screened at Teheran  International  Airport,
    but this is  to  check  whether  they  match  photographs  of  Iranians
    protesting  outside  the  Embassy  in  London.   Mr  Barjani  has   not
    participated in any political activities while in the  United  Kingdom,
    so - as the First-tier Tribunal  also  found  -  there  is  no  serious
    possibility that such screening  will  cause  him  to  suffer  harm  on
    return.

12.  But even if I am wrong about that, and  the  Iranian  authorities  find
    out that Mr Barjani has served  a  sentence  for  drug-dealing  in  the
    United Kingdom, the evidence of 'double jeopardy' is very  flimsy.   It
    consists of an academic paper by an  attorney  in  Teheran,  quoted  at
    11.24 of the COIS Report and focusing on Article 7 of the  Penal  Code.
    This article says that "any Iranian who has committed a  crime  outside
    the territory of Iran  and  is  found  in  Iran  will  be  punished  in
    accordance with the Penal Laws of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran."   As
    the Teheran attorney himself admits, "The ambiguity of Art.  7  of  the
    Iranian penal code has led judges to  make  differing  interpretations.
    Some judges believe that whether the accused has been convicted  abroad
    or not, he could still be  prosecuted  and  punished  in  Iran."   That
    sounds like the stuff of academic debate.  It is far from  saying  that
    Iranians who have served  prison  sentences  abroad  are  subjected  to
    double punishment on their return.

13.  Although both the Appellant's Bundle and 8.01-8.12 of the COIS  Report,
    handed up by Mr Smart, contain reports about hundreds of people  caught
    smuggling drugs through Iran being executed,  there  is  not  a  single
    report about anyone being  punished,  far  less  executed,  for  having
    committed a drugs offence in another country and having served a prison
    sentence there.  Double jeopardy  has  never  featured  in  a  'country
    guidance' case on Iran, but Mr Smart suggests that some assistance  may
    be derived from JC (double jeopardy : Art 10 CL) China  CG  [2008]  AIT
    36.  Apparently there is in China something in the Criminal Code  which
    allows  for  re-prosecution  of  overseas  offenders.   But   this   is
    discretionary and extremely rare.  The analogy suggested by Mr Sharp is
    that the presence of something on the statute book does not  mean  that
    it is ever resorted to in practice.  Certainly in the case of Iran,  if
    expatriate Iranians  were  being  subjected  to  double  punishment  on
    return, there would have been reports of it by now.

14.  The upshot is that I have reached the same  conclusion  as  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that there is no real risk that  the  claimant  will  be
    subjected on return to Iran to  ill-treatment  breaching  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (he is  no  longer  relying  on  his  asylum
    claim).



     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              11th June 2013



