

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01338/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 13 January 2015                   |On 15 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DAMIAN GORECKI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Bruce Short,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge J
    C Grant-Hutchison dated 9  September  2014,  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal against a deportation order made under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The material parts of the grounds are
    these:

         ... the judge materially misdirected herself ... as she has  placed
         great weight on the appellant's future rehabilitation ...

         The UT in Essa [2013] UKUT 00316 and Vasconcelos [2013] UKUT  00378
         reaffirmed ... that rehabilitation ... only becomes relevant to ...
         regulation 21(5) when someone has established a right of  permanent
         residence.  Essa at paragraph 26:

          ... the Court's reference to genuine integration must be  directed
         at qualified persons and their family members who have  resided  in
         the host state for five  years  or  more.   People  who  have  just
         arrived..., have not yet become qualified persons, or have not been
         a qualified person for five years, can always be removed  for  non-
         exercise of  free  movement  rights  irrespective  of  public  good
         grounds to curtail free movement rights.  If their presence  during
         this time makes them a present threat to public policy it would  be
         inconsistent with the purposes of the directive  to  weigh  in  the
         balance   against   deportation   their   future    prospects    of
         rehabilitation.

         .... Rehabilitation is not a relevant consideration  of  those  EEA
         nationals who have not acquired  permanent  residence.   The  judge
         clearly considers the issue ... in great detail... despite it  only
         being relevant when someone has established permanent residence ...



         Furthermore... the appellant's crimes and offending  behaviour  had
         been escalating, which was accepted by the judge  at  paragraph  37
         ... the way in which the appellant ended up serving  his  sentences
         is irrelevant.  The appellant has a clear  propensity  to  reoffend
         and there are grounds of public  policy  for  deporting  him.   The
         appellant is a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.

 3.  Mrs  Pettersen   submitted   that   the   judge's   consideration   of
    rehabilitation prospects was plainly central to her  decision,  and  on
    that point she overlooked that the regulations, as made  plain  by  the
    case law, do not admit that factor into the  balancing  exercise.   The
    appellant came to the UK in 2009,  and  had  no  right  to  expect  any
    rehabilitation to be carried out here.   The error was so  material  as
    to require the decision to be set aside.  On  the  evidence  which  was
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  decision  should  be  reversed.
    Further, the appellant is known to be subject to a further sentence  of
    10 months  imprisonment,  imposed  on  8  January  2015.   He  has  not
    suggested that any other evidence  should  be  introduced  if  a  fresh
    decision were to be required.

 4. Mr Winter's submitted firstly that the judge had not decided  the  case
    on rehabilitation prospects only but on other significant matters which
    were relevant  under  regulation  21(5).   Any  error  was  immaterial.
    Secondly, he argued that on the basis of Tsakouridis [2011] 2 CMLR  11,
    from which Essa derives, and of a close reading of Essa, rehabilitation
    prospects are relevant even in a case which does not reach the  5  year
    threshold.  He relied particularly  on  the  opinion  of  the  Advocate
    General at AG50, "Observance of the principle that  criminal  sanctions
    must have the function of  rehabilitation  is  indissociable  from  the
    concept of human dignity and ...  belongs  to  the  family  of  general
    principles of Union law"; A86, 87 and 95; the Court's general agreement
    with the AG; and paragraphs 26, 49, 52 and 53.  Essa  at  paragraph  26
    was somewhat inconsistent with paragraph 28, which says that the longer
    the residence the greater the degree of integration and  the  weightier
    the prospects of rehabilitation as a factor  against  removal.   It  is
    also inconsistent that at paragraph 30 a problem area is identified  of
    those who have been resident for more than the minimum  of  five  years
    and are integrated but not qualified persons.  The question is reserved
    whether the prospects of rehabilitation can be a factor in those cases.
     Mr Winter argued that there should be no  restriction  on  considering
    rehabilitation as a relevant factor.

 5. If there were error, Mr Winter accepted that the Upper Tribunal  should
    go on to substitute a fresh decision.  The only further evidence  would
    be a statement by the appellant, prepared by his  solicitors.   (It  is
    not signed and dated but can be taken into account.)  The appellant has
    a trial pending on 16th January 2015 in Perth Sheriff Court on a charge
    which he denies.  He has another case there with an  intermediate  diet
    on 19 February and a trial diet on 10 March 2015.  On  7  January  2015
    his sentence was made up of 4 months on a charge of assault;  2  months
    recall on the offensive weapons charge; and 4 months for  breach  of  a
    community payback order.  He has no contact with family in  Poland,  no
    home and no prospects.  His (Polish) partner would not move  with  him,
    and he "would do anything" to remain in Scotland  with  her  and  their
    daughter.

 6. Mrs Pettersen submitted in reply that the judge  not  only  went  wrong
    about rehabilitation, she for no good reason discounted the appellant's
    breach of bail conditions and failed to deal  with  the  obvious  point
    that his offending was escalating.  The appellant's  circumstances  did
    not approach those where Essa left any room for expansion of  cases  to
    which rehabilitation prospects were relevant.

 7. I reserved my determination.

 8. Tsakouridis was a case about a 10 year resident.   Essa found the  same
    principles to apply to a 5 year resident,  but  not  to  those  falling
    short of that period.  Mr Winter gleaned such pickings as he could from
    those authorities but they are plainly  too  lean.   If  there  is  any
    suitable  candidate  for  extending  the  scope  of   the   established
    principles, it is not this appellant.  The judge erred  on  the  issue,
    which is mentioned several  times  and  emphasised  in  the  concluding
    paragraph, so the decision has to be remade.

 9. I observed at the hearing that in remaking the decision I  should  take
    into account the further conviction but not the  two  further  sets  of
    pending  criminal  proceedings.   With  reference  to  the  proceedings
    pending on 19 February and 10 March 2015 that is not  quite  right,  on
    closer reading of the appellant's statement.  He admits the mistake  of
    becoming annoyed by being "punished twice" and deciding  not  to  "sign
    on" at a police station, in breach  of  a  sexual  offences  prevention
    order.  This is therefore another  matter  which  counts  against  him,
    although the decision would have been the  same  without  this  further
    adminicle of evidence.

10. The appellant finds it easy to say  that  he  would  "do  anything"  to
    remain with his partner and child, but in his conduct he  does  nothing
    to help  himself.   At  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  he
    professed to understand that he had to  change  or  he  would  not  get
    another chance, but rather than rehabilitating himself he has continued
    on a  downward  spiral.   Even  if  relevant,  the  evidence  shows  no
    likelihood of rehabilitation in this country to count  in  his  favour.
    His tendency is in the wrong direction.  The appellant has made no good
    case against the decision to make a deportation order.

11. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
    following  decision  is  substituted:   The  appellant's   appeal,   as
    originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



         [pic]


         14th January 2015
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

