
IAC-BFD- MD


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01955/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th September 2014                          |On 31st October 2014       |
|Prepared                                        |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                               mr kambulu joao
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts, of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the resumed hearing of an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against the determination of the FtT (Judge Page and Mr Yates) in which
    it allowed the Respondent's appeal against the decision  made  on  12th
    September 2013 by the SSHD refusing to revoke a deportation order  made
    against the Respondent on 12th November 2007. In this determination for
    the sake of clarity, I will refer to the Parties as  they  were  before
    the FtT, Mr Kambulu Joao as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as
    the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Angola born 2nd June 1982. He entered the
    UK aged 8 years old, in  December  1990.  He  was  granted  ILR,  after
    application made through social services when aged 15.  He  is  now  33
    years old. His last offence was when aged 19 years.

 3. The Appellant was brought to the UK by a man,  Pedro  Mbala  (aka  Paul
    Mbala), who posed as his  father  to  social  services.  The  Appellant
    refers to him as "uncle" but the true relationship is unknown. Sadly he
    was the subject of abuse by this man, both physical and mental, and had
    his first contact with social services in  May  1992  (aged  9).  Mbala
    continued to pose as the child's father to social services which led to
    the Appellant being returned to him despite  having  been  taken  again
    into care in 1993 (aged about 11), Eventually, after further  abuse  at
    Mbala's hands,  including  'loaning'  the  child  to  others  to  claim
    benefits and for sexual abuse, the Appellant was taken into  full  time
    permanent care by the local authority in 1995 (aged about 13) when they
    eventually realised that Mbala was not  his  father.  Mbala  was  later
    deported in about 1997.

 4. Social services, through Jane Coker Solicitors, applied for  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain for the Appellant and this was granted on  12  November
    1997 when he was 15 years old.

 5. The Appellant was thus known to have been subject of  abuse  since  the
    age of 9 and was finally in full time care at the age of  13.  By  this
    time he was already a drug user. This  led  to  foster  placements  and
    placement in a  care  home.  He  got  himself  involved  in  adolescent
    juvenile delinquency and crime between 1998 and 2002 (aged  between  15
    and 19). The last offence, at age 19, committed in January 2002, is the
    index offence of aggravated burglary for which he was sentenced  to  10
    years detention in a Young Offender's Institute.

 6. The Respondent served a notice of intention to deport on the  Appellant
    shortly before his release from YOI detention. The  appellant's  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed on 21st November 2007 and a  signed
    deportation order  dated  11th  December  2007  was  made  against  the
    Appellant. The appellant was taken into immigration detention following
    his release from YOI custody but was subsequently granted bail  to  his
    girlfriend's mother's address.

Procedural History

 7. The Appellant made application to revoke  the  deportation  order  made
    against him and the subsequent appeal against the Respondent's  refusal
    came before the FtT. In its decision promulgated on 28th  January  2014
    that Tribunal allowed the Appellant's appeal concluding that to  deport
    him to Angola, would constitute a  disproportionate  interference  with
    his Article 8 ECHR Protected Rights  (family  and  private  life).  The
    Respondent sought  to  appeal  that  decision  and  although  this  was
    initially refused by the FtT, it was granted on a  renewed  application
    before the Upper  Tribunal.  The  grounds  seeking  renewed  permission
    claimed that the FtT had misdirected itself in  concluding  as  it  did
    that "although  the  Appellant  managed  to  abscond,  thereby  evading
    removal when the Secretary of State was in a  position  to  do  so,  he
    could have been "found without difficulty" as he remained in the Oxford
    area" The Respondent claimed that this speculation on the part  of  the
    FtT, together  with  its  'admonishment  'of  the  Secretary  of  State
    infected its reasoning.

 8. The remaining ground contended that the  FtT  had  taken  an  incorrect
    approach. It had failed to show that  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated
    that his case is one of those  exhibiting  "exceptional  circumstances"
    that precluded deportation. MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192.  SS
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.

 9. UTJ Pitt granted permission  in the following terms:

         "Paragraphs a) and b) of the grounds,  concerning  the  Appellant's
         avoidance of immigration control  for  a  number  of  years,  would
         appear to be more clearly arguable but I grant  permission  on  all
         grounds."

10. The error of law hearing came before me on 24th  June  2014.   I  found
    that the determination of the FtT  was  legally  unsustainable  and  my
    reasons for so doing are set out here.

         "I am satisfied despite Mr Hodgetts lengthy submissions,  that  the
         determination of the First-tier Tribunal is legally  unsustainable.
         I state my reasons relatively shortly.

         Whilst  it  is  correct  that  in  the  narrative   part   of   the
         determination there  is  reference  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         reasons for making the  deportation  order  and  her  reference  to
         paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration  Rules,  nowhere  in  the
         reasons part of the determination is there  any  reference  to  the
         Immigration Rules and their relevance to this appeal, or indeed  to
         deportation cases generally. Nowhere in the  reasons  part  of  the
         determination  is  there  reference  to  the  public  interest   in
         deportation in its various components.  For  example  there  is  no
         reference to the relevance of the Immigration Rules expressing  the
         Secretary of State's view of where the public interest lies. I  see
         no adequate consideration of the public interest in relation to the
         seriousness of the offence. I accept that  in  the  course  of  the
         determination, the First-tier Tribunal did refer to the  fact  that
         the Appellant had been convicted of a  serious  offence,  but  this
         does not amount to the same thing as taking into account its effect
         on the public interest.

         What the First-tier Tribunal appears to have done is to place great
         weight  on  the  Appellant's  troubled  background  and   childhood
         together with the circumstances that the family would  face  should
         he be returned to Angola. What it  has  not  done  is  given  clear
         findings demonstrating what are the  exceptional  circumstances  in
         this Appellant's case such that the public interest in  deportation
         is outweighed.

         For those reasons I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred
         in law. That error of law is such as to require the decision to  be
         set aside and the decision will have to be remade. I  informed  the
         parties at the conclusion of the error of law hearing  that  I  was
         reserving  my  decision  on  whether  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
         determination disclosed an error of law  requiring  it  to  be  set
         aside. I indicated that the appropriate course in the event  of  my
         finding an error of law would be for there to be a resumed  hearing
         before a panel of the Upper Tribunal. The parties were in agreement
         to this. This matter is now set down for a resumed hearing with the
         parties  being  given  the  opportunity   to   make   any   further
         submissions/call further evidence upon which they may seek to rely,
         in the light of my findings above".

Resumed Hearing

11. The resumed hearing came before me on 26th September 2014.  By  consent
    the majority of the facts  and  findings  made  by  the  FtT  were  not
    challenged. They are set out here.

         "He [the Appellant] entered the United  Kingdom  in  December  1990
         when aged 8 years. He was granted indefinite leave when he was aged
         15. He is now 31 years old. His last offence was in  2002  when  he
         was aged 19 years. It was  this  offence  that  gave  rise  to  the
         respondent's decision to deport him.

         There have been a number of significant  changes  since  the  first
         Tribunal dismissed  his  deportation  appeal  in  2007.  The  first
         Tribunal did not have  to  apply  the  subsequent  and  significant
         development in Article 8 ECHR case law in Maslov v  Austria  [2009]
         INLR 47 ECHR (Grand Chamber) and the  determination  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal  in  Masih  (Deportation  -  public   interest   -   basic
         principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046. At the time  of  the  first
         deportation appeal in 2007 the Appellant was single. Now he is in a
         relationship with a British citizen, Layla Mona Jamal Kanoun,  with
         whom he cohabits together with their  daughter  Myah,  born  on  31
         March 2013.

         The appellant has an unfortunate background in the United  Kingdom.
         He arrived in the UK in December 1990 on  a  flight  from  Zimbabwe
         with a man called Paul Mbala who posed as the  appellant's  father.
         In May 1992 the appellant first made contact with  social  services
         after a report of abuse by Paul Mbala when the appellant  was  aged
         10 years. The appellant then spent six months with a  foster  carer
         but was then returned to his presumed father Paul  Mbala.  In  1993
         the appellant was taken into care when he was aged 12 to live  with
         his foster carer for one and a half years. In 1995 he was placed in
         full-time local authority care when aged 13. He then lived with his
         foster carer Judy Beaupierre  for  eighteen  months.  In  1997  the
         appellant began getting into trouble, and eventually crime, and was
         transferred to children's home (sic) aged 15 years. On 12  November
         1997 he was granted indefinite leave to remain when aged 15 years.

         In 1997 he first met Paul Bragg, a social worker with  the  Eastern
         Children's House who became like an adopted father.

         On 23 March 1998 the appellant, then aged 15 years,  was  convicted
         of his first criminal offence for  possessing  an  article  with  a
         blade and for an assault occasioning actual bodily harm,  and  made
         the subject of a supervision order of twelve months.

         Then in June 1998 the appellant committed a robbery whilst on bail,
         then aged 15 years. On 10 September 1999 he was given a conditional
         discharge for two years.

         During the year 2000 social services attempted  to  attain  Angolan
         identification  paper  without  success  in  order  to  apply   for
         citizenship  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   This   attempt   was
         unsuccessful. On 20 July 2000 the  appellant  was  sentenced,  when
         aged 18 years, for an offence of having a  bladed  article,  theft,
         and resisting arrest, [offenses committed on 3 November  1999  when
         aged 17 years], and sentenced to fifteen  months'  detention  in  a
         young offenders institution.

         In 2001 the appellant was released from detention  and  sent  to  a
         hostel with shared accommodation. Once there  he  returned  to  his
         association with others involved  in  crime.  It  was  during  this
         period that he first met Layla Kanoun when  she  was  visiting  her
         father in London from Oxford.  [The  appellant  now  cohabits  with
         Layla at her address in Oxford].

         In January 1992 he was friends with Layla but they were  not  in  a
         relationship.  It  was  then  that  he  committed  an  offence   of
         aggravated burglary (with three others) and on 7 November  2002  he
         was sentenced  to  ten  years'  detention  in  a  young  offender's
         institute. This was a grave offence,  reflected  in  the  ten  year
         sentence.

         The  judge's  sentencing  remarks  are  to  be  found  recorded  at
         paragraph 2 of the determination of Judge Braybrook and Mrs Roe  in
         their determination promulgated on 21 November 2007. The  appellant
         and his three associates entered a flat at  3am  and  tied  up  the
         occupant and assaulted him in an attempt to make him divulge  where
         the money was kept. In this incident the occupier was stabbed.  The
         sentencing judge noted that it was not clear which of the four  men
         had stabbed the occupier.

         It was during his incarceration for this offence that the appellant
         began his relationship with Layla Kanoun. She began visiting him in
         prison around the end of 2003.

         On 12 November 2007  the  appellant  had  his  appeal  against  the
         Respondent's decision to deport hearing. But he did not call  Layla
         as a witness because he did not want to involve her at this  point.
         At paragraph 12 of the determination the Tribunal recorded that the
         appellant had said he had built up a relationship with  her  during
         his detention and that she was someone  with  whom  he  planned  to
         settle down eventually. The Tribunal determination recorded that as
         there had been no previous mention  of  this  relationship  and  no
         evidence from her they could not give any weight  to  this  claimed
         relationship  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  oral  evidence.
         Consequently they found that the appellant had no  family  life  in
         the UK to engage Article 8 ECHR. The appeal was dismissed.

         On 11 December 2007 the deportation order was signed. The appellant
         was not deported because, Ms Lewis explained at the hearing,  there
         had been obstacles in obtaining a travel  document  to  deport  the
         appellant to Angola.

         In  October  2008  the  appellant  was  released  from  immigration
         detention on bail to reside at the home of  Layla's  mother  at  73
         Cranley Road, Oxford, OX3 8BP - where the appellant and Layla still
         reside."

12. What is  challenged  however  are  the  circumstances  surrounding  the
    Appellant's absconding in 2010. Any findings made on  this  issue  will
    need to be weighed in the balance on  the  proportionality  test  under
    Article 8.  In order to place the issue of the  Appellant's  absconding
    into context it was proposed that the Appellant and his  partner  Layla
    Kanoun give oral evidence.



Oral Evidence

13. I pause there because prior to hearing  that  evidence,  Mr  Walker  on
    behalf sought to adduce further documentary evidence relevant  to  this
    issue. It  consisted  of  copies  of  various  correspondences  passing
    between the Respondent, the Appellant's then representatives Turpin and
    Miller, and the Appellant's Member of Parliament Rt  Hon  Andrew  Smith
    M.P.

14. Mr Walker accepted that this evidence was not before the FtT  but  said
    that it was material evidence concerning the Appellant's absconding and
    the FtT's erroneous conclusions at [49]  of  their  determination  when
    they concluded that,

         "However it does appear to the Tribunal that the appellant remained
         living in Oxford with Layla Kanoun and he  could  have  been  found
         without difficulty".

15. Mr Hodgetts on behalf of the Appellant unsurprisingly objected to  this
    course. Not only was this evidence not before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    but the application to admit it was made without notice  and  "late  in
    the day".

16. I was satisfied that this evidence was material to this appeal, in  the
    sense that it could reflect on the Appellant's overall credibility  and
    it would be wrong to exclude it. I asked Mr Hodgetts if he now required
    time to take further instructions. After taking brief  instructions  he
    indicated he was ready to proceed.

17. I heard evidence from the Appellant Kambulu Joao. The Appellant  agreed
    that he had absconded and failed to report as he should  have  done  in
    2010. He explained that in June 2010 he reported to the police  station
    as he was meant to do. He thought at this point that the appeal process
    was still ongoing and that he had been asked to report  to  the  police
    station simply because the immigration service were  going  to  have  a
    word with him about the proceedings. Instead, he found  himself  placed
    in the detention suite at the police station.  An  immigration  service
    caseworker who was present started asking him various questions such as
    whether he was married, had children or was working. She  told  him  he
    was here illegally and gave him the impression that she  did  not  know
    the procedures. He thought to himself that she was not really aware  of
    his case.

18. He said that at this point he became scared nervous  and  confused.  He
    did not know what was happening but in his panic realised  he  did  not
    want to return to detention nor to Angola. He explained that he had had
    experienced seventeen  months  in  immigration  detention  after  being
    released from imprisonment. His first thought  was  that  he  would  be
    detained again. He bolted for the door, pushed the immigration  service
    caseworker out of the way and ran off.

19. Later that day he contacted his solicitor who tried to get  information
    from the police on whether he was to  be  detained.   Although  he  was
    living in the Oxford area he stayed out in the street and  slept  where
    he could. He decided to use Layla's address for correspondence only. He
    did speak to Layla regularly and kept in regular contact with her.

20. He said that he also kept in touch with  Andrew  Smith  MP  because  he
    wanted the restriction order lifted. He thought his MP would assist  in
    sorting out his immigration status. He also  kept  in  touch  with  his
    foster carer and probation officer but felt confused because he did not
    know what the authorities wanted from him. He accepted that he did  not
    get in touch with the immigration authorities again until 2013.

21. In response to Mr Walker, the Appellant agreed that a deportation order
    had been signed against him in 2007. He said  however  he  was  in  the
    process of appealing that deportation order and his thoughts were  that
    the Home Office were aware that he was seeking to overturn it.

22. When asked if he knew that the police had come looking for him  at  his
    girlfriend's house, he said that he was aware that  this  had  happened
    and that his girlfriend knew what was  happening  to  him  because  the
    information had reached her. He said that the police officers put  fear
    into her and that was the reason why he lived out on  the  street.  She
    made the police aware that she had not seen him, which at the time  she
    was questioned, was correct.

23. After living two to three months on the street, he started  staying  at
    his girlfriend's again. He denied that  he  had  assaulted  either  the
    immigration service officer or the police officer when he ran  off.  He
    said that neither his solicitor nor his probation  officer  were  aware
    where he was staying. He did keep in contact with his probation officer
    because he provided him with support. His probation officer advised him
    to hand himself in to the authorities.

24.  I next heard from Layla Kanoun. She was asked to recall the events  in
    June 2010. She said that a couple  of  days  after  the  Appellant  had
    absconded, the police came to her house. She had not had  any  physical
    contact  with  the  Appellant  at  that  point  so  did  not  know  his
    whereabouts but he had phoned her. The Appellant was concerned that  he
    may be picked up and that was why he did not come to her house. He  did
    contact her every  two  days  or  so  by  telephone  and  they  met  up
    elsewhere.

25. In response to Mr Walker Layla  Kanoun  said  that  she  had  tried  to
    contact the Appellant a few hours after he ran off but was  not  unable
    to. She had no idea where he was initially and she did not  pester  him
    as long as she knew he was alright. That was enough. She accepted  that
    the Appellant did not want to  put  her  in  a  difficult  position  by
    knowing where he was.

26.  She  explained  that  she  contacted  the  Appellant's  solicitor  and
    explained what had happened. She thought it was may be a  month  before
    she saw him again and that he would stay the odd night  with  her.  She
    said that he returned to her house full time  just  before  she  become
    pregnant with their child. She thought that was in June 2012.

27. It was put to her that the Appellant had thought that he  had  returned
    to her house in September 2010. Layla said she could not be specific it
    was a long time ago and a lot has happened since then. She was  pressed
    on this  point  as  to  whether  he  had  returned  to  live  with  her
    permanently three months after absconding or twelve months.  Again  she
    responded by saying it was all a long time ago.

28. I am satisfied having heard from the Appellant  and  his  witness  that
    both gave their evidence to the best  of  their  abilities  considering
    they were trying to recollect events which  happened  four  years  ago.
    There  were  some  discrepancies  in  their  evidence  about  when  the
    Appellant had returned to Layla Kanoun's address, but  I  am  satisfied
    that the important point is that what motivated  the  Appellant  to  go
    underground or "couch surf" (the description used  in  the  psychiatric
    report), arose out of his fear of being deported to Angola.

29. I am satisfied that the FtT took the wrong approach to the  Appellant's
    absconding when they made a finding that the Appellant could have  been
    found without difficulty.  It  is  the  Appellant's  responsibility  to
    conform and comply with the authorities of this  country.  He  patently
    failed to do so. That is now a factor which  must  be  weighed  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise now before me.

The Issues Before Me

30. The resumed hearing on 26th September 2014 post-dates the  introduction
    of the Immigration Act 2014 which came into force on  28th  July  2014.
    Because the decision, is being remade, both representatives agreed that
    the Appellant's appeal is now governed by the provisions  of  the  2014
    Act.

31. Both representatives submitted that the relevant parts of the 2014  Act
    are contained in the new sections 117A - C. Those sections set out  the
    statutory guidelines that must be applied when a Tribunal has to decide
    whether an immigration decision to remove someone from the UK would  be
    in breach of his Article 8 rights. The appeal before me is of course an
    application to revoke a deportation  order  as  opposed  to  an  appeal
    against the making of a deportation order but I am satisfied  from  the
    wording of section 117A(1) that as the refusal of  a  revocation  of  a
    deportation order is an immigration decision, then the new Act applies.
    The representatives clearly thought so.

32. The provisions of sections 117A - C are set out here below for ease  of
    reference.

         "117A Application of this Part

               1) This Part applies where a court or Tribunal is required to
                  determine whether a decision made  under  the  Immigration
                  Acts -

                  (a)      breaches  a  person's  right  to  respect  for  a
                      private and family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

               2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
                  Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                       117B, and

                    a)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                       criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                       117C.

             (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
                  the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                  under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
cases

               1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

               2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                  interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom
                  , that persons who seek to enter or remain in  the  United
                  Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who can
                  speak English -

                   a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                   b) are better able to integrate into society.

               3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons -

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

               4) Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the  person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

               5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

               6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
foreign criminals

               1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

               2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

               3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

               4) Exception a applies where -

                   a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                   b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                   c) there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

               5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

               6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                  in Exception 1 and 2.

               7) The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   Tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted."




33. The facts of this case are set out in paragraphs 11 -30 above. What  is
    in  issue,  however,  is  where   the   balance   lies   in   assessing
    proportionality. The Appellant relies upon the principles in Maslov and
    Uner v the Netherlands. The Respondent's case  (in  line  with  section
    117C of the 2014 Act) is that  the  Appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal
    sentenced to a term of  imprisonment  of  ten  years,  and  the  public
    interest requires deportation unless he can show that  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances applicable to his case, over and  above  those
    described in Exception 1 and 2 (section 117B).

Discussion and consideration

34. Turning to the Appellant's  criminal  history,  it  is  clear  that  he
    commenced offending as a  juvenile  aged  15  years.  He  possesses  an
    unenviable record for juvenile crime.  This  culminated  when  aged  19
    years (and now an adult) in his commission of the  aggravated  burglary
    and the subsequent sentence to a term of ten years detention in a Young
    Offender's Institute. A sentence of that length must be  accorded  very
    great weight indeed in the balancing  exercise.  The  majority  of  the
    offences committed are of a serious nature and  the  last  offence  was
    committed when an adult.

35.  I  accept  Mr  Hodgetts'  submission  that  although  an  adult,   the
    Appellant's last offence could be seen in the light  of  its  being  an
    extension of his juvenile offending and  that  the  Appellant  has  now
    "grown up". There is merit in this and it is  evidenced  by  the  OASYS
    report which states that the risk of reoffending is low. Nevertheless a
    sentence of ten years for an offence, even as an "extended  adolescent"
    is a serious and weighty matter. It is a sentence which weighs  heavily
    indeed when  considering  the  public  interest.  The  public  interest
    includes not only the risk of re-offending but  also  must  contain  an
    element of deterrence and protection of the public.

36. Mr Hodgetts whilst accepting the weighty considerations of  the  public
    interest said the Appellant's case must be considered in the  light  of
    the Maslov principles. The Appellant was brought to the UK as  a  child
    of 8 years. He had no control over being brought here.  He has known no
    other life and the majority of his offending  was  committed  whilst  a
    juvenile or "as an extension of his adolescence". Whilst I  find  merit
    in that I must keep in mind  that  the  level  of  seriousness  of  the
    Appellant's last offence requires very compelling circumstances  to  be
    put forward sufficient to outweigh the public interest.

37. What are the factors put forward on behalf of the Appellant  which  can
    be said to amount to very compelling circumstances over and  above  the
    ones set out in the Exceptions of paragraph 117C above?

38. First the Appellant has a subsisting relationship with Layla Kanoun and
    they have a child together. Their child is now around 2 years  of  age.
    The Appellant from all accounts is  a  good  father  and  has  a  close
    relationship with Myah. However there is  nothing  that  I  have  heard
    which shows that their relationship is other  than  the  normal  family
    relationship of father and child. The child is of tender years and  the
    Social  Work  Impact  assessment  report  confirms  the  child's   best
    interests are served by having two parents  living  with  her  and  not
    being separated from her father. I also accept, as does the Respondent,
    that it would be unreasonable to expect Layla Kanoun and the child both
    of whom are British citizens, to relocate to Angola especially in  view
    of this Appellant's circumstances, more of which are discussed  further
    in this determination.

39. Other than the relationship with the child, and  other  than  the  fact
    that deportation would obviously split the  family,  those  factors  of
    themselves, would not carry sufficient weight in my judgment to counter
    the public interest in deporting someone sentenced to a ten  year  term
    of imprisonment.

40. The next factor which I must consider and  one  which  carries  greater
    weight for the Appellant  is  that  set  out  in  Exception  4(1).  The
    Appellant has been in the United Kingdom, as far as can be shown, since
    he was 8 years of age. He is now 33 years  of  age.  I  accept  that  a
    deportation order was signed against  him  in  2007  and  there  is  an
    argument to say that since that  time  he  has  been  here  unlawfully.
    However if one goes back to the time of the signing of the  deportation
    order, it is correct to say that he has spent most of his life here  in
    the UK.

41. Further, I find that the  Appellant  must  be  classed  as  social  and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom. He knows no other  country
    than the UK.  It was known that he was 8 years of age when  he  entered
    the United Kingdom, it is uncertain as to how old he was when  he  left
    Angola because the scant information available simply records  that  he
    entered the United Kingdom via Zimbabwe. The Appellant states he has no
    recollection or little recollection of  life  abroad.  That  is  hardly
    surprising. I see no evidence which casts doubt on that claim. I accept
    as a certainty that he does not speak Portuguese nor Bantu,  which  are
    the two prevalent languages in Angola.  With respect to the Appellant I
    see no evidence to show he could  be  educated  or  tutored  to  master
    either of these languages easily.  There  are  no  familial  ties  with
    Angola. There is no evidence of any contact with anyone in Angola other
    than knowledge of a man who abused him as a child.

42. Even so, because the Appellant comes within the provisions  of  section
    117C(6) the public interest in his case,  requires  deportation  unless
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in Exceptions 1 and 2. SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  550  held  that  a
    claim in respect of Article 8 against deportation needs to be  a  "very
    strong" one to succeed. In AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634 the Court  of
    Appeal said,

         "Deportation in pursuit of the legitimate aim of  preventing  crime
         and disorder is not, therefore to be seen  as  one  dimensional  in
         effect. It has  the  effect  not  only  of  removing  the  risk  of
         reoffending by the deportee himself, but also  of  deterring  other
         foreign nationals in a similar position.  Furthermore,  deportation
         of foreign criminals preserves public confidence  in  a  system  of
         control whose loss would itself tend towards crime and disorder."

43. I am satisfied that there are factors in this  Appellant's  case  which
    can be described as very compelling, such as  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deporting him. I must step back here and refer once more to
    the Appellant's lack of social and cultural ties since they feature  as
    part of this consideration.

44. The Appellant entered the UK aged about 8 years,  retains  no  familial
    ties in Angola, and does not speak (and therefore does not  write)  the
    relevant Portuguese language. In other words he  has  no  communication
    skills.  Were he to be deported to Angola it would in  my  judgment  be
    transporting him to an alien environment and one  without  any  support
    system at all.  When this is factored in to the Appellant's psychiatric
    history, as it must be, since it forms part of the overall reasons  why
    he suffers mental health  problems  then  I  find  those  circumstances
    amount to very compelling reasons countervailing deportation. I turn to
    the  psychiatric  report  prepared  by  Professor  Katona  dated   15th
    September 2012 and  the  Forensic  Psychologist's  Report  from  Joanne
    Lackenby dated 11th November 2013.

45.  Professor  Katona  reports  that  there  is  a  distinct   impact   of
    deportation, for the Appellant's mental  health.  He  states  that  the
    Appellant has complex PTSD [7.5 - 7.7] and that there is a  significant
    risk of suicide if the Appellant is  "forced  back"  to  Angola.  As  I
    understand Professor Katona's report the reasoning for this  conclusion
    is that mental deterioration is highly  likely  because  the  Appellant
    would experience the loss of his family life  as  further  abandonment.
    Professor Katona goes on to state at [11.2],

         "People with PTSD show increased suicidality. In my  opinion  there
         is a significant  risk  that  Mr  Joao  would  harm  himself,  with
         potentially fatal consequences, if he were forced back  to  Angola.
         The risk would be significant in the UK once he lost  all  hope  of
         remaining here and would remain so during the removal  process  and
         once he was back in Angola. In view of  the  loss  of  face-to-face
         contact  with  his  fianc�e  and  his  unborn  child   that   would
         nonetheless ensue. I do not  think  object  reassurance  about  his
         safety in Angola would be sufficient for him to  "take  stock"  and
         decide against suicide."

46. Professor Katona goes on to opine that the Appellant would be unable to
    find it emotionally sustaining to maintain contact with his fianc�e  by
    phone or through internet social networks and then states at [11.4],

         "Because of  his  worsening  PTSD  and  associated  depressive  and
         anxiety symptoms, Mr Joao would be likely to render  him  incapable
         of working and supporting himself. The added stress of  destitution
         would make him likely to resort to drug  taking  to  alleviate  his
         symptoms, and to return  to  crime  to  fund  his  consequent  drug
         habit."

47. At this point it is pertinent to  say  that  Mr  Hodgetts  did  canvass
    whether the Appellant's risk of suicide would bring him within  Article
    3 ECHR. This concept was not developed fully before me but it is  right
    that the Respondent did counter this in her Reasons for Refusal  letter
    of 12th September 2013. It is said in the RFRL that Angola is a country
    which now has  the  drug  paroxetine  and  availability  of  outpatient
    medical  treatment.  In  my  view  that  is  not  sufficient,  in  this
    Appellant's case, to counter Professor Katona's findings at  [11.4]  of
    his report. It is hard to see how a man with no language skills and  no
    familial ties in Angola could avail himself of the  limited  healthcare
    available there.

48. In addition to Professor Katona's report, there  is  a  report  from  a
    forensic psychologist Joanne Lackenby dated November 2013. This  report
    is of more recent origin than Professor Katona's, but she confirms  his
    opinion and  says at [15.3],

         "Within the UK Mr Joao has access to a high level  of  professional
         support to assist with his mental health and should he  be  granted
         the relevant authority to  gain  employment,  this  will  serve  to
         further reduce  an  already  low  risk  of  violence.  Mr  Joao  is
         motivated to cooperate with authorities currently and is keen  when
         he  is   able   to   access   greater   intensity   mental   health
         input/counselling and to work. Mr Joao is subject a very high level
         of stress and is depressed in response to this. This  has  not  and
         does not increase the risk of violence or offending. However he has
         stated categorically that he will  take  his  own  life  if  he  is
         unsuccessful in his appeal. Given his history, his fears of life in
         Angola, the loss of contact with his family this is  considered  to
         be a significant and real risk. Unless Mr Joao found himself  in  a
         situation where is relationship broke down, he was homeless and had
         lost all his other personal support it is difficult to envisage  he
         would return to drug use and offending. This scenario is much  more
         likely in Angola than in the United Kingdom."

49. Further she report at part 5 headed 'Future  problems  with  stress  or
    coping',

         "His depression and PTSD symptoms would likely worsen  if  returned
         to Angola due to the lack of personal and professional support  and
         the continued lack of integration into a society that he  does  not
         know."

50. For the sake of completeness I  ought  to  say  that  Professor  Katona
    reports that in his expert opinion, the Appellant is not  feigning  his
    condition.

51.  Therefore,  when  I  bring  these  matters  into  the  proportionality
    exercise, whilst giving  very  great  weight  to  the  public  interest
    because the Appellant was convicted of a serious crime resulting  in  a
    custodial sentence of ten years, nevertheless I find that  the  reasons
    put forward by the Appellant why he should not be  deported  amount  to
    very compelling ones. I find those reasons outweigh the public interest
    in refusing to revoke the deportation order made against him.

Decision

52. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    30th January 2014 is set aside.  I  hereby  remake  the  decision.  The
    Appellant's appeal against the SSHD's refusal of 12th September 2013 to
    revoke the deportation order made against him, is allowed under Article
    8 ECHR.



No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal                           31st October 2014

