
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01578/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2016                             |On 14th April 2016            |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Mn
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Mensah, Counsel instructed by Zacharia & Co,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Bruce) promulgated on 15th July 2015.   The  judge  allowed  the
    appeal against the deportation of the Respondent on Article 8  grounds.
    The decision of Judge Bruce found that the Appellant had shown, in line
    with  paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules,   "very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A" of the Rules.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  application  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original Appellant or his family members.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.   Such
    an order was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  also  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in earlier proceedings in order to  avoid  the  likelihood  of
    serious harm arising to  the  children  and  family  members  from  the
    contents of these proceedings.

 3. Whilst this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I propose to  refer
    to the Secretary of State as the Respondent and MN  as  the  Appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.



 4. The Appellant is a national of Iran who appealed against  the  decision
    of the  Respondent  of  24th  July  2014  to  make  an  order  for  his
    deportation pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs [2] to  [16]  set
    out  the  background  and  history  of  the   Appellant   and   various
    proceedings.  This was  indeed  a  matter  with  a  "long  history"  as
    observed by Judge Bruce at paragraph [2].

 6. The history demonstrates that in the year 2000 the  Appellant  and  his
    brother entered the United Kingdom with their father  who  subsequently
    left them in the care of a family relative.  At that time the Appellant
    was 12 years of age and he has not seen his  father  since  that  date.
    The Appellant and his brother came to the attention of the local social
    services and they were placed in  their  care.   When  they  sought  to
    regularise his immigration status in January 2002 the  application  was
    not dealt with, however a subsequent application made in February  2005
    resulted in the grant of discretionary leave until he was 21.

 7. In May 2008 the Appellant met his partner and on 27th February 2009  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  Article  8
    family  life.   Subsequent  to  this  a  child  was   born   of   their
    relationship.  On 27th November 2009 he was convicted of an offence  of
    the possession of ammunition and was  sentenced  to  twelve  months  in
    prison, being released on 26th February 2010.

 8. The conviction resulted in the institution of deportation  proceedings.
    On 26th February 2012 a First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Holmes sitting
    with Mr Banes) allowed the appeal for the reasons set out at  paragraph
    [7] of Judge Bruce's determination.  In summary, the Tribunal held that
    his deportation could not be justified on Article 8  grounds  and  thus
    allowed the appeal.  The result of that decision on  22nd  August  2012
    the Appellant was granted three years' discretionary leave.

 9. At paragraph [9] of the decision of  Judge  Bruce,  she  sets  out  the
    circumstances in which admissions made  by  the  Appellant  were  being
    considered by the prosecuting authorities.  As a result he was  charged
    in 2012 with drugs offences and having pleaded guilty on 24th September
    2012 was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of six  years.   Paragraph
    [9] of the First-tier Tribunal's decision sets out the circumstances of
    those offences by reference to the sentencing remarks of the judge.

10. The Appellant had, however, applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    which had resulted on 28th October 2013 with a decision being  made  by
    the Secretary of State to refuse to  vary  his  leave  and  to  make  a
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to  Section  47
    of the 2006 Act.  The Secretary of State refused to  grant  leave  with
    reference to paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.  As a result of
    that decision, which was made in time, he had a right of appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it came before Judge Cruthers on 2nd June 2014.

11. In a decision promulgated on 2nd July 2014, Judge Cruthers allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds "outside the Rules".  The reasons given for
    allowing the appeal were set out at length within his determination and
    summarised at paragraph [12] of Judge Bruce's determination.

12. It is recorded at paragraph[13] that the Secretary of State had  sought
    to challenge the decision of Judge Cruthers, but in a determination  of
    30th April 2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane  upheld  Judge  Cruthers'
    decision.  At paragraph [13] Judge Bruce set out the reasons  given  by
    Judge Lane for upholding the decision of Judge Cruthers.  At  paragraph
    [14] the judge made reference to the history of the litigation which  I
    have set out above and made reference to the Secretary of  State  being
    "under the impression" that there was an application for permission  to
    appeal.  However, the judge recorded that the records demonstrated that
    there was no appeal pending at the date of the  hearing  which  was  on
    29th June 2015 and the Presenting Officer agreed that for the  purposes
    of the deportation appeal the Tribunal would have  to  proceed  on  the
    basis that the decision of Judge Cruthers had been upheld by the  Upper
    Tribunal and that both parties agreed that those  findings  insofar  as
    they were relevant, as were those of  the  Holmes  Tribunal,  were  the
    starting point applying the decision in Devaseelan v The SSHD.

13. The judge then went on to apply the  new  statutory  framework  to  the
    circumstances of the Appellant.  Her findings of fact are  set  out  at
    paragraphs [20] to [33].  The judge, having considered all the  factors
    was satisfied that the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  that  there  were
    "exceptional and very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
    matters identified in paragraph 399 and/or 399A of  the  Rules".   Thus
    she allowed the appeal.

14. Permission to appeal that decision was sought by the Secretary of State
    on 21st July 2015 on two specific grounds; firstly the judge had  taken
    as a  starting  point  the  Tribunal's  earlier  decisions.   Ground  1
    asserted that "those determinations" remain the subject  of  a  pending
    application for permission to the Court of Appeal and that  by  relying
    upon those previous Tribunal determinations as a starting point  was  a
    material error and did not form a "safe  or  correct  starting  point".
    Thus the appeal was unsafe.  The second ground was that the judge  gave
    no adequate consideration to Section 117B(3) in relation  to  financial
    independence or adequate consideration to Section 117B(4)  and  (5)  in
    relation to the establishment of his private life at a time when he was
    in the UK either unlawfully or with precarious status.

15. Permission to appeal was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  11th
    August 2015 in which it was stated at paragraph [3] that the judge  had
    specifically dealt with Ground 1 at [14] of her determination and  that
    the Presenting Officer had agreed at the date of the hearing that there
    was no appeal pending, thus it was correct for the judge to proceed  to
    determine the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  determination  of  the
    previous judge had  been  upheld.   As  regards  Ground  2,  the  judge
    correctly identified that she should have  regard  to  Section  117  at
    paragraphs [17] to [19] and carried out an analysis of the evidence  at
    paragraphs [20] to [33].

16. The Secretary of State sought to renew that application for  permission
    relying on exactly the same grounds, lodging the  application  on  26th
    August 2015.

17. On 21st September 2015 permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Blum stating as follows:-

         "It is apparent from paragraph [14] of Judge Bruce's  determination
         that there was confusion, to say  the  least,  as  to  whether  the
         Secretary of State had a pending appeal to the Court of Appeal, and
         that the Home Office Presenting Officer agreed to  proceed  on  the
         basis that the earlier First-tier Tribunal decision had been upheld
         by the Upper  Tribunal.   It  is  nevertheless  arguable  that  the
         principles and approach enunciated by Devaseelan  may  need  to  be
         modified in such circumstances.

         Permission is granted on all grounds."

18. Thus the appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.   Miss  Johnstone  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon her written  grounds.   Ms
    Mensah relied upon a skeleton argument on behalf of the Appellant which
    had been provided by  her  solicitors  in  2015  and  setting  out  the
    chronology relevant to Ground 1.  It did not  deal  with  Ground  2  as
    advanced by the  Secretary  of  State,  however  Ms  Mensah  made  oral
    submissions in relation to that ground.

19. Dealing with the first ground, the Secretary of State submits that  the
    judge  was  wrong  to  take  as  her  starting   point   the   previous
    determination promulgated on 2nd July 2014 and that of 30th April  2015
    (Judge Lane's determination).  It is said by Miss Johnston  that  there
    was an "administrative  confusion"  that  led  this  judge  failing  to
    apprehend that an application had been made to the Court of  Appeal  to
    challenge the decision of UT Judge Lane (made on 30th April  2015)  who
    had in turn upheld the decision of Judge Cruthers (the 2014  decision).
    Thus, it is argued on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    starting point was vitiated by legal error and therefore  the  decision
    to allow the appeal was unsafe.

20. In order to consider this  ground  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  the
    litigation history which is not in dispute and recorded  at  paragraphs
    [7] to [14] of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  I have also set  it
    out earlier when making reference to the background of the proceedings.
     As can be seen, following his conviction in 2009 a  deportation  order
    was made on 22nd November 2011.  It resulted in deportation proceedings
    and an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Holmes and  a
    non-legal member) who allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  by
    reference to his private and family life, and his lack of ties  to  his
    country of nationality (see paragraph [7] of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce's  decision).   The  Secretary  of  State  granted  three  years'
    discretionary leave on the basis of that decision.

21. The prosecuting authorities were considering  admissions  made  by  the
    applicant which led subsequently to the Appellant pleading guilty to  a
    number  of  drugs  offences  resulting  in  a   lengthy   sentence   of
    imprisonment of six years imposed on 24th September 2012.

22. The Appellant had applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain,  in  time,
    which resulted in a decision made on 28th October  2013  to  refuse  to
    vary his leave to remain and to make a decision to remove under Section
    47.  As it was made in time, this generated  an  in  country  right  of
    appeal and it led to the appeal before Judge Cruthers on 2nd June 2014.
     As Judge Bruce recorded  at  [12]  of  her  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds (outside  the  Rules)  for  the
    reasons amply set out within that  determination  that  is  within  the
    Tribunal papers and for the reasons summarised by Judge Bruce at  [12].



23. The issue relates  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to  that
    decision.  There is no evidence before the Tribunal as to the date upon
    which any application was made or when permission was  granted  (either
    in documentary form or  by  any  reference  to  it  in  the  subsequent
    decision of Judge  Lane).   However,  it  is  common  ground  that  the
    Secretary of State made a decision to make a deportation order on  24th
    July 2014.

24. Permission was granted to the  Secretary  of  State  to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers  and  the  appeal  came
    before the Upper Tribunal (Judge Lane) on  14th  April  2015.   In  his
    decision promulgated on 30th April 2015, he considered the Secretary of
    State's submissions but  rejected  them  finding  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cruthers) had not erred in law for the reasons that  he
    gave at paragraphs [2] to [5] and summarised at paragraph [13]  in  the
    decision of Judge Bruce.

25. It is clear from reading the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane  at
    paragraph [6] that he was aware of a further  deportation  appeal  that
    was pending before the First-tier Tribunal (the proceedings  that  were
    to come before Judge Bruce) and made reference to  the  fact  that  the
    representative should ensure that a copy  of  his  decision  should  be
    brought to the attention of the First-tier Tribunal who  may  hear  the
    appeal.  It is of relevance and significance that  at  no  time  before
    those proceedings was it ever submitted on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State that Judge Lane should either adjourn  the  proceedings  or  list
    them to be heard at the same time as the deportation proceedings.

26. Thus the deportation proceedings continued and were listed  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bruce) on 29th June 2015.

27. The judge set out at the position of the  Secretary  of  State  at  the
    hearing  (see paragraph [14] )  that  the  Respondent  was  "under  the
    impression that she had applied for permission to appeal to  the  Court
    of Appeal against the decision of Judge Lane".   The  judge  considered
    the evidence before  her  and  stated  that  whilst  the  grounds  were
    received, the Tribunal records showed that there was no appeal pending.
     It is also clear from the determination that there was no  application
    made for an adjournment by the Presenting  Officer  who  indeed  agreed
    that the judge should proceed on the basis that the findings  of  Judge
    Cruthers had been upheld by the  Upper  Tribunal  (applying  the  well-
    established Devaseelan principles) which is what the judge did.

28. The Secretary of State  then  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge Bruce on 21st July 2015 expressly on the ground  that
    there  was  a  pending  application  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.    The
    application was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 11th August 2015.



29. On 17th August 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Lane refused  the  application
    for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  this  was
    communicated to the parties, including the Secretary of State, on  21st
    August 2015.  However, notwithstanding the  refusal  of  permission  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane, the Secretary of State sought to  renew  the
    application for permission to appeal Judge Bruce's determination on the
    same grounds on the 26th August.  By that date, Judge Lane had  refused
    permission to the Secretary of State to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    and the grounds make no reference  to  the  refusal  of  the  grant  of
    permission.  Indeed it is silent as to any information relating to  the
    Court of Appeal.

30. As a consequence of the renewal of that application made on 26th August
    (which made no reference to the refusal of permission to appeal to  the
    Court of Appeal in-between the two  dates  by  Judge  Lane)  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted permission on 21st September 2015 on the first  ground
    (although it is right to observe at paragraph [3] he granted permission
    on "all grounds").

31. At no time either before the grounds being renewed on 26th August or in
    the period between 26th August and  permission  being  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on 21st September, did the Secretary of State inform the
    Tribunal that permission had been refused by Judge Lane or provide  any
    evidence as to the state of the proceedings.  The appeal was previously
    listed for hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  in  November  2015  and
    despite directions made by this Tribunal as to documentary evidence, no
    documents have been provided by the Secretary of State to  support  her
    case as to when applications were made, on what basis and the state  of
    knowledge of various parties.

32. Indeed at this hearing before the  Tribunal  no  further  evidence  was
    forthcoming.  I gave  the  Presenting  Officer  time  to  take  further
    instructions to clarify dates and to  provide  further  evidence.   The
    only document that was provided was a  letter  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    dated 30th June 2015 and was therefore after the hearing before   Judge
    Bruce that referred to proceedings  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  and
    referred to this as a "resubmission of the last application"  and  thus
    was out of time.  The letter referred to documents being attached,  but
    none were attached to the letter.  The grounds assert that  Judge  Lane
    was in error by failing to exercise case management powers  to  adjourn
    the case and link it with the  deportation  proceedings.   However,  as
    Judge Lane went on to state when refusing permission to  the  Court  of
    Appeal, no such application was made at the hearing by  the  Presenting
    Officer for the two appeals to be managed together.  Secondly, he found
    that it was not clear as to how:-

         "the existence of a second set of proceedings (relating to  matters
         arising after the immigration decision which is the subject of  the
         appeal) might have rendered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         which is under examination by the Upper Tribunal wrong in law."

    No further documents  were  provided  and  the  only  information  Miss
    Johnstone could give me was that  a  permission  application  had  been
    made, but she could not confirm any date on  which  it  was  made,  the
    grounds or any copies of the application  made.   Thus  the  Presenting
    Officer was not able to produce any further  evidence  and  could  only
    state that it was always the intention to appeal the decision of  Judge
    Cruthers.

33. I remind myself that it is for the Secretary of State to make  out  her
    grounds and thus to file evidence in support of  her  submissions.   As
    set out above, notwithstanding the  application  for  permission  being
    made on 26th August by which time Upper Tribunal Judge Lane had refused
    to grant permission to the Court of Appeal, a renewed  application  was
    made relying on the same grounds. However, I agree  with  Ms  Johnstone
    that there is no evidence to suggest that  the  author  of  the  second
    grounds had knowledge of the refusal of permission. The position before
    me is that there is no evidence  of  any  kind  to  establish  that  an
    application has been made or what the outcome has been.

34. Ms Mensah submits that had the Upper Tribunal known that Judge Lane had
    refused permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal that it  is  likely
    that Judge Blum would not have  granted  permission.  In  her  skeleton
    argument she made reference to reviewing the  grant  of  permission  in
    that light. However, in my judgement it  is  difficult  to  reach  that
    assumption.  It is right that the renewed application made no reference
    to the refusal of the grant of permission made on 11th August by  Judge
    Lane.  It is further right  that  Judge  Blum  in  granting  permission
    placed reliance and emphasis on Ground 1 and that it was  arguable  for
    the reasons that he gave at paragraph [2].  However, he  did  state  at
    paragraph [3] that "permission is granted on all grounds" and therefore
    referred to Ground 2 which does not rely upon ground 1 and is  entirely
    separate. I therefore see no ground upon  which  I  should  review  the
    grant of permission and as I am hearing the error of law hearing such a
    course is, in my view, academic.

35. There is no evidence before this Tribunal to support the  Secretary  of
    State's case as to the history and chronology she seeks to  rely  upon.
    The only document provided  was  a  letter  of  30th  June  2015  which
    postdates the hearing  before  Judge  Bruce  in  which  she  accurately
    recorded that there was no appeal outstanding on the Tribunal  records.
    Furthermore the Presenting Officer agreed that it was right to begin as
    a starting point with the decision of Judge Cruthers.  There  is  still
    no evidence before this Tribunal as to the present circumstances and it
    is for the Secretary of State to prove her case and provide evidence in
    support.  There has been sufficient time  in  my  judgment  to  provide
    evidence since the original application was made for permission and  in
    that interim period.  Thus it has not been demonstrated that the  judge
    was wrong to treat the findings of Judge Cruthers as a  starting  point
    for  her  determination  applying   the   well-established   Devaseelan
    principles.

36. In any event, a careful reading of the determination demonstrates  that
    the judge, whilst recording that the starting point  was  the  previous
    decisions of Judge Holmes and Judge Cruthers, she nonetheless  went  on
    to  consider  the  evidence  at  the  hearing  and  to  reach  her  own
    conclusions in accordance with the new legal framework.  It  is  not  a
    case that the judge simply adopted those findings with no more, but she
    analysed the evidence herself and reached  her  own  conclusions.   The
    Secretary of State has not sought to challenge any of the  findings  of
    fact made by the judge in this respect. Consequently Ground  1  is  not
    made out.

37. Dealing with Ground 2, Miss Johnstone  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to have regard to the Section 117 factors, in particular whether
    the Appellant was financially independent and whether his private  life
    was established at a time that he was in the UK, either  unlawfully  or
    with precarious status, and therefore little weight should be  attached
    to that.

38. No further submissions were made,  and no case law had been relied upon
    by either advocate before me.

39. By way of reply, Ms  Mensah  submitted  that  the  judge  set  out  the
    relevant provisions at paragraphs [17] to [19]  of  the  determination.
    At  paragraph  [20]  the  judge  had  regard  to  the  public  interest
    considerations set out at Section 117C  and  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraphs [28] and [32]  were  relevant  to  the  issue  of  financial
    independence.  She reminded the Tribunal that the earlier  findings  of
    Judge Cruthers at paragraph [60] of his determination found that he was
    able to financially support his family through legal activities without
    recourse to public funds.

40. As a question of status, she submitted that the relationship  with  his
    partner was established in 2008 at a time when  he  had  leave,  having
    been granted discretionary leave in 2006 until 2009.  She submitted the
    judge was aware of the chronology and history when reaching the overall
    conclusion  as  to  whether  or  not   there   were   very   compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the strong public interest identified by  the
    judge.

41. The correct approach in an appeal on human  rights  grounds  which  has
    been brought to seek to resist deportation is to consider  whether  the
    Appellant is a foreign criminal as defined by Section  117D(2)(a),  (b)
    or (c); and if so, does he fall within paragraph 399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules, if not, are there very compelling circumstances over
    and beyond those falling within paragraph 399 or 399A relied upon, such
    to be informed by the seriousness of the criminality of  the  Appellant
    and taking into account the factors set out in Section 117  (see  Chege
    (Section 117D Article 8 approach) [2015] UKUT 165).

42. The First-tier Tribunal at [17] considered that  the  Appellant  was  a
    foreign criminal by virtue of the length of his prison sentence and set
    out the appropriate statutory provisions at length at  paragraphs  [17]
    to [18].  In particular, the judge identified at [19]  at  the  present
    proceedings she was deciding were of a  different  character  to  those
    previously heard by the  Tribunal  as  there  was  a  "different  legal
    framework" and thus there was a material difference  in  her  approach.
    In this respect she expressly referred to  the  "particular  provisions
    Parliament has enacted to deal with foreign criminals in Section  117A-
    D" and properly identified that having received a sentence of over four
    years he could not simply point to family life with his wife and  child
    but must establish that there were "very compelling circumstances" over
    and above those which he recited.

43. Thus the judge's self-direction is in accordance with the  decision  of
    SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 at paragraphs [39] to [40] that
    she did not seek to carry out a freestanding  Article  8  analysis  but
    took account of the Convention rights  through  the  lens  of  the  new
    Rules.

44. When carrying out the exercise of considering whether there were  "very
    compelling circumstances" over and above those described in  paragraphs
    399 or 399A the judge considered whether or not  the  Appellant's  case
    did fall within paragraphs 399 or 399A (see Greenwood (No 2) (paragraph
    398 considered) [2015] UKUT 629 and SSHD v JZ (Zambia) [2016] EWCA  Civ
    11 at paragraphs [29] to [30]).

45. Thus the judge proceeded to consider the relevant issues under  Section
    399A (his length of residence, the extent of his  social  and  cultural
    integration and whether there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration to  his  country  of  nationality  (see  findings  at
    paragraph [21])).  The judge went on to consider at paragraphs 22 to 33
    the relevant issues under paragraph 399(a) and family life and  did  so
    by having regard to the earlier findings of the Tribunal which  led  to
    the question as to whether there were "very  compelling  circumstances"
    (notwithstanding the strong public interest in deportation (see [24])).



46. The judge set out her analysis of the  issues  at  paragraphs  [24]  to
    [33].  The Secretary of State does not challenge any of  those  factual
    findings made by the judge save for what is said at Ground  1  which  I
    have dealt with earlier in this determination.  Furthermore, the  legal
    framework that I have set out in the earlier paragraphs  has  also  not
    been challenged by the Secretary of State.

47. The challenge comes by way of the provisions  of  Section  117.   Those
    provisions of the Act apply where the Tribunal is required to  consider
    whether a decision breaches Article 8 rights (see 117A), and  in  cases
    where there  is  an  interference  of  such  rights,  the  Tribunal  in
    determining proportionality must  have  regard  to  the  considerations
    listed in Section 117B and to the additional considerations in  Section
    117C in cases involving the deportation of foreign criminals.

48. It is plain from reading the determination that the judge at  paragraph
    [17] made express reference to applying the "Section 117  factors"  and
    at [18] set them out in full, and again at [19] made  a  self-direction
    that "I must apply the particular provisions Parliament has enacted  in
    order to deal with foreign criminals in Section 117A-D."

49. Whilst there was no express reference to those factors, it  is  not  an
    error of law to fail to refer to them, but what matters  is  that  they
    were considered in substance (see Dube (Sections 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT
    90).  Furthermore, the statutory duty to consider the matters  set  out
    in Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  are  satisfied  if  the  Tribunal's
    decision shows that it has regard to such matters  which  are  relevant
    (see AM (Section 117B) [2015] UKUT 260 at paragraph [8]).

50. The judge did not make any reference  to  the  Appellant's  ability  to
    speak English (see Section 117B(2)) as she had found at  [21]  that  he
    did not speak his mother tongue and was culturally  integrated  in  the
    UK.  It was common ground between the parties that  he  spoke  English,
    thus it was not necessary to make any further reference to that factor.



51. As to Section 117B(3) and the issue of financial dependence,  that  was
    an issue that had been considered  by  the  previous  Tribunal  and  in
    particular Judge  Cruthers.   As  Ms  Mensah  submits,  Judge  Cruthers
    reached the conclusion in 2014 that he had been involved in  legitimate
    enterprises and found on the evidence that "It is  my  assessment  that
    the Appellant is someone who,  if  he  chooses  to,  could  financially
    support his family through legitimate activities, and without  recourse
    to public funds" (see paragraph [60]).  The determination also set  out
    the qualifications that he obtained in  prison  (see  paragraph  [63]).
    Consequently Judge Bruce was entitled to rely upon  those  findings  as
    she recorded at [14].  She recorded that she  should  not  depart  from
    them if there was new evidence before her.  At [15] she  recorded  that
    there was no new evidence, thus it was open to the  judge  at  [28]  to
    make further reference to those findings which in essence she  adopted,
    thus there was  sufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  the  ability  of
    financial independence.  As the Appellant was in custody, it would have
    to have been considered in that light.

52. As to the Appellant's  private  life,  Sections  117B(4)(a)  refers  to
    "little weight" being given to its establishment at  a  time  when  the
    person is in the UK unlawfully.  The findings  of  the  judge  and  the
    previous Tribunal were that the Appellant had lived in the UK since the
    age of 12 and therefore well over half his life in the UK.   The  judge
    was not able to quantify what proportion  of  the  time  was  "lawful",
    although the judge had  regard  to  the  chronology  when  he  had  had
    discretionary leave.  Section 117B(4)(a) was  therefore  considered  in
    substance.  However, Section 117B(5) also  makes  reference  to  little
    weight being given to a private life established at  a  time  when  the
    person's  immigration  status  was  precarious.    In   this   context,
    notwithstanding the length of his residence in the UK, the  Appellant's
    status could be viewed as precarious (see AM (Section 117B) (as  cited)
    and therefore in  the balancing exercise must be given little weight.

53. The submissions of the Secretary of State have  not  sought  to  engage
    with the judge's determination as a whole and the analysis  reached  by
    her on the proportionality balance and  has  simply  repeated  that  no
    adequate  consideration  was  given  to  whether   private   life   was
    established at a time  when  he  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  or  with
    precarious status.  However, when the determination is read as a whole,
    it is plain that the judge did take those matters  into  consideration,
    even if not expressly stated, and that the leave was not lawful for the
    entire period of his stay and therefore  by  analysis  must  have  been
    precarious (see paragraph [21]).

54. Section 117C begins with  two  statements  of  principle;  firstly  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is in  the  public  interest  (Section
    117C(1)) and secondly, the more serious the offence  committed  by  the
    foreign criminal, the greater is the public interest in his deportation
    (Section 117C(2)).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  properly  applied
    those considerations at [31] when setting out in detail the issues that
    she had to decide, recording that she had  to  weigh  the  identifiable
    factors against deportation and in her words "against  the  very  great
    weight that must be placed on the public interest".

55. The judge went on to state at [31]:-

         "When assessing the deportation under the Rules it is all too  easy
         to adopt a formulaic approach, ticking off the requirements of  the
         checklist and paying what might be described as lip service to  the
         public interest.  I stress this is not what I have done here."

56. The judge went on to give  weight  and  consideration  to  his  serious
    criminality and it can be said  that  the  judge  therefore  took  into
    account  that  little  weight   was   necessarily   attached   to   the
    establishment of  private  life  in  the  light  of  that  criminality.
    However, that had to be viewed against the findings made by  the  judge
    (which are not challenged) concerning  the  strength  of  his  cultural
    integration in the UK  (at  [21]),  his  lack  of  identification  with
    culture in his country  of  nationality  ([21]),  the  lack  of  family
    relatives there ([21]) and the "alien culture" ([21]  and  [30]).   The
    judge gave detailed consideration to his background at [25] to [27] and
    that the best interests of the children were to live with both  parents
    ([23]) and the reasons that she also gave relating to the  strength  of
    family life at [23], [30] and [31].

57. When identifying those factors, the judge made a number  of  references
    to the "strong public interest" and his  criminality  and  reached  the
    conclusion that "the weight set against this interest is  substantial".



58. Consequently I accept  the  submission  made  by  Ms  Mensah  that  the
    Secretary of State has not demonstrated that the judge fell into  legal
    error that was material in the sense that it  would  not  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome in the light of  the  factors  that  she  had
    identified.  It is difficult to see in the light of the strong  factors
    identified  by  the  judge  that  even  allowing  for   little   weight
    attributable to any precarious status that that would  have  outweighed
    the other factors taken cumulatively as identified by the judge.

59. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  carried  out  an  analysis  and  whilst
    applying the Devaseelan principles to the earlier findings, went on  to
    make an analysis of her own.  This was an  unusual  case  and  rendered
    more so by the chronology as observed by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    at [33].  Whilst it might be said that this was a decision that may not
    be reached by every judge, the decision reached was one that  was  open
    to the Tribunal on its own particular facts and on the facts  as  found
    whereby  the  judge  regarded  them  to  amount  to  "very   compelling
    circumstances" within the meaning of paragraph 398.

60. Consequently the grounds do not demonstrate any arguable error  of  law
    and therefore the determination shall stand.

61. At the hearing Ms Mensah  made  a  reference  to  the  issue  of  costs
    although there is no formal application  made  in  writing  before  the
    Tribunal. Therefore if an application is to be made, it must be made in
    writing, supported by grounds and served  upon  the  Tribunal  and  the
    Secretary of State within 7 days of service of this determination.  The
    Secretary of State has 7 days thereafter to make any submissions to the
    Tribunal by way of response.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

