
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01641/2013
                                                               IA/18986/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th March 2014                              |On 16th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    M A I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Vaughan, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 9th September 1975.   The
    Appellant has a complicated immigration history, but suffice it to  say
    at this stage  that  on  9th  August  2012  as  a  consequence  of  the
    Appellant's criminal convictions, the  Respondent  decided  to  make  a
    deportation order against him under the provisions of  Section  3(5)(a)
    Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that it would  be  conducive  to  the
    public good to do so.  Subsequently  the  Respondent  also  refused  an
    application for asylum made earlier by the  Appellant.   The  Appellant
    appealed those decisions, and on 9th October 2013 that appeal was heard
    by a Panel chaired by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page (the Panel)
    sitting at Newport.  The Panel decided to dismiss the appeal on  asylum
    and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds, but to allow the appeal on Article 8
    ECHR grounds.  The reasons for those decisions are given in the Panel's
    Determination dated 16th October 2013.   Both  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent sought leave to appeal those decisions, and such  permission
    was granted to both parties on 8th November 2013.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decisions of the Panel contained an error of
    law so that they should be set aside.

 3. The decision to deport the Appellant was  made  on  the  basis  of  his
    offending which can be summarised as follows:

      i) On 18th December 1998 the Appellant was convicted at Cardiff  Crown
         Court of an offence of manslaughter and sentenced  to  five  years'
         imprisonment.

     ii) On 10th December 2004 the Appellant was convicted at Cardiff  Crown
         Court of  an  offence  of  affray  and  sentenced  to  a  community
         punishment order for 90 hours and a community rehabilitation  order
         for eighteen months.

    iii) On 16th December 2008 the Appellant was convicted at Cardiff  Crown
         Court of the offences of unlawful wounding and failing to surrender
         to custody.  He was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment.

     iv) On  9th  February  2012  at  Cardiff  and  the  Vale  of  Glamorgan
         Magistrates' Court the Appellant was convicted of  the  offence  of
         being drunk and disorderly and failing to surrender to custody  for
         which he was fined.

      v) On 11th May 2012 at Cardiff and the Vale of Glamorgan  Magistrates'
         Court the Appellant was convicted of the offence of common  assault
         and sentenced to six months' imprisonment.

    The decision to deport the Appellant was expressly made in  respect  of
    the offences of unlawful wounding in 2008 and  the  offence  of  common
    assault in 2012.

 4. The Appellant's asylum claim was made on the basis that he feared  that
    on his return to Somalia he would become the victim  of  a  blood  feud
    because the person he had killed  in  Cardiff  in  1997  was  a  Somali
    national F A whose family would seek revenge.  That family belonged  to
    the Habr Awal tribe in Somalia.  There would be no protection  for  the
    Appellant there.  The Appellant had been attacked by a member of F  A's
    family  whilst  in  prison,  and  the  Appellant's  family   had   been
    threatened.  Indeed there had been an incident  at  court  in  December
    1998.  At other times the Appellant had been attacked with a metal  bar
    when his hand had been broken, and later with a baseball bat  when  his
    forearm had been broken.  The Appellant claimed that F A's family  came
    from a majority clan in Somalia who would be able to locate him  if  he
    ever returned to that country.  The  Appellant  had  been  warned  that
    there was a bounty on his head, and he claimed that F A's family  would
    know of his return to Somalia.

 5. The Panel  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  because  having
    considered the objective evidence provided by UNHCR and a  report  from
    an expert, Dr Bekalo, it came to the following conclusion:

         "52. We find ourselves in agreement with the assertion made by  the
             case worker refusing the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  that  Dr
             Bekalo's assertion that the Appellant would face the  risk  of
             revenge attacks is speculative as it would rely on the  family
             and friends of F A "happening to know" that the Appellant  had
             been returned to inform persons in Somalia of that fact.

         53.  The Appellant has not lived in Somalia since he was  a  child.
             The claimed risk upon return would depend upon  the  Appellant
             being identified in Somaliland - or Mogadishu if  he  went  to
             live there.  There is no evidence before the Tribunal to  show
             that there are 'family and friends' of the late F A in Somalia
             that are there to seek revenge."

 6. At the hearing, Mr Vaughan argued that the Panel had erred  in  law  in
    coming to that conclusion.  He referred to his  skeleton  argument  and
    submitted that the Panel had dismissed the appeal  on  the  sole  basis
    that there was no real risk that  the  Appellant's  return  to  Somalia
    would be known by those who wished to  persecute  him.    However,  the
    Panel had not treated with anxious scrutiny and made findings upon  the
    evidence given on the Appellant's behalf dealing specifically with that
    issue.  In particular, no findings had been made on the evidence  given
    of the Appellant's grandfather and also that of the Appellant  relating
    to the attacks upon the Appellant and the threats made against  him  in
    the UK.

 7. In response, Ms Everett argued that there had been no such error of law
    as the Panel had made its decision on the basis of the expert  evidence
    that it was only speculation that the  Appellant's  return  to  Somalia
    would be known by his enemies.

 8. As regards the Panel's decision to dismiss the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds, I find myself in agreement  with  the  argument  of  Mr
    Vaughan that the Panel's decision contained a material  error  of  law.
    It is apparent from what the Panel wrote at paragraphs 52 and 53 of its
    Determination quoted above that the  only  reason  for  dismissing  the
    appeal on asylum grounds  was  its  agreement  with  the  view  of  the
    Respondent that it was only speculation that the Appellant's return  to
    Somalia would be known by the family of the late F A and  result  in  a
    revenge attack upon the Appellant.  This reasoning is insufficient.  In
    particular, and as argued by Mr Vaughan, it  does  not  deal  with  the
    evidence given by the Appellant and members of  his  family  concerning
    relevant events in the UK and the nature  of  the  Somali  clan  system
    which would allow information to be transmitted from the UK to  Somalia
    of the Appellant's movements.   Contrary  to  what  was  argued  by  Ms
    Everett, the objective evidence and in particular the expert report  of
    Dr Bekalo did not contradict the Appellant's assertion that his  return
    to Somalia would become known to the family of the late F A.

 9. The Panel allowed the appeal on  Article  8  grounds.   The  Panel  was
    satisfied that the provisions of paragraph 398(c) of HC 395 applied  to
    the Appellant, but not those of paragraphs  399  and  399A.   Therefore
    following the decision in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the
    Panel went on to consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights.   The
    Panel followed the format given in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.   The  Panel
    found that the Appellant had a family life in the UK with  his  mother,
    his adult siblings, and his niece, nephew, and cousins.  The  Appellant
    also had a private life.  The Panel  concluded  that  the  interference
    with that family and private life as a consequence of  the  Appellant's
    deportation was not proportionate.   In  reaching  that  decision,  the
    Panel found,  compelling  and  therefore  exceptional  factors  in  the
    Appellant's favour being the fact that  excluding  the  time  spent  in
    prison, the Appellant had lived in the UK for over twenty  years.   The
    Appellant presented a low risk of re-offending and he had not indeed re-
    offended since his  last  release  from  prison  some  eighteen  months
    previously.  The Appellant had not committed a  serious  offence  since
    2008, and in respect of that offence, the Respondent had not thought it
    serious enough to warrant the Appellant's removal.  The  Appellant  had
    an extensive family in the UK.

10. At the hearing, Ms Everett argued that the Panel had erred  in  law  in
    reaching its conclusion in respect of the Appellant's Article 8 rights.
     The Panel had attributed insufficient weight to the  public  interest.
    In particular, the Panel had failed to take into account  the  entirety
    of  the  Appellant's  offending  history  which  was  relevant  as  the
    Respondent's decision was made on paragraph 398(c) grounds on the basis
    that the Appellant's deportation would be conducive to the public  good
    as the Appellant was a persistent offender.  The Panel demonstrated its
    concern as to the future potential violent behaviour of  the  Appellant
    by its comments at paragraph 87 of the Determination.   The  Panel  was
    wrong to mitigate the weight to be attached to the public  interest  on
    account of the history of the immigration  decisions  relating  to  the
    Appellant.  There had not been a significant delay.

11. In response, Mr Vaughan submitted that the Panel had not made any error
    of law in its deliberations.  The Tribunal had  carried  out  a  fuller
    analysis and had applied the  correct  test  at  paragraph  79  of  the
    Determination.  It was not  wrong  to  consider  that  Article  8  ECHR
    allowed a broader view than the Immigration Rules.  The Panel had taken
    full account of the nature of the Appellant's offending and it had been
    open to the Panel to find that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  persistent
    offender.  The Panel had correctly identified the fact that  in  recent
    times the Appellant had only committed minor offences.

12. I find no error of law in the Panel's decision in respect of Article  8
    ECHR.  The Panel found exceptional factors  so  that  the  decision  to
    deport the Appellant was disproportionate.  This was a decision open to
    the Panel on the evidence before it and which it  fully  reasoned.   Ms
    Everett's argument is that the Panel failed to attach sufficient weight
    to the public interest.  It is a matter for the Tribunal to decide what
    weight to be attached to any particular factor.  In this  case,  in  my
    view it cannot be said that the Panel did not  take  into  account  the
    nature of the Appellant's offending.  The Panel set out the  chronology
    of the Appellant's convictions at the start of  the  Determination  and
    went on to analyse that information thoroughly at paragraphs 59  to  63
    inclusive of the Determination.  The Panel then explained at  paragraph
    81 its decision to attach only a limited weight to the public interest.
     The Panel did make some remarks as to its concerns  at  paragraph  87,
    but the Panel found that there was a low  risk  of  the  Appellant  re-
    offending on the basis of evidence from a forensic psychologist.

13. To summarise, I find an error of law in the decision of  the  Panel  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.  That part of the decision is set
    aside.  As there have been almost no findings of fact made  in  respect
    of the Appellant's asylum claim, I remit that part of the appeal to  be
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with paragraph  7.2(b)
    of the Practice Statements.  I find no error of law in respect  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal relating to the Appellant's Article
    8 ECHR rights and that part of his decision is not set aside.

Anonymity

14. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  continue
    that order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

