
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01267/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 May 2014                                |On 17 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Shamarie Floyd George Currie

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms T Murshed instructed by Fletcher Dervish
& Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The respondent (hereafter "the claimant") is a citizen  of  Jamaica  born
on 26 October 1992.  He came to the UK in July  2002  and  was  granted  six
months as a visitor.   His  father  failed  to  regularise  his  immigration
position, although in November 2005 he applied for settlement in the  UK  on
the basis of having two dependent children  under  the  seven  years'  child
concession.  His application was refused on 15 January 2013 but  his  appeal
against that refusal was allowed on 25 April 2013.   This  outcome  did  not
assist the claimant because  the  appellant  (hereafter  "the  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department") took the  view  that  his  criminal  conduct
justified deportation.

2. The claimant's criminal conduct had begun in 2008 when he  was  convicted
in May 2008 of burglary and theft.  Following several  further  offences  he
had been convicted in April  2010  for  robbery  and  given  a  six  months'
detention order.  Two  of  his  offences  involved  Class  B  drugs.   By  2
February 2012, after he was convicted of attempted robbery and sentenced  to
three and a half  years'  imprisonment,  he  had  mustered  twelve  previous
convictions and  sixteen  offences.   The  sentencing  judge  on  this  last
occasion described the claimant as being at the forefront of the  commission
of the offence, noting that he had armed himself with a brick  and  later  a
knife.

3. In response to a request to give reasons why he should  not  be  deported
the  claimant  through  his  representatives  stated  that  he  was   in   a
relationship of four years duration with a Ms Cameron.  He has  a  daughter,
SY, by this woman born 23 February 2012 and a son, SE, by a Ms Hansen,  born
on 9 August 2011.  The claimant said that he had not cohabited  with  either
of these women (except for a brief period of two months with Ms Hanson)  and
each child lived with their respective  mother  and  grandmother  and  other
extended family members.   The  claimant  said  he  had  contact  with  both
children as their mothers had brought them to visit him in prison.  His  son
had asthma and his daughter had eczema.   It  was  said  that  the  claimant
continued to live with his father, stepmother and younger brother.

4. The SSHD assessed the claimant's reasons under the new Immigration  Rules
and considered that if paras 399 or 399A did not apply, the  claimant  could
only avoid deportation if able  to  show,  consistently  with  para  398(c),
exceptional circumstances outweighing the  public  interest  in  seeing  him
deported.  On 11 June 2013 the SSHD decided  the  claimant's  case  did  not
demonstrate exceptional circumstances. The  respondent  pointed  out,  inter
alia, that during his last period  in  prison  the  claimant  had  been  the
subject of thirteen adjudications for fighting, assaulting,  making  threats
of assault on other inmates, disobeying lawful orders and destroying  prison
property whilst in custody.

5. The  claimant's  appeal  was  heard  by  a  panel  comprising  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Woodhouse  and  Non-Legal  Member  Mr  A  Armitage.   In  a
determination sent on 18 March 2014 they allowed his appeal.   By  the  time
of the appeal hearing both Ms Hanson and Ms Cameron  had  stated  that  they
were now no  longer  interested  in  maintaining  a  relationship  with  the
claimant, but wished to maintain contact  for  the  sake  of  the  children.
They  both  said  in  oral  evidence  that  in  contrast  to  the   position
previously, he had changed his attitude  to  his  parental  responsibilities
and the panel accepted that, although he did not live  with  or  financially
support either of them, he had endeavoured since  released  from  prison  to
remain in a relationship with them by way of daily contact with his son  and
regularly weekly or bi-weekly contact with his daughter. "[H]e  has  a  very
loving relationship with them", the panel found.  The panel also found  that
whereas before he went into prison  on  the  last  occasion  he  spent  very
little time at his father's or family house, he was now  living  with  them.
He continued to rely for financial support from  handouts  from  family  and
friends and his friends supported him with his cannabis habit.

6. The SSHD's grounds of appeal, which resulted in  a  grant  of  permission
was essentially twofold:

    (1)  that the panel had erred in failing to have regard to the relevant
         provisions of the Immigration Rules;


    (2)  that the panel had wrongly found that the claimant's circumstances
         were exceptional.


    Under (2) the  two  main  points  advanced  were  that  the  panel  had
    erroneously considered the claimant's relationship with his children as
    a particularly weighty factor in his  favour  and  had  also  erred  in
    failing to attach due weight to the public interest in his deportation.

7. Mr Deller conceded at the outset  that  (1)  lacked  force,  as  even  if
somewhat confusingly, the panel had correctly  understood  that  the  appeal
turned on whether the claimant had  shown  exceptional  circumstances  under
paragraph 398(c). In the light of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, he  was
right to do so.

8. As regards (2), I am grateful to the careful submissions I received  from
both Mr Deller and Ms Murshed.

Error of law

9. I am satisfied that to the first issue I have to  decide  -  whether  the
First-tier Tribunal erred in law -  the  clear  answer  is  that  they  did.
Despite a very thorough examination of the claimant's  circumstances,  their
finding that his ties with his children should carry very great  weight  was
not based on an objective evaluation of his and  their  circumstances,  even
on the basis of its own primary findings of fact.  Essentially they  equated
the claimant's two relationships with that of a co-parent  father  occupying
the position of a (joint) primary carer, whereas it was clear that:

    (i)  he had never lived with them;


    (ii) he was no longer in a relationship with either of their mothers;


    (iii)    their only primary carers were their respective mothers, aided
         by their own mothers and other family members;


    (iv) until he was in prison on the  last  occasion,  he  had  had  very
         little to do with them;


    (v)  the  period  during  which  he  had  begun  to  develop  a  loving
         relationship with them broadly coincided with that during which  he
         was under threat of deportation;


    (vi) the period concerned was relatively short.


10. In such circumstances  it  was  necessary  for  any  assessment  of  the
strength of his relationship with them to take into account  that  the  best
interests of the children were primarily served  by  continuing  to  receive
the love and care of their mothers  and  their  mothers'  respective  family
support networks.  There was no evidence before the panel to  indicate  that
the effect of the claimant's deportation would have any substantial  adverse
effect  on  their  well-being.    The   conclusion   that   the   claimant's
relationship with his children  constituted  exceptional  circumstances  was
irrational.

11. I consider the panel also erred in its approach to the  public  interest
of the state in taking action  to  deport  in  respect  of  persons  with  a
serious criminal history.  It was only open to the panel to have  found  the
claimant's circumstances exceptional  if  it  had  reasonably  assessed  the
public interest factors to carry significantly less weight than usual.

12. I consider the error here on the part of the panel was twofold.   First,
it wrongly reduced the  public  interest  to  a  one-dimensional  matter  of
considering whether the claimant was likely to  reoffend.   Despite  stating
at paragraph 262 that the risk of reoffending was only  one  aspect  of  the
public interest and that:

     "[other factors are deterrence and the view of the Secretary  of  State
         who has a special  expertise  in  the  administration  of  criminal
         justice and whose assessment of the public interest must  be  taken
         properly into account and given due weight".

the panel proceeded to ignore all but the  issue  of  whether  the  claimant
    would reoffend, concluding at 293 that:

     "[h]e has shown we accept over a relatively short  period  that  he  is
         capable of changing his behaviour for the benefit of his  two  very
         young British children.  The offence for  which  he  was  convicted
         although  serious  is  not  one  which  we  conclude  falls  to  be
         considered in the most serious of  offences  to  which  the  [SSHD]
         referred in the Home Office Directive".

13. Not only did this  amount  to  an  erroneous  reduction  of  the  public
interest in deporting foreign criminals  to  the  question  of  whether  the
claimant would reoffend, it also sought to justify  it  by  reference  to  a
Home  Office  statement  which  did  no  more  than  clarify  the   relative
seriousness of sentences.  That Directive said nothing to  suggest  a  three
and a half year sentence (against the backdrop of  thirteen  other  offences
over  a  four  year  period)  was  not  sufficiently  serious   to   justify
deportation action.

14. A second component of the panel's error here was that  in  weighing  the
gravity of the public interest in deporting the  claimant,  it  wholly  left
out of consideration the  fact  that  he  also  had  a  dubious  immigration
history.  Although  (again)  it  noted  that  all  but  six  months  of  his
residence in the UK since 2002 had been unlawful, it appeared to think  this
could wholly be disregarded because "[h]e arrived as a minor  and  therefore
cannot be held responsible for his illegal immigration  status".   That  was
incorrect.  As the panel itself noted he would only  have  been  unaware  of
his illegal [unlawful] status until the age of 16 and even disregarding  the
fact that he did not become an adult until he was 18, he turned that age  in
October 2010 and it was from that age his responsibility  became  either  to
leave the UK or make an application to remain as an adult.

15. A third aspect of the panel's erroneous  manner  of  assessment  of  the
public interest was that its conclusion at paragraph 293 that he  had  shown
"he was capable of changing his behaviour ..." cannot properly  be  said  to
amount to a firm finding that he was not  likely  to  reoffend;  or,  if  it
could, to explain satisfactorily why it  chose  to  depart  from  that  that
taken by his Probation Service Officer, Miss  Bradshaw,  dated  21  February
2012. The latter had concluded that his history of offences over the  period
2008-2011  indicated  a  pattern  of  offending  behaviour   and   that   he
demonstrated  a  willingness  to  use  weapons  and  partake   in   reckless
behaviour.  Miss Bradshaw assessed the appellant as posing a 70%  likelihood
of reoffending within  two  years.  She  referred  to  his  entrenched  pro-
criminal attitudes and assessed that he and his associates "are  potentially
involved in offending for financial gain". She rejected his  claim  to  live
off money from his family.  The claimant was also assessed as posing  a  40%
likelihood of reoffending in a violent way.

16. There was also  a  more  recent  letter  from  Miss  Bradshaw  dated  10
December 2013.  Despite noting that he had complied with his  conditions  of
licence  and  had  embarked  on  a  Thinking  Skills  Programme,  she  still
considered that he presented a medium risk of harm to the public and a  high
risk of reoffending within two years.

17. Whilst it was open to the panel to  reach  a  different  view  from  Mss
Bradshaw, notwithstanding that she  was  a  professio0nal  trained  in  this
field, it was required to give adequate reasons for doing so. It did not.

18. Curiously, although devoting considerable space to the issue of  whether
the claimant's activities and  involvements  were  gang-related  (concluding
that the SSHD had not shown that they were) the panel appeared to  disregard
the accepted fact that he continued to associate with  persons  involved  in
criminal activities.  Just as  curiously,  despite  the  claimant  giving  a
quite unsatisfactory account of his prison  adjudications,  only  purporting
to know about 4 or 5 of the 13 and not addressing the  fact  that  (fighting
aside) he was also recorded  as  damaging  prison  property.  If  the  panel
considered it did not  have  enough  informatio0n  to  assess  the  evidence
regarding these adjudications, as it indicted  in  paragraph  105,  then  it
should have taken steps to direct its  production.  It  appears  instead  to
have considered that nothing about these adjudications had been  established
and therefore it could entirely ignore them. A further minor point was  that
the panel appeared to attach  no  weight  to  the  fact  that  the  claimant
continued to use a Class B drug (cannabis).

19. The upshot of these failings was that it simply cannot be said that  the
panel properly engaged with the evidence from  the  Probation  Service  (and
also the police services)  indicating  that  he  was  not  likely  to  avoid
reoffending.

20. These errors on the part of the panel necessitate that its  decision  is
    set aside.

Re-making of Decision

21. Despite being informed that if  it  was  intended  to  rely  on  further
evidence notice was to be  given  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  claimant's
representatives did not identify any further evidence.  Accordingly I  shall
proceed to re-make this decision on the basis of  the  evidence  before  the
First-tier Tribunal panel.  In her  grounds  of  appeal  the  SSHD  has  not
sought to challenge any of the primary findings of fact made by  the  panel.
My task can be confined, therefore, to evaluating by  reference  to  correct
legal principles,  the  claimant's  circumstances  in  the  light  of  these
primary findings.

22. The factors in the claimant's favour when seeking to strike the  Article
8 balance are principally the following: that he has been in  the  UK  since
2002; that he has family here, including his  father  and  younger  brother;
that although he has been an overstayer  for  all  but  six  months  of  his
period of residence in the UK, he  came  as  a  minor  and  cannot  be  held
responsible for the unlawful nature of his stay  for  the  period  until  he
turned 18; that he currently has a genuine and loving relationship with  his
two children (supported by their  respective  mothers);  that  both  of  his
children are British citizens; and that since his  release  from  prison  he
has begun spending more time living at his father's house and  has  shown  a
capability of changing his behaviour from the former criminal pattern.

23. Whilst these factors carry significant weight that is reduced  somewhat,
for  the  reasons  already  set  out,  by  the  following  facts:  that  his
relationship with his children cannot be described as having several of  the
elements of a normal father-child relationship;  that  he  has  never  lived
with either of them; that he has not devoted care to them  until  relatively
recently;  that  their  primary  care  is  afforded  by  their  mothers  and
grandmothers; and that the period during which he has changed his  behaviour
towards them broadly coincides with that during  which  he  has  been  under
threat of deportation.

24. Counting against the claimant are a number of  weighty  factors.   There
is first of all the fact that between 2008-2012 he  had  committed  multiple
criminal offences.  Although most of these were  committed  when  he  was  a
minor, his most recent offence, for which he was sentenced to  three  and  a
half years, was committed when he was an adult.  It is  true  that  none  of
his offences have involved the infliction of  physical  injury  but  he  has
clearly engaged in threatening conduct and has carried  weapons.   The  only
assessment made of his risk  of  his  reoffending  made  by  an  independent
statutory body rated him a high risk of reoffending within two years  and  a
40% risk of committing a crime of violence. Whilst in  prison  the  claimant
had been the subject of 13 prison adjudications  and  the  answers  he  gave
regarding them when giving  evidence  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  do  not
indicate that, whatever the rights and wrongs  of  those  adjudications,  he
had faced up to the fact that during his time  in  prison  he  had  used  or
threatened violence and damaged property. On the panel's findings  of  fact,
although the claimant now lives with his father  and  family,  there  is  no
indication that he has ceased associating with other  offenders  and  indeed
his friends are said to fund his continued use of an illegal drug.

25. In addition to the significant risk of his likelihood  to  reoffend  his
history of criminality is  such  as  to  justify  public  revulsion  and  to
warrant the SSHD deciding that his deportation  would  achieve  a  deterrent
effect.

26. In respect of his immigration history, he did not seek  to  do  anything
about his unlawful status since he turned 18, although he  clearly  knew  he
was here unlawfully by that age. In contrast to the applicant  in  Maslov  v
Austria, he cannot point to any settled status or lawful residency beyond  a
few months.

27. The removal of the claimant from the UK  would  separate  him  from  his
family members in the UK and effectively end his relationship with  his  son
and daughter (it being accepted by the First-tier Tribunal panel that  their
mothers could not afford to travel to Jamaica so that they could  visit  him
there).  However, it would not mean he was returned to a situation where  he
had no family connections.  As the panel found at  paragraph  248,  "it  was
not disputed that the [claimant] has his mother,  his  paternal  grandmother
and a paternal uncle who reside in Jamaica at 'the present time'".

28. Given that there is a significant preponderance of factors  weighing  in
favour of the public interest in the claimant's deportation I conclude  that
his circumstances cannot be said to be exceptional  within  the  meaning  of
paragraphs, 398, 399 and 399A. There are no compelling  reasons  that  would
make it disproportionate for him to be deported.

29. For the above reasons:

     The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and its decision is set aside.

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.




Signed                                  Date 13.06.2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey










