
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01481/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 19 October 2015                   |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                           SHEILA AUXILIA CHIKWARE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Walsh, Counsel instructed by Universe
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  16
    July 2014 to deport her from the UK  following  her  conviction  for  a
    number of criminal offences involving the use of false instruments  and
    in making false representations  for  gain.  She  was  sentenced  to  a
    combined total of 21 months imprisonment for offences that  took  place
    during the period 2007-2013. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ross  dismissed
    her appeal in a decision promulgated on 24 April 2015.

2.    The appellant seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

    (i)    The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to find that  the
         notice of decision was not in accordance with the law.  The  notice
         of decision purported to deport the appellant under section 3(5)(a)
         of the Immigration Act 1971 but no power to deport arose from  that
         section nor a right of appeal.

    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding that the appellant was a
         "persistent offender" for the purpose of paragraph  398(c)  of  the
         immigration rules and section 117D(2)(c)(iii) of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  NIAA  2002")  was  perverse
         because  the  evidence  showed  that  she  was  at  low   risk   of
         reoffending.

3.    The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to  determine  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point
    of law.

4.    I heard submissions from both parties, which have  been  noted  in  my
    record of proceedings and  where  relevant  are  incorporated  into  my
    findings.

Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making
    of an error on a point of law.

6.    Mr Walsh argued that there was confusion as to whether the  respondent
    had applied the correct statutory framework to  the  case.  In  earlier
    correspondence dated 08 October 2013, inviting the  appellant  to  make
    representations in relation to  proposed  deportation,  the  respondent
    wrongly  stated  that  the  appellant  would  be  deported  under   the
    provisions of the UK Borders  Act  2007.  Although  the  appellant  was
    sentenced to a total period of  21  months  imprisonment  none  of  the
    individual convictions amounted to a 12 months sentence and she was not
    therefore liable to automatic deportation.

7.    The respondent subsequently made a  decision  to  make  a  deportation
    order on 04 April 2014 on the ground that her presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom was  not  conducive  to  the  public  good.  The  decision  was
    withdrawn after the appellant became unwell and required  treatment.  A
    fresh decision was made on 16 July 2014. That decision is  the  subject
    of this appeal. The notice of decision is headed "Decision  to  make  a
    deportation order". It stated that  the  respondent  deemed  it  to  be
    conducive to the public good to make a deportation order "by virtue  of
    section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971". It went on to state  that
    "this order requires you to leave the United Kingdom and prohibits  you
    from re-entering while the order is in force".

8.    The relevant statutory framework for deportation on  the  ground  that
    it is conducive to the public good is contained in sections 3(5)(a) and
    5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

         3(5)     A person who  is  not  a  British  citizen  is  liable  to
         deportation from the United Kingdom if:

          a) the Secretary of state deems his deportation to  be  conducive
             to the public good.

         ...

         5(1)     Where a person is under section 3(5) or (6)  above  liable
         to deportation, then subject to the following  provisions  of  this
         Act the Secretary of state may make  a  deportation  order  against
         him, that is to say an order requiring him to leave and prohibiting
         him from entering the  United  Kingdom;  and  a  deportation  order
         against a person shall invalidate any leave to enter or  remain  in
         the United Kingdom given him before the order is made or  while  it
         is in force.

9.    Where a person is not liable to automatic  deportation  under  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 the respondent can still make  a  decision  to  deport
    using the combined powers contained in sections 3(5)(a) and 5(1) of the
    Immigration Act 1971. Unlike automatic deportation a deportation  order
    is not signed when the initial decision is made but a "Decision to make
    a deportation order" is made. It serves as a  notice  of  intention  to
    deport. This decision attracts a right of appeal under section 82(1)(j)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  applicable  at
    the relevant date of decision). The operative immigration decision  for
    the purpose of this part of the 2002 Act  is  "a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order under section 5(1) of that Act".

10.   Mr Walsh struggled to identify  the  exact  error  that  was  said  to
    undermine the lawfulness of the decision. In the end it  was  expressed
    as little more than "confusion over the statutory framework". While  it
    is clear that notice of decision failed to mention, as  would  normally
    be the case, that the decision to make a  deportation  order  was  made
    under section 5(1) with reference to section 3(5)(a) there  can  be  no
    doubt that the respondent had made  a  decision  that  the  appellant's
    deportation following conviction for a number of criminal offences  was
    conducive to the public good. Having decided  that  the  appellant  was
    liable to  deportation  under  section  3(5)(a)  the  respondent  quite
    clearly had a power to make a "Decision to make  a  deportation  order"
    under section 5(1) even if it was not expressly stated in the notice of
    decision. Mr Walsh accepted that the mere fact that  section  5(1)  was
    not mentioned did not undermine the lawfulness  of  the  decision.  The
    fact that the decision then purported to state that  it  was  an  order
    that required the appellant to leave the United Kingdom was  merely  an
    error in the drafting. The decision quite properly confirmed  that  the
    appellant had a right of appeal under section 82(1) of the NIAA 2002.

11.   While the "Decision to make a deportation order" was  not  drafted  as
    accurately as it could and should have been that does not lead  to  the
    conclusion that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law.  The
    appellant had been convicted of a number of criminal offences  and  the
    respondent was entitled to conclude that her deportation was  conducive
    to the public good. As such the power to decide to make  a  deportation
    order arose under section 5(1) of the  Immigration  Act  1971  and  the
    "Decision to make a deportation order" was an appealable decision under
    section 82(1)(j) of the NIAA 2002. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  quite
    clearly took into account the arguments put forward in the  appellant's
    skeleton argument but could not be criticised for concluding  that  the
    decision was lawful because it was quite clear that the respondent  had
    power to make a deportation order under section 5(1) [19 & 34]. For the
    reasons outlined above there is no error  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's reasoning in relation to the lawfulness  of  the  "Decision  to
    make a deportation order" dated 16 July 2014.

12.   The second  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's finding that the appellant was "a persistent offender" for  the
    purpose of paragraph 398(c) and section  117D(2)(c)(iii)  of  the  NIAA
    2002. Mr Walsh  argued  that  there  was  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant was assessed to be a low risk of reoffending  and  that  this
    should have been taken into account  in  assessing  whether  she  is  a
    persistent offender. While the risk of reoffending can be  relevant  to
    an overall assessment of proportionality  the  appellant's  history  of
    offending behaviour must be central to  the  assessment  of  whether  a
    person is "a persistent offender".

13.   In this case the appellant was convicted of four  counts  of  using  a
    copy of a false instrument and three counts of dishonestly making false
    representations for gain. While the convictions and sentencing were all
    dealt with together in August 2013, and it is true to say that there is
    no evidence of previous convictions before that date, it is quite clear
    from the judge's sentencing  remarks  that  the  appellant's  offending
    behaviour took place over  a  long  period  of  time.  She  used  false
    instruments to work without permission and to  obtain  a  bursary.  She
    also sought accommodation  and  falsely  claimed  that  she  had  three
    children by using false birth certificates. She sought  allowances  for
    accommodation that she was not entitled to.   The  pre-sentence  report
    stated that the offences were carried out repeatedly and over a  period
    of time and that she sought to deceive a number of different government
    departments [pg.90 appellant's bundle].

14.   While the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not give detailed reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant  was  "a  persistent  offender"  for  the
    purpose of the definitions contained in the immigration rules  and  the
    NIAA 2002 I find that this discloses no material error of law [26]. The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge clearly set out the nature  of  the  offences
    and the long period of time over which they were  committed  [7-8].  It
    was self-evident from the evidence that the appellant could properly be
    described as a "persistent  offender"  because  she  had  a  number  of
    convictions for various different dishonesty offences that were carried
    out over a period of time.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge's  findings  were  outside  the  range  of   reasonable
    responses in relation  to  the  ordinary  interpretation  of  the  word
    "persistent" i.e. continuing to occur over a long period.

15.   Even if I am wrong in concluding that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not err in his assessment of whether the appellant is "a persistent
    offender" it is difficult to see how this could have been  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal. It seems that the appellant did not seek  to
    argue that she  came  within  any  of  the  exceptions  to  deportation
    outlined in paragraphs 399 or 399A of the immigration rules or  section
    177C(4)-(5) of the NIAA 2002 and could only seek to resist  deportation
    on the ground of "very compelling circumstances".  Whether  she  was  a
    "persistent offender" or not the respondent still had a power to make a
    decision to deport by virtue of section 5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971, which would only be limited by the principle of  proportionality.
    Following the Court of Appeal decision in MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192 the terms of the immigration  rules,  and  in  particular
    paragraph 398,  are  deemed  to  be  sufficient  to  encompass  a  full
    proportionality assessment. The First-tier Tribunal Judge followed this
    approach and his findings cannot be criticised.

16.   It is quite clear from the scheme of rules  and  statutory  provisions
    relating to deportation, and a number of recent authorities, that great
    weight should be placed on  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  No
    specific challenge has been made to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings relating to the proportionality of  the  decision  to  deport,
    which were open to him on the law and evidence. For the  reasons  given
    above I conclude that the decision discloses  no  errors  of  law  that
    would have made any material difference to the outcome of  the  appeal.
    It is understandable that the appellant disagrees with the decision but
    the respondent's decision to deport her arose directly as a  result  of
    her own actions.

17.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that the decision shall stand.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal shall stand

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

