
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01997/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 June 2014                                 |On 29 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE SIMLER
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             Bodie Shabba Smith
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kay Mak
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the respondent  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge  Williams  and  Mr
    Eames.  The Tribunal allowed the appeal  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Bodie
    Smith, on Article 8 Convention grounds.  Permission to appeal was given
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd who said that the  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules was arguably an error of law as
    the Immigration Rules have  been  found  to  be  a  complete  code  for
    deportation by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria)  and  who  therefore
    gave permission for the Secretary of State to raise the  three  grounds
    identified in the grounds of appeal as arguable.  For convenience,  the
    parties are referred to in this decision  as  the  respondent  and  the
    appellant as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The background can be summarised shortly.   The  appellant  claimed  to
    have entered the UK in April 2000, but on  21  June  2007  was,  having
    pleaded guilty of an offence of possessing a false  identity  document,
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of fourteen months.

 3. On 16 January 2008 he was notified by the respondent of a  decision  to
    make a deportation order against him.  His custodial sentence ended  on
    20 January 2008  and  he  was  thereafter  detained  under  immigration
    powers.

 4. On 23 January 2008 he claimed asylum but  his  asylum  application  was
    refused by a decision dated 19 April 2008 and his appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed on 14 June 2008.

 5. On 8 July 2008 he was released from immigration detention and  required
    to report on a weekly basis to Beckett House and he duly did so.

 6. On 13 February 2009 the deportation order against him was  signed,  but
    no steps were taken to remove him thereafter.  It is  significant  that
    he did not, as many do, go underground at that stage but  continued  to
    report on a weekly basis.

 7. He married a British citizen in the United Kingdom on 5 June  2010  and
    they had children thereafter of that marriage on 21 August 2010  and  a
    second child in 2012.

 8. In January 2011 further representations  were  submitted  to  the  Home
    Office raising Article 8 and the appellant's relationship with his wife
    and at that stage their first child, and  an  application  for  further
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds was refused on  21  February  2011
    due to the fact that a deportation order had already been made.

 9. Further representations were made, ultimately resulting  in  a  refusal
    decision dated 19 September 2013  whereby  the  respondent  refused  to
    revoke the deportation order that had previously been made and  it  was
    against that decision to refuse to revoke the  deportation  order  that
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was made.

10. By its decision the First-tier Tribunal set out  the  relevant  law  at
    paragraphs 45 through to and including paragraph 54.   The  appeal  was
    based on Article 3 and Article 8 grounds.  The Tribunal dealt with  the
    fact that  the  new  Rules  encompass  the  Article  8  and  Article  3
    considerations and are now to be seen as the starting  point,  and  the
    fact that it is only in a case where there is an arguable basis outside
    the Rules for relying on Article  8  grounds  that  Article  8  can  be
    considered outside the Rules.

11. The First-tier Tribunal  rejected  the  Article  3  ground  of  appeal,
    concluded that the appellant could not succeed under the Rules, but  at
    paragraph 60, having set out the Rules as a starting point  made  clear
    that the new approach following the  cases  of  Nagre  and  Gulshan  in
    particular was that it would only be if there are arguably good grounds
    for granting leave to remain outside the new Rules  that  it  would  be
    necessary to consider Article 8 and concluded that in  this  particular
    case it was appropriate to do  so.   Having  done  that,  the  Tribunal
    ultimately concluded that the appeal should be allowed under Article  8
    grounds.  It did so having weighed a number of factors for and  against
    and having it said expressly reached the conclusion in effect that this
    was a finely balanced case, but that the  balance  came  down  just  in
    favour of the appellant here.

12. There is no challenge to the Tribunal's decision in relation to Article
    3 in this case by way of Rule 24 notice, although  the  prospect  of  a
    late application to rely on a Rule 24 notice was raised by  Mr  Mak  on
    behalf of the appellant.  Having further reflected on this argument and
    the points that he wished to make, Mr Mak  withdrew  that  application.
    We consider he was right to do is in the circumstances.  The appeal  by
    the respondent is therefore based solely on the conclusion in  relation
    to Article 8 reached by the First-tier Tribunal.

13. The new Immigration Rules introduced on 9 July 2012 had the  effect  of
    bringing the consideration of Article 8  within  the  Rules  so  as  to
    ensure a consistent, fair and  transparent  approach  to  the  decision
    making process.  The approach to and effect of the new Rules  has  been
    considered in a number of cases,  including  most  relevantly  for  our
    purposes Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  640.   The  new  Rules  provide  better
    coverage of the factors identified  as  relevant  to  the  analysis  of
    Article 8 claims than previously so that  in  many  cases  the  factors
    relevant to an  Article  8  consideration  will  be  addressed  by  the
    decision maker.  Accordingly, after applying the  requirements  of  the
    Rules it is only if there may be good  arguable  grounds  for  granting
    leave to remain outside the new Rules that it is necessary to  consider
    the  application  of  Article  8  and  whether  there  are   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules that  require
    consideration outside the Rules.

14. The proper approach for the decision maker  is  therefore  to  consider
    whether an applicant in the circumstances of this particular  appellant
    meets the requirements in the new Rules, in particular Appendix FM  and
    EX.1. addressing family life and related factors, and paragraph  276ADE
    in relation to private life aspects as a starting point.

15. Where an applicant does not meet the requirements of the  Rules  it  is
    only as we have indicated where  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
    that mean that refusal of the application would result in unjustifiably
    harsh consequences for  the  individual  or  their  family,  such  that
    refusal would not be proportionate under Article 8, that leave  outside
    the Rules can be considered or granted.  Exceptional  in  this  context
    does not mean unusual or unique, but rather that the  circumstances  in
    which such a refusal would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    are likely to be very rare.

16. So far as EX.1. is concerned it applies if an applicant has  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a partner in the UK who is  a  British
    citizen settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  status  or
    humanitarian  protection,  and  that   there   are,   and   we   quote,
    "insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK".

17. Following the Court of Appeal's decision in MF (Nigeria)  it  is  clear
    that  insurmountable  obstacles  does  not  mean  obstacles  which  are
    literally impossible  to  surmount,  but  concerns  whether  there  are
    practical possibilities of relocation.  If there are no  insurmountable
    obstacles to relocation within the meaning of the Rules,  then  removal
    will be disproportionate under Article 8  outside  the  Rules  only  if
    there are other non-standard or particular features demonstrating  that
    removal will be unjustifiably harsh for an applicant  and  his  or  her
    family.

18. On this appeal the respondent contends that the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision was  in  error  of  law  principally  by  reference  to  three
    particular  matters.   Firstly,  the  public  interest  in  favour   of
    deportation in a case of this  kind  was  inadequately  recognised  and
    insufficient weight was given to it.  Secondly, so far as the  question
    of delay was concerned, this was given too much weight in favour of the
    appellant whose status was always precarious, who lost  his  appeal  in
    2008 and could have left thereafter voluntarily at any  time  and  this
    was inadequately, it is said, recognised  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with the consequence that the  delay  was  treated  as  a  factor  that
    weighed too significantly in  the  appellant's  favour.   Thirdly,  the
    respondent contends that under the heading "Exceptional  Circumstances"
    the Tribunal should have  decided  whether  there  were  arguably  good
    grounds for considering Article 8 as a preliminary matter, and only  if
    it concluded that there were, gone on to consider Article 8.  Mr Avery,
    on behalf of the respondent, argues that that was not  this  Tribunal's
    approach which dealt with it in a one stage way and  simply  considered
    Article 8 without  having  dealt  with  that  threshold  consideration.
    Moreover, having done so, Mr Avery argues on behalf of  the  respondent
    that the appellant never had lawful status in  this  country  and  that
    there was a failure properly to  consider  that,  or  to  address  that
    feature which vitiates the Article 8 evaluation.  Although  not  raised
    in his oral argument, in writing Mr Avery also contended that there was
    a failure adequately to address the double aim that is  relevant  in  a
    deportation case, namely  the  need  to  deport  foreign  criminals  to
    prevent disorder and crime, as well as  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control, and in writing it was submitted that there  was  a
    material misdirection in failing to consider the double  aim  that  the
    appellant's deportation would realise.

19. For the reasons that we will give shortly in a moment, we cannot accept
    Mr Avery's arguments that there was an error of law in this  case.   In
    our judgment this Tribunal directed itself properly in accordance  with
    the new approach to the new Immigration Rules identified in  Nagre  and
    Gulshan and adopted the  two  stage  approach  that  is  required.   In
    particular, at paragraph 52 the Tribunal expressly  set  out  the  fact
    that the starting point was the Rules and  that  it  was  only  if  the
    Tribunal came to the conclusion that the appellant did not satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules that there would be any scope to consider Article  8.
    The Tribunal referred to the  two  stage  process  in  MF  and  to  the
    relevant Immigration Rules which were described in  MF  as  a  complete
    code.

20. The Tribunal referred to the fact that paragraph 398 of the Immigration
    Rules provides that if the specific conditions of paragraph 399 or 399A
    do not  apply  in  relation  to  a  foreign  criminal,  in  exceptional
    circumstances the public interest in deportation may be  outweighed  by
    other factors, and to the fact that the use of the  term  "exceptional"
    in this context was a recognition that very compelling reasons would be
    needed to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

21. We are accordingly satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal had very much
    in mind the two stage approach and  the  need  for  there  to  be  very
    compelling circumstances where  an  individual  does  not  satisfy  the
    requirements in the  Immigration  Rules  for  the  public  interest  in
    deportation to be outweighed by  factors  relevant  to  any  Article  8
    consideration.

22. Having given themselves that direction in law, at paragraph 60  we  are
    satisfied that the Tribunal  followed  that  approach.   In  fact,  the
    Tribunal made clear that this was one of those rare cases  where  there
    were arguably good grounds for a consideration of Article 8 outside the
    Rules  and  for  a  consideration  of  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  Rules  that  could
    outweigh the public interest in deportation here.  We therefore  reject
    Mr Avery's argument  that  the  Tribunal's  approach  at  paragraph  60
    discloses an error of law.

23. Having identified and followed the two  stage  approach,  the  Tribunal
    then made an assessment of the relevant factors  by  reference  to  the
    evidence and the findings of fact in this case.

24. At paragraph 67 the Tribunal found that the  only  conviction  recorded
    against the appellant was the conviction in June 2007.   They  accepted
    that identity offences are serious and did not in any way underestimate
    the seriousness of the sort of passport offence that the appellant  was
    convicted of here.  With those sentiments we agree.  Nevertheless,  the
    Tribunal went on to record the fact that this was the only offence this
    appellant had committed and,  whilst  it  attracted  a  fourteen  month
    sentence, it was not the most serious offending that one  comes  across
    on a daily basis in the Crown Court.

25. Moreover, the appellant was released from immigration detention in July
    2008.  He had maintained  contact  with  the  Home  Office,  faithfully
    reporting on a weekly basis to Beckett  House  ever  since  July  2008.
    That was important.  It meant that he was in touch with the Home Office
    and there was no difficulty of his making in relation to deporting him.
     Moreover, the Tribunal found that the  risk  of  reoffending  by  this
    appellant was low to say the least.

26. So far as other factors are concerned, the Tribunal  accepted  that  he
    had married a British citizen on 5 June 2010, recorded the respondent's
    concession that this was a genuine and subsisting  marriage  (that  was
    dealt with at paragraph 64 of the decision), and quite apart from  that
    concession, from the evidence the Tribunal heard they found  that  this
    was a strong relationship between the appellant  and  his  wife  and  a
    strong family relationship between the parents and their children.

27. The Tribunal had identified at the outset of the decision the fact that
    the appellant came to the UK in 2000.  There is no suggestion  that  he
    came here lawfully and it is in our judgment implicitly  recognised  by
    this Tribunal that he had no status in this country  from  the  outset.
    His status was expressly recognised as precarious by  the  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 72 where the Tribunal said, "We  accept  that  the  appellant
    chose to have children in the United Kingdom when his  status  was  not
    only uncertain but where he could have been deported at any time."   Mr
    Avery argues that that was not a recognition of his  precarious  status
    from the start, but rather a statement in favour of the appellant and a
    criticism of the respondent Secretary of State.  We cannot accept  that
    that is the case.  We consider that that sentence, viewed in  light  of
    the evidence in  the  findings  that  this  Tribunal  had  made,  is  a
    recognition that this was an appellant who had no legal status  in  the
    UK and who could have been deported at any time following his  criminal
    activity, but whose status was uncertain from the start.

28. The Tribunal having dealt with that point at paragraph 70 also referred
    expressly to the words of Lord Justice Judge (as he then was) who  said
    that people from  foreign  countries  must  realise  that  one  of  the
    consequences of serious crime for foreign  nationals  is  a  return  to
    their country of  origin.   They  also  accepted  that  deportation  of
    foreign  criminals  can  express  society's  condemnation  of   serious
    criminal activity and promote public confidence  in  the  treatment  of
    foreign  citizens  who  have  committed  crimes.   In  light  of  their
    direction in law at paragraph 52 in  relation  to  the  double  aim  of
    dealing  with  foreign  criminals  and  the  public  interest  in  good
    immigration control, we consider that this Tribunal did not forget  the
    double  aim  that  is  necessary  and  was,  albeit  perhaps  obliquely
    referring to that at paragraph 72.

29. Having identified all the factors that were relevant to  the  balancing
    exercise that the Tribunal was conducting  the  Tribunal  concluded  in
    this way, we find, having given anxious scrutiny to all  the  evidence,
    that there are the compelling circumstances in this case that can  just
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.  In our view  that  was  a
    decision that was open to this Tribunal on the findings it made and  in
    light of the material considerations and the careful balancing exercise
    it undertook.  In the vast majority of cases where  children  are  left
    with a carer in the UK, the proportionality assessment is  unlikely  to
    outweigh the public interest and the  dual  aim  in  deportation  of  a
    foreign national person convicted of a  criminal  offence.   Compelling
    circumstances   would   indeed   be   necessary   to   give   rise   to
    disproportionately.  Here the Tribunal identified  unjustifiably  harsh
    circumstances where this was not the most serious  of  offending,  were
    there had been delay, certainly since July 2008  coupled  with  regular
    weekly reporting, and where there was evidence of a particularly strong
    relationship between the appellant and his wife  and  the  parents  and
    their children in  this  case.   The  Tribunal  recognised  the  public
    interest and we reject Mr Avery's argument that there was  insufficient
    weight given to that.  Mr Avery concedes that the public  interest  was
    referred to but argues that it was  not  engaged  with  or  given  real
    meaning.  We cannot accept that in  light  of  the  Tribunal's  obvious
    engagement with those issues.

30. So far as delay is concerned, again we cannot accept that this Tribunal
    gave undue weight to the question of delay.  It was a factor, but  only
    a factor in the Tribunal's consideration.  Nor in our judgment is there
    any evidence of delay by the appellant.  Delay by the appellant is  not
    referred to in the respondent's refusal letter, nor as Mr Avery frankly
    accepted, was there evidence regarding a delay by the appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, nor was there any argument or discussion about
    this.  Again, as Mr Avery frankly accepted, in those  circumstances  we
    cannot accept his argument that there was undue weight given  to  delay
    here or inadequate recognition of delay caused by this  appellant,  and
    finally, so far as exceptional circumstances  are  concerned,  we  have
    already indicated that we are satisfied that there was no error of  law
    at paragraph 60, and nor do  we  accept  that  there  was  insufficient
    weight given to the double aim of controlling the  ability  of  foreign
    criminals to live here and  the  prevention  of  disorder  as  well  as
    maintaining effective immigration control.

31. As we identified in the course of argument, the  respondent  relied  in
    writing on the case of JO (Uganda) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ 10 where the Court of Appeal said this:-

         "Where the person to be removed is a person unlawfully  present  in
         this country who has also committed criminal offences, the decision
         to remove him may pursue a double aim,  namely  the  prevention  of
         disorder  or  crime  as  well  as  the  maintenance  of   effective
         immigration control.  If that is the case, it should be made  clear
         in the reasons for the decision, since it affects the way in  which
         the criminal offending is factored into the  analysis.   Where  the
         prevention of disorder or crime is an aim,  the  person's  criminal
         offending can weigh positively in favour of removal,  in  the  same
         way as in a deportation case.  But if reliance is  placed  only  on
         effective immigration control, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
         person's criminal offending would relate to that aim or, therefore,
         count as a factor positively favouring removal.  On the other hand,
         it might still have a significant  effect  on  the  proportionality
         balance by reducing the weight to be placed on the person's  family
         or private life: to take an obvious example,  where  a  person  has
         spent long periods in detention, his family ties  and  social  ties
         are likely to be fewer or  weaker  than  if  he  has  been  in  the
         community  throughout.  Criminal  offending  can  therefore  remain
         relevant even if the maintenance of effective  immigration  control
         is the only aim of the removal decision; but careful  account  must
         be taken of how it bears on that decision."

32. Despite being pressed on a number of occasions, Mr Avery was unable  to
    identify how the dual aim bore on the decision in this particular case,
    save to say that the appeal was allowed by a narrow margin so that  any
    slight error in the Tribunal's approach would be material.  Given  that
    the appellant's sentence was completed  before  his  marriage  and  the
    birth of his children in this case, we cannot see how  the  maintenance
    of effective immigration control and the aim of preventing disorder  or
    crime has particular relevance in this case.  This is not a case  where
    family and private life ties are likely to be  fewer  or  weaker  as  a
    result of the offending and any sentence, and nor is this a case  where
    the appellant is a  repeat  offender  or  is  a  high  risk  of  future
    offending.  Indeed, the Tribunal expressly found that he is  at  a  low
    risk of offending.

33. In our judgment these were matters that this Tribunal  weighed  in  the
    balance and recognised, having regard to all the factors in this  case,
    that  this  was  a  finely  balanced  case,  but  a   case   in   which
    exceptionally, after anxious scrutiny, this  Tribunal  found  that  the
    compelling  circumstances  did  outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation.  In our judgment this Tribunal adopted a correct  approach
    to the law and a correct approach to  the  balancing  exercise  it  was
    required to undertake, and we are fully satisfied  that  there  was  no
    error of law such as would entitle us  to  interfere  with  it  in  the
    circumstances.  The appeal is accordingly dismissed.






Signed                              Date 11 June 2014


Mrs Justice Simler


