
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01004/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 March 2014                              |On 26 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                          lloyd fitzgerald withall

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Justine Fisher, Counsel instructed by Messrs
Duncan Lewis
     and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Jamaica,  born  on  17
    November 1963, against the  decision  of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal heard at Hatton Cross on 18  September,  27  November  and  11
    December 2013, when, in a  determination  promulgated  on  20  December
    2013, the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 15 May 2013 refusing to  grant  to  him  asylum  and  to  make  a
    deportation order by virtue of Section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007, was dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights
    (Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR) grounds.

The Proceedings

2.   The Appellant made a successful application for  permission  to  appeal
    that decision and in granting such permission on 15 January 2014 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta had inter alia, this to say:

         "The grounds asserted that the Tribunal committed an error  of  law
         (in that) they refused an application for an adjournment  when  the
         Appellant, who was in custody, had failed to attend because he  was
         unwell.  The Tribunal's refusal of an adjournment was an unfair and
         inappropriate decision as the Appellant had not had the opportunity
         to address the issues of credibility and family life.  The  hearing
         had not been seen to be fair as the  Appellant's  ability  to  deal
         with significant issues was compromised.


         The hearing of the appeal had  been  adjourned  part  heard  on  18
         September 2013, there being inadequate time for  the  hearing,  the
         Appellant having become unwell at the first hearing on  July  2013,
         as he had not been given his  medication  for  a  constellation  of
         ailments.  At the resumed hearing on 27 November 2013 the Appellant
         again became unwell and experienced an epileptic fit, he was  taken
         away in an ambulance.  The Appellant, who was in custody,  was  not
         brought to court for the resumed hearing on 11  December  2013,  he
         was unwell but there was no medical evidence of that  condition  at
         that time.  The Tribunal was told he was unwilling to attend but it
         was advanced by  his  representatives  that  he  was  unwell.   The
         Tribunal refused to adjourn to  obtain  a  further  medical  report
         concerning his condition or ability to participate in proceedings.


         The Appellant had sent the Tribunal evidence and medical  notes  on
         18 December 2013 to show that he had attended the medical centre on
         11 December 2013, having had seizures that day.


         I conclude that it is arguable that the Appellant  had  not  had  a
         fair  and  comprehensive  hearing  as  the  Tribunal  knew  of  his
         protracted ill  health  and  had  experienced  at  first  hand  his
         inability to participate because of health issues, on two occasions
         of hearings.  The Tribunal can only  have  acted  on  the  material
         available to them at the time.  However,  since  Justice  must  not
         only be done but must be openly and  manifestly  been  seen  to  be
         done, the failure to accede to the request for  an  adjournment  in
         these circumstances had given rise to the appearance of unfairness,
         because the Appellant could not be a witness in his own appeal.
         I therefore agree that there is an arguable  case  for  challenging
         the decision as the Determination may contain errors of law."

3.   Thus the appeal came before me on 10 March 2014,  when  my  first  task
    was to determine whether the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed an error of errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

4.   Prior to the hearing, the Tribunal received from the Respondent a  Rule
    24 response dated 18 February 2014 opposing the Appellant's appeal  and
    submitting   that   the   First-tier   Tribunal   directed   themselves
    appropriately.  The response went on to state as follows:

         "The Judge was advised that the Appellant did not intend to attend,
         paragraph 11.   There  was  no  medical  evidence  to  support  the
         contention that the Appellant was so unwell  as  to  be  unable  to
         attend court.


         There had been  two  previous  adjournments  as  a  result  of  the
         Appellant's medical conditions and there was no  adequate  evidence
         as to when (if ever) the Appellant's medical conditions  would  not
         lead to him deciding that he did not  wish  to  attend  as  at  the
         current hearing.


         Under the particular circumstances of the case it was open  to  the
         panel to conclude that there was inadequate evidence to justify  an
         adjournment and the evidence on which the Appellant is now  reliant
         cannot be admitted to establish an error of law and does not in any
         event  establish  that  the  panel  materially  erred  in  law   in
         proceeding with the hearing.


         The  panel  found  there  were  manifest  inconsistencies  in   the
         Appellant's account as outlined in the findings.  It  was  open  to
         them to dismiss the appeal taking account of all the  circumstances
         before them.


         The other grounds are a sustained disagreement with  well  reasoned
         findings.  The Respondent would seek to point out that the reliance
         on Maslov at paragraph 29(ii) is misconceived as the  very  weighty
         reasons referred to are not applicable to adult  entrants  but  are
         specifically related to settled persons who entered as children and
         spent the  whole  or  majority  of  their  childhood  in  the  host
         country."

5.   The Tribunal also received a bundle of documents from  the  Appellant's
    solicitors essentially in support of the submission  that  the  panel's
    failure to adjourn the hearing for the Appellant to attend, was  unfair
    and precluded the Appellant from having a fair  hearing,  that  he  was
    unable to give evidence and to address the  credibility  issues  raised
    against him.

6.   In that regard, it was pointed  out  that  the  Tribunal  made  adverse
    findings of fact that included a reference to the Appellant's  lack  of
    attendance.  Indeed reference was made to the following observations of
    the panel within their findings:

         "33(5)   The Appellant does not refer to any other physical attacks
              upon him in either his witness statement or AIR  but  in  the
              medical report from Norfolk and Norwich University  Hospitals
              dated 24th May 2012 he refers to having been  attacked  by  a
              gang in 1996.  This discrepancy has not been explained.


         34.  The Appellant's credibility is further undermined by the  fact
              that we consider he failed  to  attend  the  hearing  without
              reasonable excuse." [Emphasis added].

7.   It was pointed out  that  the  Appellant  suffered  from  a  number  of
    medical conditions and that the First-tier Tribunal had seen first hand
    the Appellant having an epileptic fit in court at  the  hearing  before
    them on 27 November 2013.

8.   It would be as well  that  I  set  out  paragraphs  16  to  21  of  the
    Appellant's grounds of challenge in that regard in which the  following
    was stated:

         "16. The Appellant suffers from a number of medial  conditions  and
             the FTT saw first hand the Appellant having an  epileptic  fit
             in court on 27 November.  He has to take a lot  of  medication
             for   epilepsy,   asthma   and   depression   as    well    as
             urinary/prostrate issues.  In fact the failure of security  to
             give the Appellant his medication led  to  an  adjournment  in
             July.


         17.  The Crown Court  when  sentencing  the  Appellant,  noted  the
             medical report by Dr Chou and that the  Appellant's  illnesses
             were debilitating within the prison context [para 25].


         18.  There was also  a  medical  report  by  Dr  Sahota  which  was
             referred to [25 and 37].  The FTT in considering  Dr  Sahota's
             evidence  state  that  the  report  does  not  deal  with  the
             Appellant's ability to give evidence [37] which is  true,  but
             an  updated   email   and   concerns   for   the   Appellant's
             deteriorating health  raised  issues  that  should  have  been
             addressed in an updated report.  This was one  of  the  issues
             for the adjournment request.


         19.  The findings of fact are compromised by the findings  the  FTT
             has made and the unfairness in the proceedings.  It is  simply
             impossible to say what the FTT could or would have found  from
             the current position where the Appellant was absent and unable
             to give evidence.


         20.  It is clear from the  evidence  before  the  FTT  (that)  this
             Appellant suffers from a number of serious medical conditions.
              It was unreasonable not  to  grant  an  adjournment  request,
             particularly as the hearing on 27 November had to be adjourned
             after the Appellant collapsed and had to be taken to hospital.


         21.   These findings cannot be saved as they  are  tainted  by  the
             fundamental unfairness.  It would have been impossible for any
             Tribunal to reach a fair and balanced decision in relation  to
             proportionality on  the  FTT's  assessment  of  the  evidence.
             These findings  are  inseparable  to  the  unfairness  in  the
             hearing."

9.   Further and before the hearing before me,  the  Tribunal  received  the
    Respondent's further submissions.  In that regard, reliance was  placed
    on her earlier Rule 24 response arguing inter alia,  that  the  hearing
    had been adjourned on two previous occasions at short notice  and  that
    in the absence of any medical evidence, the panel were  correct  to  go
    ahead with the hearing.  Further the Appellant had been unwell on three
    previous occasions and that it was  "more  likely  that  the  Appellant
    would fail to appear again at any future hearing".

10.  The Tribunal also  received  a  further  letter  from  the  Appellant's
    solicitors dated 7 March 2014  to  which  was  attached  a  psychiatric
    report on the Appellant by Dr Tahira George dated 4 March 2014 and thus
    postdating the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal panel.

The Law

11.  Rule 21 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    provides as follows:

         "21(1)   Where a party applies for an adjournment of a  hearing  of
               an appeal, he must -


               (a)    If practicable,  notify  all  other  parties  of  the
                    application;


               (b)    show good reason why an adjournment is necessary; and


               (c)    produce evidence of any fact or matter relied upon in
                    support of the application.


              (2) The Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of  an  appeal  on
               the application of a party, unless satisfied that the appeal
               cannot otherwise be justly determined.


           (3)    The Tribunal must not, in particular, adjourn  a  hearing
               on the application of a party in order to  allow  the  party
               more time to produce evidence, unless satisfied that -


               (a)    the evidence relates to a matter in  dispute  in  the
                    appeal;


               (b)    it would be unjust to determine  the  appeal  without
                    permitting the party a further  opportunity  to  produce
                    the evidence; and


               (c)    where the parties fail to comply with directions  for
                    the production  of  the  evidence,  he  has  provided  a
                    satisfactory explanation for that failure."


12.  In the course of the hearing before me, I referred  the  parties  to  a
    number of case law guidance decisions that included the decision of the
    Court of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan) [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1284.   This  of
    course was an important decision that pre-dated the First-tier Tribunal
    panel's determination.  It was not however  a  decision  to  which  the
    panel referred within their determination in explaining  their  reasons
    for refusing the Appellant's adjournment request at the hearing  before
    them on 11 December 2013.  In SH, consideration was given to the proper
    approach to be taken by a Judge  when  considering  a  request  for  an
    adjournment.  Moses LJ who gave a leading judgment was clear  that  the
    question for the Judge was:

         "Whether it was unfair to refuse the Appellant the  opportunity  to
         obtain an independent assessment of his age; the  question  is  not
         whether it was reasonably open to the Immigration Judge to take the
         view that no such opportunity should be afforded to the  Appellant.
         Where an Appellant seeks to be allowed  to  establish  by  contrary
         evidence, that a case against  him  is  wrong,  the  question  will
         always be, what  stage  the  proceedings  had  reached,  what  does
         fairness demand?" [Emphasis added].

13.  His Lordship went on to conclude, that it was plain  from  the  reading
    of the Judge's decision as a whole that this was not the  test  applied
    and that his failure to  apply  it  was  "a  significant  error".   His
    Lordship continued:

         "The next question which the Judge  resolved,  namely  whether  the
         report which was being sought if it had been  obtained  would  have
         made any difference... the Judge, on  that  issue,  concluded  that
         even if that report had been obtained 'it (was) reasonably  likely'
         that (the Immigration Judge) would have reached the same  decision.
         This was not the correct test."

14.  His Lordship was clear, that when considering whether a Judge ought  to
    grant an adjournment, the test was not one of irrationality, or whether
    the Judge's decision  was  properly  open  to  him  or  was  Wednesbury
    unreasonable and perverse, "the test and sole test was whether  it  was
    unfair" [Emphasis added].

15.  In RJ (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 93,  Sir  Paul  Kennedy  who  gave  the
    leading judgment, noted not only the provisions of Rule 21 of the  2005
    Procedure Rules  but  also  Rule  4  that  dealt  with  the  overriding
    objective and Rule 19 that read as follows:

         "The Tribunal may hear an appeal in the absence of a party  or  his
         representative, if satisfied that the party or his representative -




         (a)  has been given notice of the  date,  time  and  place  of  the
             hearing, and


         (b)  there is no good reason for such absence."

16.  His Lordship noted that amongst the grounds of challenge was that  even
    if the Judge's decision not to adjourn seemed right at the time but  in
    circumstances  where  postdecision  evidence  demonstrated   that   the
    Appellant should not be  held  accountable  for  his  failure  for  his
    absence, that the court should grant the Appellant relief in  the  form
    of an order for a fresh hearing.  In that regard his Lordship  went  on
    to consider that with the benefit of  the  additional  information  now
    available, the court should now intervene "to in  effect  override  the
    Judge's decision and send this matter back for reconsideration".

17.  It was held  that  had  the  Immigration  Judge  who  had  refused  the
    adjournment in that case, been aware of the true circumstances relating
    to the Appellant's non-attendance that:

         "25. ...It seems to me at least possible and indeed  probable  that
             the Judge would have granted  an  adjournment.   Certainly  he
             would have been in possession of information which he did  not
             have, and relevant information, and in those  circumstances  I
             find it impossible to say that this Appellant did  not  suffer
             and was not the victim  of  unfairness  as  a  result  of  the
             intervention of AR on 16 May in the way that I have described.




         26.  I reach  that  conclusion  with  some  hesitation,  because  I
             recognise the force of Mr Sheldon's third submission that  in
             this court we  should  be  slow  to  interfere  with  what  he
             describes as case management  decisions  of  the  Tribunal.  I
             endorse that submission... but so far as the present  case  is
             concerned, if one accepts, as I for my part do, that on 16 May
             this Appellant was told not to  go  to  the  Tribunal  on  the
             following day, and if one accepts that  as  a  result  he  was
             unable to explain to the Judge  why  his  case  had  not  been
             prepared  for  proper  deployment  in  accordance   with   the
             directions originally given by the Tribunal itself then, as it
             seems to me, it is impossible to escape the conclusion that he
             has suffered an injustice and the only way in which this court
             can put it  right  is  to  order  that  the  decision  of  the
             Immigration Judge be set aside, that is to  say,  his  final
             determination, so that the way is clear for the matter  to  be
             dealt with by the Tribunal  on  a  future  occasion.  I  would
             accordingly so order."

The Present Case

18.  With that guidance in mind, I turn to the facts  of  the  present  case
    and not  least  the  track  of  the  appeal  hearings  concerning  this
    Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.

19.  In that regard, the first hearing on 8  July  2013  was  adjourned  for
    lack of court time.  That was of course not the fault of the  Appellant
    who was both  present  and  ready  to  give  evidence  in  his  appeal.
    However, by 3:00pm, (the case not having yet been  reached)  he  became
    unwell having not been given his medication.

20.  Despite the fact that it was known to the Tribunal that  the  Appellant
    was detained and that the previous hearing had not proceeded  for  lack
    of time, I find it extraordinary that when his case was  re-listed  for
    18 September 2013, it again appeared on the afternoon hearing list  and
    in consequence did not start until 2:00pm, where, because two witnesses
    who had attended to give evidence on the Appellant's behalf  had  other
    commitments, it was decided that their evidence should be heard  first.



21.  In the event, and by the time their  evidence  was  concluded,  it  was
    found to be too late to proceed to hear the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    the hearing was adjourned part heard.  Again this was  a  hearing  that
    the Appellant attended ready to give evidence on his behalf and in  the
    event, was adjourned through no fault of his own.

22.  The third hearing took place some  two  months  later  on  27  November
    2013.  The Appellant was again in  attendance  but  upon  arrival  felt
    unwell and indeed before the Tribunal panel suffered an  epileptic  fit
    such that he had to be taken away in an ambulance.  The fact that  such
    a hearing had to be adjourned in consequence cannot be blamed upon  the
    Appellant in those circumstances.

23.  It follows that by the time of the fourth hearing before the  panel  on
    11  December  2013  they  were  aware,  and/or  should  have   reminded
    themselves,  that  the  Appellant  had  attended  all  three   previous
    hearings, each of which had been adjourned for reasons  that  were  not
    the Appellant's fault.  However, at the outset of  the  hearing  on  11
    December 2013 the panel were given to understand that the Appellant had
    not attended the hearing because it was said he felt unwell.   In  that
    regard and at paragraph 11 of their determination, the  panel  reminded
    themselves that they had first heard evidence in the  appeal  from  the
    Appellant's witnesses on 18 September 2013 and  that  the  hearing  was
    adjourned due to lack of time and that at the  resumed  hearing  on  27
    November 2013 it was necessary to adjourn the hearing before  receiving
    further evidence "because the Appellant had  an  epileptic  fit".   The
    panel continued:

         "The case was set for resumption on 11 December 2013  but  we  were
         advised that the Appellant who was in detention, refused to  attend
         the hearing.  There was no documentary evidence  from  any  medical
         person to state that the Appellant was unfit to attend the  hearing
         and give evidence.   Ms  Fisher  stated  that  she  had  heard  the
         Appellant was not well and for that reason had refused  to  attend.
         She said that credibility was an issue in this case  and  therefore
         it was important for  the  Appellant  to  give  evidence.   In  the
         circumstances she applied for an adjournment.  She said that if  an
         adjournment was granted the instructing solicitors  would  seek  an
         addendum to the report of Dr Sahota dated  10  September  2013,  to
         ascertain whether the Appellant would be fit to  give  evidence  in
         Court.  Ms Afzal pointed out there was  no  evidence  to  show  the
         Appellant's current inability to attend the hearing due to illness.
          As to a further addendum to Dr Sahota's report,  she  pointed  out
         that there was no timeframe regarding the provision of this report.
           We  concluded  there  was  nothing  to  support  the  Appellant's
         assertion he was not fit to attend the hearing and  accordingly  we
         decided to proceed with the hearing under Rule 19(1) of the  Asylum
         and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (as amended)."

24.  The First-tier Tribunal thus proceeded to hear and  conclude  the  case
    in the Appellant's absence.

25.  On 18 December 2013 the First-tier Tribunal received an email to  which
    was attached medical evidence which confirmed that on 11 December 2013,
    the day of the hearing, the Appellant had attended the  prison  medical
    centre and had suffered several seizures during the course of that day.



26.  I note that the panel's determination was subsequently  promulgated  on
    20 December 2013 in relation to  which  no  mention  is  made  of  this
    further evidence.  In fairness to the Tribunal however  it  might  have
    been the case that the email was not brought to the  attention  of  the
    First-tier Judge who prepared the determination in  time.   I  observed
    however that the panel at  the  hearing  did  see  an  email  from  the
    Appellant's doctor, Dr Sahota concerning the Appellant's  deteriorating
    condition/health in consequence of which he had made clear  that  there
    would be a need for him to  write  a  further  report.   This  did  not
    persuade the panel to adjourn.

Assessment

27.  I have concluded that in common with the finding of their Lordships  in
    RJ (above) the refusal of the panel to refuse the Appellant's Counsel's
    adjournment request at the hearing on  11  December  2013  did  in  the
    event, result in the Appellant suffering an  injustice.   I  share  the
    view expressed by Ms Fisher who authored the grounds of challenge, that
    on that occasion, justice was not seen to be done.

28.  In reaching that conclusion (and quite apart from the  guidance  in  SH
    (above) whose guidance I have borne in mind in reaching this  decision)
    I am further reinforced in that conclusion by  the  findings  of  their
    Lordships in RJ (above) where in common with the facts in that case,  a
    few days after the last hearing, medical evidence was produced from the
    prison authorities that clearly and satisfactorily explained the reason
    why the Appellant was unable to attend that hearing due to  his  having
    suffered several epileptic seizures during the course of the  day  that
    required his attendance at the medical wing for treatment.  I would, in
    the circumstances of the present  appeal,  therefore  concur  with  the
    reasoning of their Lordships in RJ that it is therefore "impossible  to
    escape the conclusion that (the Appellant) has suffered  an  injustice"
    and that the only way which this Tribunal can put it right  is  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel "so that the way is
    clear" for the matter  to  be  dealt  with  afresh  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on a future occasion.

29.  Quite apart from  that  further  post-hearing  evidence,  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal panel at the hearing, included the  fact
    that the three previous hearings had all been adjourned in  consequence
    of matters that were  not  the  Appellant's  fault.   Further,  he  had
    attended all three  previous  hearings.   On  two  of  those  occasions
    underlying reasons for the adjournments were lack of time and  that  in
    turn was due to the fact that the appeal hearings had been listed in an
    afternoon list.  There had thus been an administrative failure to  take
    into account the fact that the  Appellant  was  detained  and  in  poor
    health, and that he had attended all previous hearings in circumstances
    where in consequence his case had not been reached.

30.  There is nothing within the reasoning of  the  panel  in  refusing  the
    adjournment request in December that demonstrates that these  important
    matters were taken into account by them in concluding that the  hearing
    should proceed in the Appellant's absence.

31.  The panel's decision to thus refuse the adjournment  request  was  thus
    unfair and it further prevented the Appellant from the  opportunity  to
    establish by way of contrary evidence that the  case  against  him  was
    wrong.  In that regard I am also concerned to have noted that the panel
    in their  determination  and  in  reaching  their  adverse  credibility
    findings, held against the Appellant the fact that he did not attend to
    give evidence on his own behalf in circumstances in which the panel  in
    my view wrongly considered was without a reasonable excuse.

32.  I am of course aware that there were other grounds  of  challenge  upon
    which permission to appeal was granted.  In that regard I have reminded
    myself that in EK (Colombia) [2006] EWCA Civ 926, it was  held  that  a
    Judge would not have to determine each point in order to decide if  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal was right.  That guidance  was
    given in  terms  of  the  reconsideration  process  applicable  to  the
    previous jurisdiction of the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal but  still
    has relevance today.  Their Lordships held that it was not necessary at
    the first stage of a reconsideration to go through each of the  grounds
    of appeal and decide whether the error of law asserted  could  be  made
    out.  It was enough if one of the grounds disclosed legal  error.   The
    "second" stage of the reconsideration process might then encompass  all
    of the issues raised in the original appeal.

33.  Having informed the parties of my decision and mindful of  Mr  Melvin's
    express concern as to the ability of the Appellant to attend any future
    listed hearing, Ms Fisher most helpfully informed me as follows:

         "I assure the court that if in the light of  the  medical  evidence
         and prior to the new hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
         situation is such where responsibly it  cannot  be  said  that  the
         Appellant  will  be  able  to  give  oral  evidence,  that   urgent
         instructions will be taken from him  with  a  view  to  immediately
         advising the Tribunal and the Respondent that in such circumstances
         the Appellant's remitted appeal should proceed without him."

34.  Given my finding that there had been  procedural  unfairness  amounting
    to an error of law  such  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside, the parties agreed  with  me  that  there
    were highly compelling factors, falling within paragraph 7.2(b) of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement that the decision should  not  be
    re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  It was  clearly  in  the  interests  of
    justice that the appeal of the Appellant be heard afresh in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

35.  Indeed, in consequence of my findings, it follows that there  has  been
    no satisfactory hearing of the substance of the  appeal  at  all.   The
    scheme of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  does  not
    assign the function of primary fact-finding to the Upper Tribunal.   In
    such circumstances Section 12(2) of the TCE 2007 requires us  to  remit
    the case to the First-tier or re-make it ourselves.   For  the  reasons
    that I have given above, I have concluded that the decision  should  be
    remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge or panel other than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Onoufriou and  Mrs  Jordan  (Non-Legal  Member).   I  am
    advised that for this purpose the present earliest  hearing  date  that
    can be obtained is 5 August 2014 at Taylor House.  I am further advised
    that for this purpose oral evidence shall be given by the Appellant and
    two witnesses.  There will be no need for an interpreter.   There  will
    be a need for a time estimate of three hours.

36.  I cannot ignore the possibility in view of the history of  this  appeal
    and the Appellant's medical condition, that as before (and  indeed  due
    to his medical condition he was unable to attend the hearing before me,
    although of course oral evidence was not  required  from  him  on  this
    occasion in any event) he may be unable to attend the remitted hearing.

37.  It follows that at the remitted hearing, the  First-tier  Tribunal  may
    need in such circumstances to decide whether the hearing should proceed
    in his absence under Rule 19(2)(d) of the  2005  Procedure  Rules,  for
    which purpose they will have to consider the circumstances as  at  that
    date.

38.  I have also been given to  understand  that  although  at  present  the
    earliest hearing date that the Taylor House Hearing Centre can  provide
    for this purpose is 5 August 2013.   It  may  be  possible,  given  the
    urgency of the matter and the fact that the Appellant has  remained  in
    immigration detention since July 2012, that the question of the hearing
    date might be  further  considered  by  the  Principal  Resident  Upper
    Tribunal Judge at Taylor House with a view to  considering  whether  it
    might be possible  to  obtain  an  earlier  date  than  that  presently
    arranged.

39.  However, I do consider that it is in the circumstances  most  important
    that the remitted  appeal  be  heard  as  a  matter  of  priority.   In
    accordance  with  Section  12(3)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007, I direct that the hearing of the remitted  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal must be heard first on the list, on  the
    basis it was, to  say  the  least,  highly  unfortunate  that  previous
    hearings of this detained  potential  deportee  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were so arranged that this case was not  heard  first  on  two
    occasions.

Decision

40.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that  their  decision  should
    be set aside with none of their findings preserved.  I  remit  the  re-
    making of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  to  be
    heard before a First-tier Tribunal Judge/panel  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Onoufriou and Mrs Jordan (Non-Legal Member).





Signed                                  Date 20 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
