
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01554/2013
                                                               Pa/00076/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     FL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Plowright instructed by Perera & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellant who claims asylum and to protect
    the anonymity of his children.  This  order  prohibits  the  disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the appellant.  Any disclosure and breach of this order may amount to a
    contempt of court.  This order shall remain in force unless revoked  or
    varied by a Tribunal or court.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the DRC who was born  on  9  April  1984.
    The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  in  October  1996  with  his
    family.  He was then aged 12 years old.  His father claimed  asylum  in
    1999 (the appellant  says  it  was  in  1995)  but  that  was  refused.
    However, the appellant and his family were granted exceptional leave to
    remain until 17 November 2003.  The appellant  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain on 7 January 2004.

 3. Between 16 April 2004 and 1 June 2012 the appellant  was  convicted  of
    fourteen  offences  on  six  occasions,  including  possession  of   an
    offensive weapon, driving a  motor  vehicle  with  excess  alcohol  and
    possession of a class A controlled drug.  On 1 June 2012, the appellant
    pleaded guilty to a number of  drugs  offences  at  the  Swindon  Crown
    Court.  He was convicted  of  the  offence  of  possessing  a  class  A
    controlled drug, namely heroin; being concerned  in  the  supply  of  a
    class A controlled drug, namely heroin,  and  being  concerned  in  the
    supply of a class A controlled drug, namely cocaine.   In  addition  he
    was convicted of the offence of failing to surrender to custody at  the
    appointed time.  He was sentenced to a term of 42 months' imprisonment.

 4. On 10 July 2012, the appellant was served with notice informing him  of
    his liability to be deported.  On 31 July 2013, he was  served  with  a
    deportation order pursuant to the automatic deportation  provisions  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.  The  appellant  unsuccessfully  appealed  the
    deportation decision to the First-tier Tribunal on  19  November  2013.
    He appealed to the Upper Tribunal and on 27  February  2014  the  Upper
    Tribunal  (Judge  Poole)  found  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   had
    materially erred in  law  and  remitted  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 5. By the time of his appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  appellant  had
    claimed  asylum.   On  30  April  2015,  the  respondent  refused   his
    protection claim.

 6. The appeal against that decision  (PA/00076/2015)  was  heard  together
    with the appellant's remitted  appeal  against  the  earlier  automatic
    deportation decision under the UK Borders Act 2007 by Judge L Murray on
    22 June 2015.

 7. By that time, the appellant had been convicted of a further offence  on
    6 February 2015 at  the  Swindon  Crown  Court,  namely  conspiracy  to
    falsely imprison for which he was sentenced to 28 months' imprisonment.

The Judge's Decision

 8. In  her  determination  promulgated  on  15  July  2015,  Judge  Murray
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of his  protection
    claim on asylum grounds.  That decision is not challenged  and  I  need
    say no more about it.

 9. In addition, Judge Murray dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the
    decision to make a deportation order under  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions of the 2007 Act on the basis that the appellant  had  failed
    to establish that his deportation would breach Art 8 read together with
    paras 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

10. Judge Murray reached three principal  conclusions.   First,  she  found
    that para 399(a) of the Rules did not apply  to  the  appellant  as  it
    would not be "unduly harsh" for the appellant's children to  remain  in
    the UK if he were deported to the DRC.  Secondly,  Judge  Murray  found
    that although the appellant was  "socially  and  culturally  integrated
    into the UK", he had not established that there were "very  significant
    obstacles to his integration" into the DRC if he  were  deported  under
    para 399A of the Rules.  Thirdly, Judge Murray went  on  to  find  that
    there were not "very compelling circumstances  over  and  beyond  those
    falling within para 399 and 399A" so as to outweigh the public interest
    such that the appellant's deportation would be disproportionate  and  a
    breach of Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision of Judge  Murray
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 13  August  2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Simpson) granted the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  on  two
    grounds.  First, the judge had arguably erred in law in finding that it
    would not be "unduly harsh" for the appellant's children to  remain  in
    the UK without him and secondly, the judge had arguably erred in law in
    concluding that there were not  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his
    integration into the DRC given that he had left the DRC when he  was  5
    years old and with which he no longer had any ties.

12. On 25 August 2015 (in relation to the DA/01554/2013 appeal) and  on  27
    August 2015 (in relation to the PA/00076/2015 appeal),  the  respondent
    filed Rule 24 notices.  In both, the respondent argued that the judge's
    findings in relation to para 399(a) and para 399A were open to her  and
    fully sustainable on the evidence.

13. Thus, the appeals came before me.

The Hearing

14. Mr Plowright, who  represented  the  appellant,  relied  upon  the  two
    grounds of appeal upon which permission had been granted.  I begin with
    the challenge to the judge's decision in respect of para 399(a) of  the
    Rules.

15. So far as relevant, that provides as follows:

         "399.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British citizen; or

                  ...

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported; ..."

16. Para 399(a) is potentially engaged in this appeal because the appellant
    falls within para 398(b) of the  Rules  having  been  convicted  of  an
    offence for which he has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    "less than four years but at least twelve months".

17. By way of background, it  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  four
    children in the UK as a result of his marriage to  a  British  citizen.
    Those children are themselves British citizens and were aged 11,  8,  4
    and under 1 year old at the relevant time.

18. It was not disputed before the judge that the appellant had a  "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" with those children.

19. Further, it was accepted that it would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  those
    children to live in the DRC if the appellant were deported.

20. The crucial issue presented to Judge Murray in respect of  para  399(a)
    was whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the children to live in  the
    UK if the appellant were deported to the DRC.   The  judge  dealt  with
    this issue at paras 27-29 as follows:

         "27. It has been conceded by the Respondent that the Appellant  has
             a genuine and subsisting relationship with three of  his  four
             children (the fourth  was  not  considered)  who  are  British
             Citizens.  It has also been conceded that it would  be  unduly
             harsh for the children to live in the DRC.   The  question  is
             therefore whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
             remain in the UK without the Appellant.

         28.  It is clear that in assessing whether it would be unduly harsh
             I must take into account the best interests of the children as
             a primary consideration.  It is not in dispute that until  his
             conviction on 16 September 2011 for possession of  a  class  A
             drug for which he was  sentenced  to  3  years  and  6  months
             imprisonment, he lived with his family which comprised of  his
             wife, Monique, his son Jemiha 8, his daughter Sinai who 4, and
             his son Isaac who was one.  He was released from prison on  31
             December 2013  on  immigration  detention.   However,  he  was
             convicted  of  a  further  offence  on  6  February  2015  and
             sentenced to 28 months imprisonment.  The Appellant states  in
             his witness statement  at  paragraph  31  that  he  is  deeply
             concerned that his children will be left without their  father
             as they grow up.

         29.  I accept having heard from the Appellant and  his  mother  and
             having seen the greetings cards in the Appellant's bundle that
             the Appellant has a good relationship with  his  children  and
             that save for the periods in prison he has lived with them  as
             a family.  His wife did not attend the hearing and it is clear
             from the Appellant's witness statement that  the  relationship
             is no longer subsisting, although there are no current divorce
             proceedings.  His wife also did not  provide  a  statement  in
             relation to the effect of his deportation on the children.   I
             note that she provided a statement in February 2014 before the
             relationship broke down.  According to his  witness  statement
             he  has  commenced  another  relationship.   On  the   current
             evidence therefore  when  the  Appellant  is  released  it  is
             unlikely that he would live with his children.  Whilst  it  is
             undoubted in children's best interests generally  to  grow  up
             with both parents it is  currently  unclear  what  access  the
             Appellant would have.  There is no evidence before me that his
             children have come to any harm as a result  of  his  offending
             behaviour.  There is no suggestion that social  services  have
             been involved with the children or that  they  are  not  being
             well looked after by their mother.  I conclude that it  is  in
             their best interests to remain with their mother.  I  conclude
             on the evidence before me that that whilst it will be hard for
             the children to grow up without the presence of  their  father
             it has not been demonstrated that it would be unduly harsh".

21. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Plowright initially submitted  that  the
    judge had misunderstood in para 29 the position between  the  appellant
    and his children when she said that  it  was  "currently  unclear  what
    access the appellant would have".  Mr Plowright submitted that  it  was
    obvious that the appellant would obtain access  to  his  children  when
    released from prison.  However, when I enquired whether  the  appellant
    had begun family proceedings or had obtained contact with his children,
    Mr Plowright frankly accepted that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant had applied for contact or what contact he could obtain.   In
    the light of that, the judge's statement that it was "currently unclear
    what access the appellant would have" was entirely consistent with  the
    evidence before her and is wholly unobjectionable.

22. Mr Plowright further submitted that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  it
    would be "hard" for the children to grow up without  their  father  but
    would not be  "unduly  harsh"  was  outside  the  range  of  reasonable
    conclusions that the judge could reach in the light  of  the  appellant
    being deported and, effectively, the children being denied contact with
    their father for an extended period  of  time  whilst  the  deportation
    order was in force.  As is stated in the grounds, Mr  Plowright  relied
    on the fact that if deported it was unlikely that  the  children  would
    see their father for at least ten  years  which,  in  relation  to  the
    oldest two children, would mean no contact until they were adults.

23. Mr Plowright drew my attention to the  recent  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC).
     There, the Upper Tribunal decided that the phrase  "unduly  harsh"  in
    para 399 of the Rules did not import a balancing exercise requiring the
    public  interest  to  be  weighed  against  the  circumstances  of  the
    individual.   The  focus  was  solely  upon  the  evaluation   of   the
    consequences and impact upon the individual concerned.  Further, the UT
    concluded, as is summarised in paras 2 and 3 of the head note:

         "2.  Whether the consequences of deportation will be 'unduly harsh'
             for  an  individual   involves   more   than   'uncomfortable,
             inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome or merely  difficult  and
             challenging' circumstances and  imposes  a  considerably  more
             elevated or higher threshold.

         3.   The consequences for an individual will be 'harsh' if they are
             'severe' or 'bleak' and they will be 'unduly' so if  they  are
             'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into account  all
             the circumstances of the individual".

24. At the hearing I drew the representatives' attention to the  subsequent
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in KMO  (section  117  -  unduly  harsh)
    Nigeria [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC) where the  Tribunal  disagreed  with  the
    decision  in  MAB  to  the  extent  that  in  determining  whether  the
    consequence was "unduly harsh" it was necessary to  take  into  account
    the seriousness of the offence committed and  the  public  interest  in
    deporting the foreign criminal.  The head note summarises the  position
    accepted by the UT in that case as follows:

         "... the word  'unduly'  in  the  phrase  'unduly  harsh'  requires
         consideration of whether, in the light of the  seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the foreign criminal and the public  interest
         considerations that come  into  play,  the  impact  on  the  child,
         children or partner of  the  foreign  criminal  being  deported  is
         inordinately or excessively harsh".

25. As the latter part of that quotation makes clear, in KMO, the  Tribunal
    agreed with the earlier decision in MAB to  this  extent,  namely  that
    "the impact on the individual must be  'inordinately'  or  'excessively
    harsh'" but having regard to all the circumstances including the public
    interest.

26. As Mr Plowright's oral submission made plain, he pitched the  challenge
    to Judge Murray's conclusion that the separation of the appellant  from
    his children would not  be  "unduly  harsh"  on  the  basis  that  that
    conclusion was  irrational  or  perverse:  as  he  put  it,  it  was  a
    conclusion not within the range of reasonable conclusions open  to  the
    judge.  Whether one adopts the approach in MAB (and ignores the  public
    interest) or in KMO (and takes into account the public interest), Judge
    Murray's conclusion was not irrational or perverse.

27. The judge found that the appellant's relationship  with  his  wife  had
    broken down.  Indeed, his own evidence was that he had  started  a  new
    relationship.  His wife did not attend the hearing.   That  finding  is
    not  challenged  even  though  Mr  Plowright  informed  me   that   the
    appellant's wife was present in the Tribunal building on the day of the
    UT hearing.  It was, in my judgment, properly open to the judge to find
    that the appellant when released,  on  the  evidence  before  her,  was
    unlikely to live with his children.  Further, the  children  had  since
    the appellant's imprisonment in September 2011 lived with their  mother
    and there was no basis for concluding that it was other than  in  their
    best interests to live with their mother.  There was no evidence before
    Judge Murray that particularised any harm or serious detriment  to  the
    children of being separated from their father  other  than  that  which
    naturally  one  would  expect  to  occur  if  a  parent  in  a  genuine
    relationship with his  children  was  no  longer  living  in  the  same
    country, i.e. the inevitable effect of  deportation  (see  Lee  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 348 per Sedley LJ at [27]).  There was, as I have said,
    no evidence before the  judge  that  the  appellant  had  begun  family
    proceedings or whether he would obtain contact as a result.

28. It is important to read Judge Murray's determination as  a  whole.   In
    para 44, when considering Art 8 outside the Rules, she commented that:

         "... in  his  asylum  interview  [the  appellant]  stated  that  he
         maintained contact with his children via phone calls  and  letters.
         He could maintain this level of contact from the DRC".

29. Whilst, of course, this form of communication, including Skype or other
    internet face-to-face contact, is not a complete substitute for  actual
    physical  contact,  it  nevertheless  allows  for  some  continued  and
    meaningful interaction  between  an  individual  abroad  (such  as  the
    appellant) and his children.

30. In short, the only basis upon which the appellant could claim that  his
    separation would be "unduly harsh" upon his children was that the  mere
    fact that he would be in the DRC and had been a parent with  a  genuine
    relationship would impact upon his children.  On that evidence, it  was
    not irrational or perverse for Judge Murray to conclude that  it  would
    not be "inordinately" or "excessively" harsh  on  the  children  to  be
    separated  from  their  father  for  the  significant  period  of   his
    deportation order.  That finding was not irrational  even  disregarding
    the appellant offending.

31. If, however, the appellant's offending is taken into  account  then  he
    has, as Judge Murray noted, and I shall return to shortly, a history of
    offending including most recently two very serious sets of  convictions
    for drug  offences  and  false  imprisonment  leading  respectively  to
    imprisonment for 42 months and 28 months.  Judge Murray found,  on  the
    evidence, which is not challenged in the grounds or in  Mr  Plowright's
    submissions, that the appellant presents a high risk to the public  and
    there was no objectively verifiable evidence that he had rehabilitated.
    Weighing that in  the  balance,  applying  the  approach  in  KMO,  the
    appellant's challenge based upon irrationality or perversity is on even
    more untenable ground and cannot, in my judgment, be sustained.

32. For these reasons I reject ground 1  challenging  the  judge's  finding
    that para 399(a) of the Rule did not apply to the appellant.

33. I now  turn  to  the  appellant's  second  ground  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Plowright, namely that the judge was wrong  in  law  to  conclude  that
    there  were  not  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the   appellant's
    integration into the DRC and that, therefore, para 399A did not  apply.
    Para 399A is in the following terms:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

             (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
             of his life; and

             (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated into the UK; and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported".

34. Judge Murray dealt with the application of para 399A at paras 31-33  of
    her determination concluding that the crucial issue was in relation  to
    para 399A(c).  She said this:

         "31. I have therefore considered whether (a) the Appellant the  has
             been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life; (b)  he
             is socially and culturally integrated in the UK;  and  whether
             there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is  deported.   It
             is accepted that the Appellant has been lawfully  resident  in
             the UK for most of his life.  He came to the UK at the age  of
             12 years in 1996.  He has spent 18 years in this  country  out
             of which three years and 4 months have been serving  custodial
             sentences  and  do  not  therefore  count  towards  continuous
             residence.   The  Respondent  disputes  the  fact   that   the
             Appellant is socially and culturally resident in the UK due to
             his persistent offending.

         32.  The Appellant was at school and college here,  has  worked  in
             the UK and established a family and has his mother  here.   He
             is undoubtedly a persistent offender having been convicted  on
             6 occasions for 15 offences of increasing seriousness  between
             April 2004 and February 2015.  However, in view of his  length
             of residence, his family ties, the fact  he  came  here  as  a
             youth  and  was  educated  here  I  consider   that   he   has
             demonstrated that he is socially and culturally integrated.

         33.  I have  therefore  considered  whether  there  would  be  very
             significant obstacles to his integration into  the  Democratic
             Republic of Congo.  It is argued on his behalf that he has not
             lived there since the age of 5 years, a period  of  26  years,
             and has no family and does not speak the language.  I have not
             been provided with any background evidence in relation to  the
             DRC or specific difficulties that the Appellant would face  if
             returned there.  According to the  evidence  provided  by  the
             Appellant, before he arrived in the UK at the  age  of  12  he
             lived in France.  He says he now speaks  no  French.   I  find
             that this is unlikely in view of the fact he must have  spoken
             it up to the point of his arrival in the  UK.   I  have  found
             that he has not made out any risk on return to the  DRC.   The
             Appellant has gained qualifications in this country and is fit
             and healthy.  I accept that his immediate family is in the  UK
             and he has not returned to the Congo since arriving in the UK.
              However, I find it unlikely that he has  no  extended  family
             there and that  his  family  would  have  no  contacts  there.
             Whilst it may well be that there are significant obstacles  to
             his return in the form of finding accommodation and  work,  it
             has not been demonstrated  that  there  are  very  significant
             obstacles".

35. Mr Plowright, relying upon the grounds, submitted that  the  judge  had
    failed to give any  or  any  adequate  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had left the DRC in 1989 when  he  was  5  years  old.   Even
    though he had come to the UK in 1996 when he was 12, he had not been in
    the DRC since he was 5.  Mr Plowright submitted that the appellant  was
    now 31 years old and he had not lived in the  DRC  for  26  years.   He
    submitted that the judge had failed to give any reason  for  concluding
    that it was not established that he had no extended family in the DRC.

36. First, it is clear that the judge was well aware that the appellant had
    not lived in the DRC since he was 5 years old - a period  of  26  years
    before.  She makes explicit reference to it in para 33.  It is  simply,
    therefore, unarguable that she failed to have regard to those  matters.
    Further, it was open to the judge to find that the appellant's  family,
    despite having been in the UK since 1996, had "extended family" in  the
    DRC and that she had not established that the family had "no  contacts"
    there.  These were, in my view, reasonable inferences  that  the  judge
    was entitled to draw from the evidence.

37. In any event, the judge was required to determine whether the appellant
    had established that there were "very significant obstacles".   It  was
    not sufficient that there  were  "significant  obstacles".   The  judge
    accepted that there might well be "significant obstacles" but not "very
    significant obstacles".  Obviously, the addition of the word "very"  to
    the phrase heightens the level of obstacle  that  the  individual  must
    establish in order to succeed under para 399A.   The  judge  took  into
    account the appellant's education and background including, as she  was
    entitled to find, that it was unlikely that he no longer  spoke  French
    which was his first language.

38. Again, the challenge to the judge's factual findings has to be made  at
    the altitude of irrationality or  perversity.   Having  considered  the
    appellant's circumstances, and having made entirely sustainable factual
    findings, even though the appellant had not been to the  DRC  since  he
    was 5 years old (26 years ago), it was open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that there had not been established very significant obstacles  to  his
    integration although there might be significant obstacles.

39. For these reasons, I reject ground 2 and the appellant's  challenge  to
    the judge's decision that the appellant could not  succeed  under  para
    399A of the Rules.

40. In addition to considering paras 399(a) and 399A, Judge Murray went  on
    to consider the application of Art 8  outside  the  Rules  and  whether
    there were "very compelling circumstances over and above those  falling
    within paragraph 399 and 399A" to establish that the public interest in
    the appellant's deportation was outweighed.  The judge dealt with  this
    issue at paras 34-44 in what can properly be described as an  exemplary
    way.  She considered the public interest represented by the appellant's
    offending including that he remained a high risk to the public and  the
    evidence did not establish that he had rehabilitated.  The judge  fully
    took into account the appellant's personal circumstances and the effect
    upon him and his children of deportation.   Her  conclusion  that  "his
    criminality is serious, persistent and there is no persuasive  evidence
    of rehabilitation" and that "the risk to the public remained high" (see
    para 44) is not challenged in these proceedings.  Given  that  finding,
    in the light of the appellant's circumstances, the judge  dismissal  of
    the appellant's appeal under Art  8  of  the  ECHR  is  wholly  legally
    sustainable.  There simply were not "very compelling circumstances"  to
    outweigh the public interest represented  by  the  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's offending, its persistence and his future risk.  As I  have
    said, nothing in paras 34-44 of the judge's determination is challenged
    in  these  proceedings.   I  refer  to  it  simply  to  emphasise   the
    comprehensive nature of  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    circumstances in dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

Decision

41. The judge's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    rejection of his protection claim is  not  challenged.   That  decision
    stands.

42. For the reasons given above,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  apply  the
    automatic deportation provisions of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  on  the
    basis that the appellant had  not  established  his  deportation  would
    breach Art 8 did not involve the making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision, therefore, stands.

43. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
