
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01560/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 May 2014                                |On 20 June 2014              |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                     TEF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Draycott, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Alice Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 1 June 1982,
    has appealed against a decision of a panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 4  February  2014  following  a  hearing  at  Nottingham
    Magistrates' Court on 9 January 2014 in which the panel  had  dismissed
    his appeal against a decision of the respondent dated 23 July  2013  to
    make a deportation order against him by virtue of Section 32(5) of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007.  The decision followed the appellant's  conviction
    on 12 June 2012 at Nottingham Crown Court for affray and possessing  an
    offensive weapon for which he was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.
     Although his original application for  permission  to  appeal  against
    this decision was refused by the First-tier Tribunal, on a  renewal  of
    that application  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley granted permission to appeal on 24 March 2013.

 2. I heard submissions on behalf of  the  appellant  on  7  May  2014  but
    because there was insufficient time available  to  hear  the  reply  on
    behalf of the respondent it was necessary to adjourn the hearing  until
    today when I heard further submissions from  Mr  Draycott  representing
    the appellant and also heard submissions on behalf  of  the  respondent
    which were made  by  Ms  Holmes.   Before  today's  hearing  Ms  Holmes
    prepared a skeleton argument on behalf of the  respondent  setting  out
    the respondent's case in some detail.  I have found this a very helpful
    document.

 3. I recorded all the submissions which were made to me  contemporaneously
    and these submissions are contained within the Record  of  Proceedings.
    Accordingly I will not set out below everything which was  said  to  me
    during the course of the hearings but shall refer only to such  of  the
    submissions as are necessary for the purposes of this determination.  I
    have, however, had regard to everything which was said to me during the
    hearings as well as to all the documents  contained  within  the  court
    file and all the authorities put before me whether or not the  same  is
    specifically set out and referred to below.

 4. The appellant's immigration history is  set  out  within  the  decision
    letter of 23 July 2013.   According  to  the  respondent's  record  the
    appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 9 July 1998 as a  visitor
    and was granted leave until 9 January 1999.  It would seem that he left
    the country before his leave expired on that occasion.  He then entered
    this country again on 29 March 2000 as a visitor  having  been  granted
    leave to remain until 29 September 2000.  On 29 August 2000 he  applied
    for leave to remain as a student which was  granted  until  31  October
    2001.

 5. Again, it appears that the appellant left  the  country  in  accordance
    with the terms of his visa.  On 8  September  2002  the  appellant  re-
    entered the United Kingdom and submitted a human rights claim.  He  was
    granted leave to enter until the  following  day  and  given  temporary
    release but he then absconded.  On 14 March 2003  he  was  served  with
    overstayer papers.

 6. On 22 April 2005 his human rights claim was refused.   The  appellant's
    appeal against this refusal was dismissed  on  30  June  2005  and  his
    appeal rights were exhausted on 15 July 2005.  Thereafter, on  25  July
    2005 he was administratively removed to Jamaica.  On 24  May  2006  the
    appellant's application for a spouse visa to come to the United Kingdom
    was refused (it is said that this was principally on the grounds of the
    sponsor  having  insufficient  income  and  the  appellant  had  little
    prospect of finding employment in  the  UK).   The  appellant  appealed
    against this decision but his appeal was dismissed on 25  January  2007
    and his appeal rights exhausted on 23 March 2007.

 7. On 5 October 2007 he applied again for  a  visa  as  the  spouse  of  a
    settled person and on 17 January 2008 he was granted a  two  year  visa
    valid until 17 January 2010.   The  respondent  said  in  the  decision
    letter that the exact date of his re-entry into the United Kingdom  was
    not known but he claimed to have arrived in February 2008.

 8. The spouse who was named in both visa applications was a Ms NF but  the
    respondent is not aware of the date or location of the wedding.  On  14
    January 2010 the appellant applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of a settled person, again Ms F.   His
    application was refused on 14  July  2010  in  light  of  his  criminal
    history of which details will be set out  below.   His  appeal  against
    this decision was allowed on 23  September  2010  following  a  hearing
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Plimmer and  the  respondent  did  not
    seek permission to appeal against this decision.   In  light  of  Judge
    Plimmer's decision on  25  November  2010  the  appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 25 November 2013.

 9. The appellant has committed a number of criminal offences which will be
    referred to below and most seriously on  12  June  2012  at  Nottingham
    Crown Court following a trial he was convicted of affray and possessing
    an offensive weapon in a public place for which he was sentenced to  30
    months' imprisonment.  The appellant did not appeal against either  the
    conviction or the sentence.  I set out the comments of  the  sentencing
    judge which are contained in the decision letter  and  which  are  also
    referred to within the panel's  determination.   The  sentencing  judge
    commented as follows:

         "Chasing that man from the betting shop, in the way that  you  did,
         in the way that we saw on CCTV, I have absolutely no doubt that you
         were, had you been able to get hold of him at that stage, intent on
         causing him injury.  You were swiping that knife down at  his  back
         as he fled and I do not see that there is any other  interpretation
         that can be put on that.  That makes this about as bad  a  case  of
         possession of an offensive weapon as it is possible  [to]  conceive
         of, without a greater charge being laid".

10. The judge continued as follows:

         "I reinforce the observation that this is about as bad a  case  for
         possession  of  an  offensive  weapon  and  affray,  once  all  the
         children, and the ladies and the other members of  the  public  who
         were out shopping when this altercation swept in the  direction  of
         Medina Stores.  It is about as bad as it can get".

11. The respondent gave consideration as to whether or not the  deportation
    of this appellant would be proportionate such as not to be in breach of
    the appellant's Article 8 rights and considered  that  it  would.   The
    respondent considered first whether  or  not  the  appellant  would  be
    entitled to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of paragraphs 398 and  399(a)  of  the  Rules  or  paragraph
    399(b) and then considered whether or not there were other  exceptional
    circumstances such that it could still be said to  be  disproportionate
    to deport this appellant but  considered  that  there  were  not.   The
    respondent considered the appellant's family circumstances, that he was
    almost 33 years of age and in good health and that his convictions  are
    ones which would  be  regarded  as  serious  and  which  compelled  the
    respondent to give significant weight to  the  question  of  protecting
    society against crime and the risk of harm to others.

12. Having considered all the issues the respondent made  the  decision  to
    deport this appellant.  As already noted above the  appellant  appealed
    against this decision and his appeal was heard before a  panel  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal consisting of Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Coates and Mr G H Getlevog, non-legal  member,  sitting  at  Nottingham
    Magistrates' Court on 9 January 2014.   In  a  determination  which  is
    dated 27 January 2014 and  promulgated  some  eight  days  later  on  4
    February 2014 the panel dismissed the appellant's appeal.  It  directed
    that the identity of the children referred in the determination  should
    not be revealed and that no report of these proceedings should directly
    or indirectly  identify  the  children.   This  tribunal  considers  it
    appropriate to continue that direction.

13. The appellant now appeals against this decision.  As already  noted  he
    has permission to do so which was granted by Judge Chalkley on 24 March
    2013.  The very long grounds set out a  number  of  arguments  some  of
    which regrettably have  little  or  now  merit.   For  example,  it  is
    suggested at paragraph 5 of the renewed grounds as follows:

         "It is also emphasised that when the  present  FTT's  determination
         was only typed up by the FTJ on 27 January 2014 and promulgated  by
         the respondent on 4 February 2014, it was in breach of  Rule  23(3)
         of the AIT (Procedure) Rules 2005 which requires  the  Tribunal  to
         serve a copy of its determination upon the  respondent  within  ten
         days of the hearing, when in the present proceedings  it  was  more
         than a week and a half late.  As a result of this  delay,  pursuant
         to [11] of (Ghorbani) v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2004] EWHC 510
         (Admin)  in  determining  this  application,  it  is  an   accepted
         principle that the UT should 'more readily draw the inference where
         there is no reference to certain factors that they have simply been
         forgotten by a (First-tier Judge) who has prepared  his  case  some
         time after the hearing, than it would  where  the  preparation  was
         hard on the heels of the hearing itself.  Plainly, the  longer  the
         delay the more credible is the contention  of  the  applicant  that
         certain evidence may have been forgotten, particularly if it is not
         mentioned by the (First-tier Judge)'".

14. This is in my judgment simply unarguable and although  strictly  within
    the Rules the determination was promulgated late it cannot seriously be
    contended that for this reason the inference should be  made  that  any
    omission within a determination must be or should be inferred as  being
    due to the fact that the panel forgot the factors which  were  relevant
    in this appeal.

15. I do not propose for the purposes of this determination to  go  through
    every single argument advanced on behalf of the appellant in  the  same
    detail as they were put both in the grounds and also in  oral  argument
    before me.  To her credit Ms Holmes has in her very  detailed  skeleton
    argument set out the arguments advanced and rebutted them where she can
    in detail.  As she put it in oral argument before me, in  view  of  the
    fact that Mr Draycott on behalf of the appellant had argued his case so
    fully she felt it was incumbent on her as  the  representative  of  the
    Secretary of State to argue the Secretary of State's decision fully  as
    well.  She did that and  I  have  taken  into  account  fully  all  the
    arguments which have been advanced on behalf of both  parties  in  this
    appeal.

16. I shall summarise the basis upon which the panel dismissed the  appeal.
    First of all, the panel set out the provisions contained within Section
    32 onwards of  the  UK  Borders  Act  at  paragraphs  4  to  8  of  its
    determination as follows:

         "4.  Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 provides for the  making
             of an  automatic  deportation  order  in  respect  of  foreign
             criminals.  A foreign criminal is defined as a person  who  is
             not a British citizen, who  is  convicted  in  the  UK  of  an
             offence and has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment for
             at least twelve months.

         5.   Sub-Section 32(4) of the 2007 Act states that the  deportation
             of a  foreign  criminal  is  conducive  to  the  public  good.
             Therefore there is no balancing of factors.  It  is  conducive
             to the public good  to  deport  a  person  who  is  a  foreign
             criminal.  Thus the requirement of  Section  35(5)(a)  of  the
             1971 Immigration Act that removal be conducive to  the  public
             good  is  satisfied.   Sub-Section  32(5)  states   that   the
             respondent must make a  deportation  order  in  respect  of  a
             foreign criminal, subject to the exceptions mentioned below.

         6.   The Immigration Rules now  reflect  the  statutory  provisions
             introduced  by  the  2007  Act.   Paragraph  364(A)   of   the
             Immigration Rules provides that paragraph 364 does  not  apply
             where the Secretary of State must make a deportation order  in
             respect of a foreign criminal under Section 32(5)  of  the  UK
             Borders Act 2007.

         7.   Section 33 of the 2007 Act contains the exceptions whereby the
             provisions of Section 32(4) and (5) do not  apply.   Exception
             (1) is where deportation would breach either  the  appellant's
             protected  ECHR  rights  or  his  rights  under  the   Refugee
             Convention.   In  this  appeal  the  appellant   claims   that
             deportation would breach his protected rights under Article  8
             of the ECHR.

         8.   The burden of proof is on the appellant to demonstrate that he
             comes within one of the exceptions  set  out  in  Section  33.
             Where human rights issues fall  to  be  considered  the  lower
             standard of proof applies, that is to say a reasonable  degree
             of likelihood."




17. The panel might have added that in this case by virtue of Section 32(2)
    the appellant, who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 30
    months (that is of at least twelve months), is defined  as  a  "foreign
    criminal" and accordingly and by virtue of Section 32(4) it is the will
    of parliament that "the deportation of a foreign criminal is  conducive
    to the public good".

18. Also, the panel was  not  correct  to  state  at  paragraph  8  of  its
    determination as it did that "where human  rights  issues  fall  to  be
    considered the lower standard of  proof  applies,  that  is  to  say  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood" because where it is  argued  that  the
    removal of an applicant would be in breach of his Article 8 rights this
    needs to be established on the balance of probabilities.   However,  if
    indeed the panel considered the appellant's position on the basis  that
    he had to establish his case to an even lower standard of proof that in
    fact he did that cannot be an error of law  capable  of  rendering  its
    decision less safe.  If anything, it would make the appellant's task in
    this appeal harder.

19. The panel set out the appellant's immigration history but then set  out
    at paragraphs 12 and 13 the appellant's criminal history which  clearly
    is a relevant factor in this appeal.  I set out paragraphs 12 and 13 of
    the panel's determination as follows:

         "12. The appellant's record of convictions shows that he  has  been
             sentenced on seven separate occasions for a total  of  fifteen
             offences.  He has also been cautioned on two  occasions.   His
             PNC record shows that he first offended within  two  years  of
             his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  May  2002  he  was
             convicted  of  handling   stolen   goods   and   conditionally
             discharged.  The following year he was  convicted  of  driving
             whilst  disqualified,  possessing  a   controlled   drug   and
             resisting  or  obstructing  a  police  constable.   All  these
             offences were in breach of the conditional  discharge.   Later
             the same year he received a  further  conviction  for  driving
             whilst disqualified and possessing  a  controlled  drug  which
             resulted in a four month sentence  of  imprisonment.   He  was
             also convicted of failing to surrender to  custody.   In  2009
             the appellant was committed to the Crown  Court  for  sentence
             for possessing a knife or pointed article in a  public  place.
             This resulted in a community order for twelve  months'  unpaid
             work.  He was convicted again of  theft  in  2010  and  common
             assault in 2011.  Finally, on 12 June 2012 he was sentenced to
             30 months for affray and possessing an  offensive  weapon,  as
             already mentioned.

         13.  We think it is important to look closely  at  the  appellant's
             record  and  in  our  opinion  it  demonstrates  a  persistent
             offender who shows little regard for orders of the court.   He
             has breached a conditional discharge, a  community  order,  an
             order of disqualification and a requirement  to  surrender  to
             bail.  All of this demonstrates scant regard for the  rule  of
             law.  Even  while  serving  his  recent  prison  sentence  the
             appellant has continued to re-offend.  He admitted during  his
             oral evidence that he has received two adjudications,  one  of
             which was for smoking cannabis in his cell."

20. The panel also took into account  the  previous  appeals  made  by  the
    appellant before the Tribunals and  applied  Devaseelan  principles  to
    these.  In particular it took into account the determination  of  Judge
    Plimmer dated 23 September 2010 as referred to above  who  had  allowed
    the appellant's appeal against  the  refusal  of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as Ms F's spouse.  At paragraphs 17 and 18 the  panel  continued
    as follows:

         "17. By the date of Judge Plimmer's determination the appellant had
             already been convicted of a number of offences and had  served
             a four month custodial sentence.  He then spent a long  period
             in immigration detention before being removed  to  Jamaica  in
             2005.   Notwithstanding  that  removal,  the   appellant   was
             ultimately granted a visa to enter the  United  Kingdom  as  a
             spouse in January 2008 and since that date he had resided with
             his wife and  three  children.   Judge  Plimmer  records  that
             during the time the family lived together  they  had  survived
             mainly on the wages earned by Mrs F who was employed as a care
             assistant.  Judge Plimmer took  the  view  that  whilst  there
             remained a real risk of offending, the risk of harm to  others
             was at the lower end of the spectrum.  The  judge  also  found
             that, on the available evidence, it was more likely  than  not
             that the appellant would re-offend, albeit that the nature  of
             the re-offending was unlikely to be at the serious end of  the
             spectrum.

         18.  Judge Plimmer was correct in  predicting  that  the  appellant
             would re-offend but she was wrong in considering that such re-
             offending was unlikely  to  be  at  the  serious  end  of  the
             spectrum.  The appellant's most recent conviction,  which  has
             resulted  in  these  proceedings,  demonstrates  offences   of
             violence which are far more serious than  anything  for  which
             the appellant had previously been convicted.  In this context,
             we refer to the sentencing  judge's  remarks"  [which  I  have
             already set out above].

21. The panel then referred to the family life which the appellant  claimed
    to have in this country.  It recorded the appellant's claim that he and
    Mrs F had three children together, born respectively in 2006, 2007  and
    2009.  It was also recorded  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  a
    stepchild as well.  The appellant and Mrs F are now  divorced  and  the
    appellant has claimed to have another partner, Ms T, with whom he has a
    daughter who was born while the appellant was serving his  most  recent
    prison sentence.  The panel also recorded that during  the  hearing  it
    emerged that the appellant had another child in Jamaica about whom  the
    panel had been given virtually no information.   The  panel  considered
    the appellant's claim that despite the breakdown  of  the  relationship
    with  his  wife  he  still  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with five British children (that is the  three  biological
    children by his wife, his stepchild by his wife and his child  with  Ms
    T) and that  his  removal  to  Jamaica  would  not  be  in  their  best
    interests.  The panel considered the appellant's claim that  until  his
    recent conviction he remained closely involved in the upbringing of his
    wife's four children with whom he and the  mother  lived  in  a  family
    unit.  It was argued before the panel that the respondent had failed to
    consider the effects of his proposed deportation upon this  very  young
    child despite evidence of paternity having  been  provided  before  the
    decision was made.  It was also claimed that the respondent had  failed
    fully to consider the effect of the deportation  upon  the  older  four
    children such that a proper proportionality test had not been  applied.
    It was the appellant's case which the  panel  considered  that  as  the
    panel recorded at paragraph 20:

         "The public interest in deportation does not outweigh the right  to
         a family life he shares with his five children and partner nor  the
         best interests of his other children."

22. Having considered all the evidence the panel was unimpressed  with  the
    appellant's case.  As already noted at  paragraph  28  it  is  recorded
    that:

         "The appellant confirmed that he  had  received  two  adjudications
         while serving his present sentence.   He  said  that  one  was  for
         possessing a prohibited item and the other was for smoking cannabis
         in his cell".

    It was also noted that the appellant had agreed that he had never lived
    with his current partner and when asked why his ex-wife  had  moved  to
    Liverpool this was because she had moved in order to get away from him.

23.  At  paragraph  30  the  panel  records  that  an  application  for  an
    adjournment had been made by  Mr  Draycott  (who  had  represented  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal and before this  Tribunal)  on
    the basis that the appellant had made  an  application  in  the  family
    court for contact with his  older  children  and  in  this  context  Mr
    Draycott  relied  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal   in   RS
    (immigration and family court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218.  At
    paragraph 31 the panel sets out the head note to this  decision  and  I
    shall refer to this below.

24. The panel refused the application for  an  adjournment  and  considered
    that on the basis of the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in RS  it
    was not necessary to await the decision of the family court within that
    application.  Having heard evidence subsequently  the  panel  formed  a
    decision also (which is set out at paragraph 54) that "the  appellant's
    recent application for contact was made with a view  to  preventing  or
    impeding his removal from the United Kingdom".

25. The panel noted that it had not had the benefit of  an  OASys  or  pre-
    sentence report, but considered at paragraph 50 that  "to  some  extent
    the appellant's criminal record speaks for itself".   The  panel  noted
    further that:

         "The number and nature of his convictions, the repeated breaches of
         orders of the court and his  insistence  on  having  a  jury  trial
         despite overwhelming CCTV evidence causes us to conclude that he is
         someone who poses  a  significant  risk  of  harm  to  the  general
         public".

26. The panel also had regard to the recent guidance given by the Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  Having considered all  the
    evidence in the case the Tribunal  then  took  into  account  the  best
    interests of the children at paragraphs 53 and 54, as follows:

         "53. We are required to take into account  the  best  interests  of
             children likely to be affected by the decision under appeal as
             a primary consideration.   The  appellant  has  not  seen  his
             children by [Ms F]  for  approximately  eighteen  months.   As
             already mentioned, [Ms F] has given a fairly strong indication
             of her  attitude  towards  contact  by  moving  to  Liverpool,
             severing  all  connection  with  the  appellant's  family  and
             withholding her telephone number and address.  So far  as  the
             appellant's relationship with [Ms T] is concerned, this  is  a
             relationship which appears to have started while the appellant
             was still married to [Ms F].  It seems obvious to us that  [Ms
             T's] pregnancy by the appellant has had a significant  bearing
             on his ex-wife's behaviour and attitude.   [Ms  T's]  daughter
             was born while the appellant was in prison.  They  have  never
             lived in the same household and it is highly unlikely that the
             child even knows the appellant.

         54.  We find that the appellant's recent  application  for  contact
             was made with a view to preventing  or  impeding  his  removal
             from the United Kingdom.  We do not  believe  his  explanation
             that  he  did  not  know  how  to  go  about  making  such  an
             application.  We are satisfied  from  the  available  evidence
             that it would be in the best interests  of  all  the  children
             concerned for them to remain in the United Kingdom in the care
             of their respective mothers.  We appreciate that [Ms T]  is  a
             British citizen who has lived in this country  all  her  life.
             However, she is of Jamaican background  and  her  parents  are
             Jamaican.  She has visited Jamaica in  the  past  and  we  are
             satisfied that there would  not  be  insurmountable  obstacles
             which would prevent her relocating to Jamaica  with  her  very
             young daughter  in  order  to  pursue  family  life  with  the
             appellant in that country if she were so inclined".

27. Then, the panel having considered all the factors,  the  conclusion  is
    set out in paragraph 55 that

         "any interference there may be in the appellant's Article 8 rights,
         or those of his children  and  partner,  is  proportionate  to  the
         legitimate aim of protecting the public and prevention of crime"

    such that his deportation is not in breach of his Article 8 rights.

28. As I have already stated,  the  grounds  are  very  long,  and  I  will
    summarise them as follows.  The main  argument  which  is  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant is that he should have been permitted to remain
    until such time as  his  outstanding  contact  application  before  the
    county court had been determined (although as  stated  in  the  grounds
    "albeit it has been generally adjourned so as to await his release from
    immigration detention") on the grounds that it would be a violation  of
    his Article 8 rights for him to be removed before his  application  has
    been determined (reliance here was placed upon the  European  Court  of
    Human Rights' decision in Ciliz v. The Netherlands  [2000]  2  FLR  469
    ECtHR)  and  also  that  he  should  be  granted  a  short  period   of
    discretionary leave and permission to work  for  the  duration  of  the
    contact proceedings (reliance here is placed on the  decision  of  this
    Tribunal in RS and also of Mohan [2013] 1 WLR 922 (a  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal)).  In the alternative it is  said  that  the  Tribunal
    should have adjourned the appellant's appeal to await the result of his
    outstanding contact application before reaching a decision.

29. It is said also that  the  Tribunal  was  in  error  by  assessing  the
    strength of the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  with  regard  to  his
    children on the basis that he had not seen his children by his wife for
    about eighteen months because it had been expressly stated at paragraph
    5 of the respondent's decision dated 23 July 2013 that  in  respect  of
    the four children by his wife "it is accepted that you are in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with ... a child who is under  the  age  of
    18".  It is said that the  panel  should  not  have  gone  behind  this
    concession without giving the appellant an opportunity of addressing it
    on this point.

30. It is also argued  that  the  panel  had  erred  by  finding  that  the
    outstanding contact  application  had  been  instituted  to  "delay  or
    frustrate removal and not to promote the child's welfare" because  this
    was contrary to the earlier determination  made  by  Judge  Plimmer  at
    paragraph 30 that:

         "I have no doubt having  heard  and  seen  Mrs  F  and  placed  her
         evidence in context and against the other supporting evidence  that
         the interests of the four children in this case would be  adversely
         affected by  their  father's  removal  to  Jamaica  [and  that  she
         accepts] the evidence before me that since 2008  he  has  played  a
         full and active part in their daily lives".

31. It is then said that the panel either misdirected itself or  failed  to
    act rationally when  finding  at  paragraph  54  that  the  appellant's
    current partner Ms T and her daughter could relocate to Jamaica if they
    wished and in particular that as both she and her daughter are  British
    citizens, such a finding  was  contrary  to  the  respondent's  general
    concession at paragraphs  94  to  95  of  Sanade  and  others  (British
    children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 that to expect children
    in  such  cases  to  relocate  outside  the  European  Union  would  be
    "unreasonable".

32. It is then argued that the panel also materially erred by holding  that
    the youngest child could relocate to Jamaica  by  failing  to  consider
    whether such a step would be in her best interests for the purposes  of
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

33. Also it is said that the panel had erred by not considering  with  whom
    the child would live in addition to the arrangements for looking  after
    the child in another country.

34. Then it is said that the panel erred by referring to evidence that  the
    appellant's stepfather had a large house in Jamaica  while  failing  to
    refer to  that  witness's  oral  evidence  which  did  not  reject  the
    appellant's claim to have no-one in Jamaica and so on.

35. As noted, these contentions  were  dealt  with  by  Ms  Holmes  in  her
    skeleton argument comprehensively but  it  is  not  necessary  for  the
    purposes of this determination to go into huge detail  with  regard  to
    these claims. In oral argument before me essentially  the  crux  of  Mr
    Draycott's submissions was that there was a significant  error  of  law
    which can be seen from a proper analysis of what  is  set  out  in  the
    panel's determination at paragraphs 53  and  54  because  there  is  no
    actual finding as to whether or not it would be in the  best  interests
    of the children to have some form of  contact  with  their  father.   I
    shall deal with this below.  In this regard Mr Draycott also asked  the
    Tribunal to have in mind the guidance given by the Court of  Appeal  in
    IA (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 323 where at paragraph 15 Keene LJ set out
    that in public law cases, an error of law will be regarded as  material
    unless the decision-maker must have reached the same conclusion without
    the error.  Keene LJ affirmed as correct what was said by Moses  LJ  at
    paragraph 18 of Detamu v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2006] EWCA Civ 604 which was that: "The question for us is whether the
    error of law was material in the sense that the Adjudicator  must  have
    reached the same conclusion (emphasis added)".

36. It is right that I also record Mr Draycott's submission that the  Court
    of Appeal's decision in SS (Nigeria), in his words  "unduly  skews  the
    application of the Boultif criteria".  Mr Draycott wished me to  record
    this submission because although he appreciated that  the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal is binding  on  me  if  he  wished  to  advance  an
    argument on appeal he did not want it to be said that this argument had
    not been raised before the Upper Tribunal.  I shall  refer  briefly  to
    this argument below.



Discussion

37. I now deal with those arguments advanced on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    which have been pursued before me by Mr Draycott.  I shall first of all
    deal with the argument which he makes regarding the lack of  a  finding
    by the panel as to whether or not it is in the best  interests  of  the
    appellant's children to continue to have  some  form  of  contact  with
    their father.  I agree with Mr Draycott that on  a  close  analysis  of
    what  is  set  out  within  paragraphs  53  and  54  of   the   panel's
    determination the panel does not in fact make a finding as  to  whether
    or not it is in the best interests of the children to continue  to  see
    their father.  It would certainly have been open to  the  panel  in  my
    judgment to find on the basis of the other findings which it made  that
    it would not be in the interests of these children to continue to  have
    contact with a man who would be likely to be in and out of  prison  all
    his life if he remained in this country, whose influence would be  poor
    and whose continued sporadic presence in his children's lives would  be
    unlikely to be a positive factor.  However, it is fair to say that that
    would not have been the only conclusion open to the panel and  had  the
    panel addressed this point specifically it could have  taken  the  view
    that albeit marginally it  would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to have some contact with their father and that  that  contact
    would be greatly reduced if their father were deported.  However, and I
    return to this below, I have in mind as Mr Draycott urged I should, the
    observations of the Court of Appeal in IA  (Somalia)  which  are  well-
    understood by this Tribunal that an error would only be material  if  a
    Tribunal could have come to another conclusion or could come to another
    conclusion if that error had not been made.  In my judgment the highest
    that the appellant's case can be put is that it would have been open to
    this Tribunal to find in the circumstances of this case that there  was
    at least a possibility that had there been a  proper  consideration  of
    the best interests of the children and  in  particular  a  report  from
    CAFCAS, the recommendation might  have  been  made  that  it  would  be
    preferable for the children to continue to see their father.   However,
    I reject the suggestion  that  has  been  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant by Mr Draycott that it was  possible  that  a  CAFCAS  report
    would suggest that the failure to have contact with their father  would
    in the circumstances of this case have  drastic  consequences  for  the
    children.  In my judgment anybody considering this case in light of the
    evidence could not possibly come to this conclusion and the  suggestion
    that such a conclusion might be arrived at would fly  in  the  face  of
    common sense.

38. I also have regard to the guidance given by the Upper  Tribunal  in  RS
    when considering whether or not the Tribunal should either  adjourn  an
    appeal to await the outcome of any contact  proceedings  or  allow  the
    appeal such that limited leave could be given to an applicant to remain
    until the conclusion of those proceedings.  The head note  provides  as
    follows:

         "1.  Where a claimant appeals  against  a  decision  to  deport  or
             remove and there are outstanding family  proceedings  relating
             to a child of the claimant, the judge of the  Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber should first consider:

             i)   Is the outcome of  the  contemplated  family  proceedings
                  likely to be material to the immigration decision?

             ii)  Are there compelling public interest reasons  to  exclude
                  the claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective  of  the
                  outcome of the family proceedings or the best interest  of
                  the child?

             iii) In the  case  of  contact  proceedings  initiated  by  an
                  appellant in an immigration appeal, is there any reason to
                  believe that the family proceedings have  been  instituted
                  to delay or frustrate  removal  and  not  to  promote  the
                  child's welfare?

         2.   In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally want
             to consider: the degree of the claimant's previous interest in
             and contact with the child, the timing of contact  proceedings
             and the commitment with which they have been progressed,  when
             a decision is likely to be reached, what  materials  (if  any)
             are already available or can be  made  available  to  identify
             pointers to where the child's welfare lies?

         3. Having considered these matters the  judge  will  then  have  to
             decide:

             i)   Does the claimant have at least an  Article  8  right  to
                  remain until the conclusion of the family proceedings?

             ii)  If so, should the appeal be allowed to a  limited  extent
                  and a discretionary leave be directed as per the  decision
                  in MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133?

             iii) Alternatively, is it more appropriate for a short  period
                  of an  adjournment  to  be  granted  to  enable  the  core
                  decision to be made in the family proceedings?

             iv)  Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a
                  view on the present state  of  knowledge  of  whether  the
                  appellant would be allowed to remain in the event that the
                  outcome of the family proceedings is  the  maintenance  of
                  family contact between him or her  and  a  child  resident
                  here?"

39. The panel clearly considered the questions set out within this decision
    and although as I have found it did not specifically make a finding  as
    to whether or not it would be in the best interests of the children  to
    have some contact with their father it is quite clear from the findings
    which the panel made that the  panel's  view  was  that  at  best  such
    contact would be of only marginal value to  the  children.   The  panel
    noted (and notwithstanding Mr Draycott's argument it is in my  judgment
    clear) that Ms T's daughter who had been born while the  appellant  was
    in prison was unlikely to even know the appellant.  That is  of  course
    not the end of the matter  because  it  might  still  be  in  her  best
    interests to have some contact with her father but that finding is  not
    on its face wrong.  The panel also noted that  the  appellant  had  not
    seen his children by Ms F for approximately eighteen  months  and  that
    she did not wish to have any further connection with the appellant  and
    had been withholding her telephone number and address.

40. The panel also found, and in my judgment it was entitled  so  to  find,
    and again notwithstanding Mr Draycott's argument that a prisoner was in
    a "catch 22" situation in such circumstances, that the real motive  for
    the contact application was not actually  to  obtain  contact  but  was
    rather to prevent or impede his removal from the  United  Kingdom.   In
    this regard it is notable  that  since  the  contact  proceedings  were
    adjourned (I accept that this  was  not  the  fault  of  the  appellant
    because he had apparently been produced at court in circumstances where
    the one room which might have been available for him to  be  placed  in
    was being used by another prisoner) he has taken no steps whatsoever to
    pursue this application.  The proceedings have been adjourned generally
    and whether or not legal aid was available for  him  it  was  incumbent
    upon him to take steps to progress the application which he has  failed
    to do.

41. A Tribunal would also have to consider the other two questions  posited
    by the Upper Tribunal in RS which are first whether the outcome of  the
    contemplated family proceedings  was  likely  to  be  material  to  the
    decision and secondly whether there  were  compelling  public  interest
    reasons to exclude the claimant from this country irrespective  of  the
    outcome of the family proceedings with regard to the best interests  of
    the children.  In my judgment the outcome of  the  contemplated  family
    proceedings would not be likely to be material  to  this  decision  and
    there are extremely compelling public interest reasons to exclude  this
    appellant from the United Kingdom irrespective of the  outcome  of  the
    family proceedings or the best interests of the children.   I  have  in
    mind my finding as to the most a Tribunal could find with regard to the
    best interests of the children.  As I  have  already  noted,  the  most
    beneficial finding that could be made with regard to this appellant  is
    that it would be marginally in the best interests of  the  children  to
    see their father; on the facts of this case it cannot possibly be  said
    that it is overwhelmingly in the best interests of the children to  see
    their father and it is also clear given the findings made  with  regard
    to the risk that this appellant poses that there  are  very  compelling
    reasons indeed why he should be excluded from this country.

42. It is suggested by Mr Draycott that the burden is on the respondent  to
    establish that the appellant poses a risk and that in the absence of an
    OASys or pre-sentence report the most that a  Tribunal  could  properly
    say is that it cannot make a finding one way or the other as to whether
    he poses a risk.  Mr Draycott even went so far as to suggest that as he
    had not yet been released from prison it could not yet be said  whether
    or not the prison sentence had been effective so as to deter  him  from
    committing further offences.  In my judgment, this is another  argument
    which flies in the face of the evidence  and  common  sense.   What  is
    undeniable in this case is that the appellant's  history  of  offending
    has escalated even beyond what Judge Plimmer regarded  as  likely  when
    she made her determination in 2010.  The panel was entirely entitled to
    take the view as it did that the appellant had shown that he had simply
    no desire to obey any rules at all.  As the panel said at paragraph  13
    of its determination, the appellant's record "demonstrates a persistent
    offender who shows little regard for orders of the court".   The  panel
    noted and any Tribunal would in my judgment be bound to take account of
    the fact that "he has breached a  conditional  discharge,  a  community
    order, an order of disqualification and a requirement to  surrender  to
    bail" and that "all of this demonstrates scant regard for the  rule  of
    law".  It is not even arguable in my judgment that the  Tribunal  would
    have to wait until he is released from prison to see whether prison has
    had any effect that it was intended to have because  as  the  appellant
    admitted in evidence before the panel he  had  continued  to  re-offend
    even while in prison by smoking cannabis in  his  cell  and  having  an
    article he was not allowed under prison rules to have.

43. In these circumstances I regard the suggestion that the Tribunal  could
    not do any more than say that it was unknown whether or not he would be
    a risk as  untenable.   The  panel  was  entitled  to  find  that  this
    appellant poses a  significant  risk.   In  my  judgment  any  Tribunal
    considering the position of this appellant would be bound  to  come  to
    the same view.

44. Before dealing with the effect of the decisions of the Court of  Appeal
    in SS (Nigeria) and MF (Nigeria) I shall deal briefly with the argument
    advanced on behalf of the appellant that the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Nigeria) did not deal properly with the decision of the European Court
    in Boultif.  Ms Holmes dealt comprehensively with this argument in  the
    context of this appeal in the course of her oral submissions and  I  am
    grateful to her.  She referred me to paragraph 48 of Boultif where  the
    guiding principles are set out as follows:

         "The court has only a limited number of  decided  cases  where  the
         main obstacle to expulsion was that it  would  entail  difficulties
         for the spouses to stay together and, in  particular,  for  one  of
         them and/or the children to live in the other's country of  origin.
         It is therefore called upon  to  establish  guiding  principles  in
         order to examine whether the measure in question was necessary in a
         democratic society.

         In assessing the relevant criteria in such a case, the  court  will
         consider the nature and seriousness of the offence committed by the
         applicant; the duration of the applicant's stay in the country from
         which he is going to be expelled; the time which has elapsed  since
         the commission of the offence and the  applicant's  conduct  during
         that period; the nationalities of the  various  persons  concerned;
         the applicant's  family  situation,  such  as  the  length  of  the
         marriage; other factors revealing whether the couple  lead  a  real
         and genuine family life; whether the spouse knew about the  offence
         at the time when he or she entered into a family relationship;  and
         whether there are children in the marriage and, if so,  their  age.
         Not least, the court will also  consider  the  seriousness  of  the
         difficulties which the spouse would be likely to encounter  in  the
         applicant's country of origin, although the mere fact that a person
         might face certain difficulties in accompanying her or  his  spouse
         cannot in itself preclude expulsion".

45. As Ms Holmes demonstrated, whatever criticism Mr Draycott might seek to
    make of the decision of the Court of Appeal in  SS  (Nigeria)  in  this
    particular appeal the panel dealt with every aspect which was  said  in
    Boultif itself to be relevant, and it did everything it was called upon
    to do within the guidelines set out in Boultif.  So, for  example,  the
    panel clearly considered the nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence
    committed by this appellant.  At paragraph 48 it was as the panel noted
    a violent offence and was the most serious in a line of offences but it
    is also made clear at paragraphs 12 and 13 of  the  determination  that
    the duration of the appellant's stay in this  country  was  also  taken
    into consideration by the panel, as was  the  time  which  had  elapsed
    since the commission of the offence and the applicant's conduct  during
    that period.  The time was minimal because the decision to deport  this
    applicant  had  been  made  shortly  after  the  conviction   and   the
    applicant's conduct was as the panel noted that he had  not  even  kept
    out of trouble while  in  prison.   The  panel  acknowledged  that  the
    nationality of the appellant was Jamaican but the  nationality  of  the
    other persons concerned was British.  The panel also had full regard to
    the appellant's family situation and such evidence was material  as  to
    the family life which he actually led.  I would  note  in  this  regard
    that although he did  not  make  any  concessions  in  this  regard  Mr
    Draycott did not dispute that the panel had taken into account some  of
    those factors it would be required to take into account  (even  without
    such glosses as provided within the Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  SS
    (Nigeria) and in Boultif.

46. So in my judgment, even if there was open to the appellant an  argument
    which could properly be  raised  in  a  higher  court  than  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the decision in SS (Nigeria) does not properly take  into
    account the guidance given in Boultif (which I do not accept, but  this
    is not a matter for me), in my judgment, even if such an argument  were
    to succeed it would not avail him  on  the  particular  facts  of  this
    appeal.

47. I turn now to the guidance which has been given by the Court of  Appeal
    in the decisions in SS (Nigeria) [2014] 1  WLR  998  and  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  It is clear from the decision  in  SS  (Nigeria)
    that the Court of Appeal was concerned to  ensure  that  the  Tribunals
    understood that when dealing with the deportation of foreign  criminals
    under the 2007 Act they gave due weight to the fact that it was in  the
    public interest that such persons be  deported.   I  set  out  what  is
    stated by Laws LJ at paragraph 53 as follows:

         "The importance of the moral and political character of the  policy
         shows that the  two  drivers  of  the  decision-maker's  margin  of
         discretion - the policy's  nature  and  its  source  -  operate  in
         tandem.  An Act of Parliament is anyway to be specially  respected;
         but all the more so when it declares policy of this kind.  In  this
         case, the policy is general and overarching.  It  is  circumscribed
         only by five carefully drawn exceptions,  of  which  the  first  is
         violation of a person's Convention/Refugee Convention rights.  (The
         others concern  minors,  EU  cases,  extradition  cases  and  cases
         involving  persons  subject   to   orders   under   mental   health
         legislation).  Clearly, parliament in the  2007  Act  has  attached
         very great weight to the policy as a well-justified imperative  for
         the protection of the public and to  reflect  the  public's  proper
         condemnation of serious wrongdoers.  Sedley  LJ  was  with  respect
         right to state that '[in the case of a 'foreign criminal'] the  Act
         places in the proportionality scales a markedly greater weight than
         in other cases'".

48. At paragraph 55, Laws LJ then stated as follows:

         "...  Proportionality, the absence of an 'exceptionality' rule, and
         the meaning of 'a primary consideration'  [when  dealing  with  the
         interests of children who might be involved] are all, when properly
         understood, consonant with the force to be attached in cases of the
         present kind to the two drivers of the decision-maker's  margin  of
         discretion: the policy's source and the  policy's  nature,  and  in
         particular to the great weight which the 2007 Act attributes to the
         deportation of foreign criminals".

49. Then in MF (Nigeria) the Court of Appeal in the judgment of the  court,
    given by the Master of the Rolls, stated as follows, in  paragraph  43,
    when considering the circumstances in  which  an  Article  8  exception
    could be applied:

         "43. The word 'exceptional' is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule.  The general rule in the present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paras  399
             and 399A do not apply, very compelling reasons  [my  emphasis]
             will  be  required  to  outweigh  the   public   interest   in
             deportation.  These compelling reasons  are  the  'exceptional
             circumstances'".

50. Accordingly the position with regard to appeals of this type which  are
    founded upon an argument that deportation would  be  in  breach  of  an
    applicant's Article 8 rights can be summarised as follows.

51. Although an applicant cannot be deported if his  removal  would  be  in
    breach of his Article 8 rights, if his deportation  is  in  the  public
    interest, as it will always be if he has committed an offence for which
    he has been sentenced to at least one year in prison, it is only  where
    there are very compelling reasons that the decision to deport  will  be
    disproportionate.  So in order for this appellant to have any  prospect
    of succeeding a Tribunal must have material  before  it  such  that  it
    could properly be found that the reasons why this appellant should  not
    be deported are very compelling.  In my judgment, as I have  said,  the
    most that could be said on behalf of this appellant is that there could
    be a finding that it was  marginally  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's children to continue to have some contact with him but this
    could not be said to be a "very compelling" reason why he should not be
    deported.  This is even  more  so  when  one  considers  the  extremely
    serious nature of this appellant's offending.  Although because he  was
    only charged with possession of an offensive weapon he did not  receive
    a sentence larger than 30 months' imprisonment I must  have  regard  to
    just how  serious  this  offence  actually  was  in  the  view  of  the
    sentencing judge.  As the judge remarked he had "absolutely  no  doubt"
    that "had [the appellant] been able  to  get  hold  of  [the  potential
    victim] at that stage" he  was  "intent  on  causing  him  injury".   A
    Tribunal would have to have in mind the judge's  finding  that  he  was
    swiping the knife down at the potential victim's back as  he  fled  and
    that this was "about as bad a case of possession of an offensive weapon
    as it is possible [to] conceive of,  without  a  greater  charge  being
    laid".

52. When one considers this appellant's history of  offending  both  before
    the offence and even after, while he was still in prison,  the  finding
    of this panel that he posed a significant risk of harm  to  the  public
    was not only not irrational but was in  my  judgment  inevitable.   Any
    panel considering the evidence properly would have been bound  to  make
    the same finding.  In these circumstances it follows that  this  appeal
    could not possibly succeed.  The factors in favour  of  deporting  this
    appellant are in my judgment overwhelming while such limited factors as
    there may be against deporting him (which is  that  there  could  be  a
    finding that it is marginally in the best interests of the  appellant's
    children that they should continue to  have  some  contact  with  their
    father) are very far indeed from being "very compelling" as they  would
    be required to be.  In my judgment this decision is not finely balanced
    at all but on the facts of  this  case,  even  were  the  family  court
    ultimately to find (in the event that the appellant decided  to  pursue
    his application which he has not done to date) that the children  would
    be better off seeing their father than not his application could  still
    not possibly succeed.  It follows that this appeal  must  be  dismissed
    and I will so find.



Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  panel's  determination,  this
appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                 Date:  18 June 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

