

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01227/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 4 January 2016                        |               On 12 January 2016     |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                  MR A R N
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr K Smith, Legal Representative

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a  protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department.
   For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were  in  the
   First-Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
   Appellant in this particular appeal.

2. The Appellant is a national  of  Iran.   He  arrived  in  the  UK  on  14
   November 1978 with leave as a visitor which was subsequently extended  as
   a student.   He was  then  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  but
   following the breakdown of his marriage he was refused  indefinite  leave
   to remain.  He originally claimed asylum in 1984 but that was refused and
   his appeal rejected.  Following convictions for  drug  offences,  he  was
   made the subject of a notice of liability to deport  but  the  Respondent
   did not pursue that action at the time since, as a  result  of  the  drug
   convictions, the Appellant might face disproportionate punishment on  his
   return to Iran.   The  deportation  order  was  therefore  revoked.   The
   Appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in 1993.   He  continued
   to commit drugs offences and was the subject of  further  convictions  in
   1992 and 2003.   He was convicted in 2012 of having an  offensive  weapon
   and wounding with intent to commit grievous bodily  harm.   In  all,  the
   Appellant has  committed  23  offences  for  which  he  has  received  12
   convictions. As a result of this latest offence, he was made the  subject
   of automatic deportation action.  The  signed  deportation  order  and  a
   decision that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007  applies  to  him
   were served in June 2014.  It is that decision which is  the  subject  of
   this appeal.

3. The Appellant's appeal was originally allowed on Article  8  grounds  but
   dismissed on protection grounds in a decision promulgated on 17  November
   2014.  There was an appeal by the Respondent against that decision and  a
   cross-appeal by the Appellant in relation to his protection claim.  In  a
   decision dated 5 March 2015, the President of the  Upper  Tribunal  found
   that there was no error of law in  the  previous  decision  allowing  the
   appeal on Article 8 grounds with the consequence for my decision that the
   Appellant has already succeeded on those grounds and will presumably need
   to be granted some form of leave on that basis.  Removal is not therefore
   in prospect.  However, the President found that there was an error of law
   in the decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal on protection  grounds.
   The Appellant pursues his appeal in relation to the protection  claim  to
   determine whether he is entitled to status as a refugee.   The  President
   remitted  the  protection  claim  to  the  First-Tier   Tribunal.    That
   culminated in the decision under challenge which is  that  of  First-Tier
   Tribunal Judge Britton promulgated on 20 May 2015 ("the Decision").

4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  the  Decision  on  the  basis
   that the Judge misdirected himself in law in finding that  the  Appellant
   would be at risk on return to Iran.   The  Respondent  asserts  that  the
   Judge erred by failing to apply the relevant case law correctly,  failing
   to provide adequate reasons for the Decision including failure to  engage
   with or provide reasons for departing from the findings  of  the  earlier
   Tribunal which dismissed  the  asylum  claim  in  1987,  and  failing  to
   properly consider the evidence.
5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane in  a
   decision dated 4 August 2015 on the basis that the  Judge's  reasons  for
   accepting the Appellant's account as true and accurate and his consequent
   assessment of risk on return were arguably inadequate.   The matter comes
   before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Decision involved the making of an error of law.



Submissions

6. Mr Duffy relied on the grounds.  He directed  my  attention  to  [31]  to
   [36] of the Decision.  He submitted in particular that the case  law  did
   not show that the Appellant would be at risk  on  return  to  Iran  as  a
   result of his convictions.  Those were not convictions in Iran  to  which
   the case of SB (Risk on Return: Illegal Exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT  00053
   might be relevant.  That case talks of criminal convictions as the  basis
   of risk but that relates to convictions in  Iran  not  in  the  UK.   The
   Respondent would not identify the Appellant as a convicted criminal.   In
   response to a question from me concerning  the  impact  of  HJ  (Iran)  v
   Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]  1  AC  596  and  RT
   (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  UKSC  38,
   Mr Duffy submitted that even  if  the  Appellant  were  identified  as  a
   convicted criminal, that did not mean that he would be at  risk  on  that
   account.

7. Mr Smith relied on his Rule 24 response.  He submitted that there was  no
   error of law in the Decision.  The Judge made a clear  finding  that  the
   Appellant's criminal convictions some of which related to drugs and  were
   associated with alcohol abuse and  his  other  conduct  including  sexual
   relations outside marriage would be seen by the regime  as  amounting  to
   anti-Islamic conduct.  The Respondent's grounds did not engage with  what
   would happen to the Appellant on return.  He  would  be  returned  on  an
   emergency travel document because he had no exit stamp in his passport as
   he had lost his passport on which he travelled.  The headnote at (3)  and
   (4)(iii) of BA (Demonstrators in Britain: Risk on Return) Iran CG  [2011]
   UKUT 36 (IAC) makes clear that the authorities would  therefore  take  an
   interest in how the Appellant left Iran and on what visa.  The  Appellant
   left Iran when the Shah was still in power.  The  fact  that  he  has  no
   passport issued after the Revolution would also attract attention.  As  a
   result, he would be questioned.  Following the decision in RT  (Zimbabwe)
   he could not   reasonably be expected to lie about his convictions or his
   views of the current regime.  The authorities would thereby be  aware  of
   his convictions, the circumstances of those convictions and his views  of
   the regime.  Those factors would place him at risk.

8. In reply, Mr Duffy accepted that there were factors in  this  case  which
   might lead the authorities to interview the Appellant on return  to  Iran
   but he continued to submit that even if the  convictions  were  disclosed
   those would not lead  to  a  risk.   Even  if  the  convictions  and  the
   circumstances of those convictions were  seen  as  anti-Islamic  conduct,
   there would not be a risk on that account.

9. I reserved my decision in relation to whether there is an  error  of  law
   in the Decision and indicated that I would give my decision  and  reasons
   in writing which I now go on to do.  Both parties agreed that if  I  were
   to find an error of law, I could go on to re-make  the  Decision  on  the
   evidence before me without a further hearing as the facts  were  accepted
   and provided I did not consider that further oral evidence was  required.



Decision and reasons

10. In his decision dated 5 March 2015, the President set out the  basis  on
   which he found an error  of  law  in  the  previous  First-Tier  Tribunal
   decision as follows:-


       "[3] The first ground relates to the sustainability  of  the  Judge's
    assessment that the Appellant's asylum claim was lacking in credibility
    by virtue of its timing.  The burden of the Appellant's  case  is  that
    there is no tenable basis for this assessment  and,  further,  that  it
    disregards the case made by him in response  to  the  Form  ICD/0350/AD
    questionnaire accompanying the  "minded  to  deport/one  stop  warning"
    letter sent on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  together  with  the
    Appellant's letter which accompanied his  response  and  certain  other
    evidence generated at an earlier stage.  The exercise for this Tribunal
    is to juxtapose all of these sources with the determination of the FtT.
     Having performed this exercise, I conclude that this ground of  appeal
    is established.  There is, in my judgment, a failure on the part of the
    FtT to acknowledge these various strands of evidence and to assess them
    accordingly.   Had  the  FtT  performed  this  exercise,  I  cannot  be
    confident that its adverse  credibility  assessment  of  the  Appellant
    would nonetheless have been made.  Thus this error of law is  material.


            [4]  The second error of law which I have found,  based  on  the
    second of the permitted grounds of appeal, relates  to  the  manner  in
    which the  FtT  considered  the  various  risk  factors  on  which  the
    Appellant's case was advanced.  There were several  such  factors:  his
    own historic conduct; the asserted anti-government conduct  of  members
    of his family and events relating  to  them,  including  their  alleged
    execution; the Appellant's drugs offences  convictions  in  the  United
    Kingdom; his illegal departure from Iran; his enforced return from  the
    United Kingdom; his non-possession of a passport;  and  his  status  of
    Iranian Arab.  The first two of these factors  were  conflated  by  the
    FtT: see [55] of the determination.  The Judge failed to recognise that
    these were separate  considerations.   The  Judge  then  considered  in
    extenso the drugs offences factor.  No consideration was given  to  the
    factors of non-possession of  a  passport,  enforced  return  from  the
    United Kingdom to Iran and the Appellant's Iranian  Arab  status.   The
    Judge did consider the illegal departure factor.  The relevant passages
    in the determination are [56] - [58].
            [5]  In addition to the conflation and omissions noted above,  I
    consider it clear that the risk factors which the  Judge  did  identify
    were considered by him disjunctively.  This I consider to amount  to  a
    further, free standing error of law since, having regard to the Country
    Guidance decisions in this sphere, it was incumbent  on  the  Judge  to
    consider these factors cumulatively, in the round.   See  SB  (Risk  on
    Return: Illegal Exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053, BA (Demonstrators  in
    Britain: Risk on Return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and  SA  (Iranian
    Arabs - No General Risk) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 41 (IAC)"

11. Although the previous First-Tier decision is no longer  relevant  as  it
   is set aside so far as the protection claim is concerned, the President's
   observations concerning the error of law are important as a  backdrop  to
   the way in  which  the  Judge  approached  the  re-determination  of  the
   protection claim in the Decision.

12. I start by dealing with the written grounds which  were  not  elaborated
   upon at the hearing as I consider that those can be dealt  with  shortly.
   The Respondent says that the Judge failed to engage with the findings  of
   the previous Tribunal in relation to the earlier asylum  claim  in  1987.
   Quite apart from the fact that the Appellant  was  not  present  and  not
   represented at the earlier hearing, the basis  of  that  claim  was  very
   different to the one now made.  It concerned a claim that  the  Appellant
   would be forcibly conscripted into the army and that he would be executed
   as a deserter.  In any event, the findings are set out  at  [16]  of  the
   Decision and the Judge notes at [33] that as the Appellant's  failure  to
   complete his military service was a long time ago, that  factor  may  not
   now be significant.  Although the reasoning is short in relation  to  the
   alleged imprisonment and activities of the Appellant's cousins and  other
   family, the fact that the Appellant is an Iranian Arab and the  assertion
   that the authorities may be suspicious of the Appellant as a spy  due  to
   his length of absence, those factors are not  the  central  crux  of  the
   Judge's reasoning. Any deficiency in reasoning is not material.  Further,
   in any event, the Judge's findings on those aspects of the claim follow a
   lengthy recitation of the Appellant's evidence at [17]  to  [19]  of  the
   Decision which evidence does not appear to have been seriously challenged
   (see note of the Respondent's submissions at [20] of the Decision).

13. The Judge's findings on the protection claim are  set  out  at  [31]  to
   [36] of the Decision.  Since that section is quite short, I set it out in
   full:-


    "[30].....I have to consider  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and
    whether he would be at risk on return to Iran.
      [31]  The appellant has been in this country since 1978.  He  came  as
    a visitor.  He was granted leave  to  remain  as  a  student  until  30
    September 1979.  He had  further  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    marriage as set out above.  The appellant states that he has  not  seen
    his family over 37 years.  His father is still alive and he last  spoke
    to him in  2010  and  2011.   His  family  have  been  members  of  the
    Mujahedeen.  His brother died of a  heart  attack  6  or  7  years  ago
    following the revolution.  Some of his cousins  have  been  in  prison.
    The appellant received funds from the Shah's  government  to  study  in
    this country.  These funds were stopped when the Shah  was  overthrown.
    He never completed his military service.
      [32]  I find that  on  return  to  Iran  the  appellant  would  arrive
    without a valid passport.  He has been  away  from  Iran  for  some  37
    years.  The authorities would want to know why he has been away for  so
    long.  They would be suspicious that he may be  a  spy.   He  would  be
    interrogated and they would find out that  he  has  been  convicted  of
    serious drug offences.  The question is whether  the  appellant  is  at
    risk because of his convictions, especially his drug offences on return
    to Iran.  I am satisfied he would be at risk because it is not just one
    offence and he would be considered as a risk of reoffending.  Also  the
    last offence is an extremely serious violent crime.
      [33]  The appellant has not completed his military service.  That  was
    a long time ago and may not be a significant factor.
      [34]  What is more significant is the report that  has  been  produced
    by the appellant in his bundle (p71-118), the  executions  in  Iran  in
    relation to drug offences, even though the appellant's last  conviction
    was over 12 years ago, I find that would  still  put  him  at  risk  in
    relation to the regime.  He has been convicted  "of  the  most  serious
    crimes" in the United Kingdom.  He has been convicted of  a  number  of
    drug offences.  The appellant would be accused of anti-Islamic  conduct
    which would constitute a significant risk factor because  of  his  drug
    offences (SB (Risk on Return -  Illegal  Exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00053).
      [35]  The appellant has not got a passport to show that he  left  Iran
    legally, and therefore that would be another problem he would  have  to
    face to convince the authorities that he did not leave illegally.
      [36]  Other factors that would cumulatively put him  at  risk  include
    his family supporting the Mujahedeen and he being an Iranian Arab"
      [my emphasis]

14. The core of the Judge's findings therefore relates  to  the  grounds  on
   which I was addressed at the hearing.  I agree with Mr Duffy that if  the
   Judge's findings amounted to a reliance on the case of SB  on  the  basis
   that the Appellant's convictions would put him at risk on return on  that
   account alone, this would amount to an error of law.   However,  that  is
   not the basis of the Decision.  It is said in the  Respondent's  original
   grounds that the majority of the Judge's findings  are  to  be  found  at
   [32].  I disagree.  That sets out  the  basis  on  which  the  Judge  has
   allowed the case  namely  that  the  Appellant's  convictions  for  drugs
   offences are the  principal  basis  for  the  risk  on  return  but  that
   paragraph does not contain the reasoning for why they put  him  at  risk.
   The reasoning is at [34].  The Judge finds that the  background  evidence
   relating to drugs offences shows  that  the  convictions  would  put  the
   Appellant at risk even if his last conviction  on  that  account  was  12
   years ago.  The evidence shows that Iranian authorities  deal  with  such
   offences particularly harshly and that the death penalty is often imposed
   and enforced in such cases, often following unfair trials or  no  trials.
   It is clear that the reference to the case of SB is in the context of the
   Appellant's drugs offences constituting anti-Islamic conduct and  not  on
   the basis that the convictions would themselves create the risk.

15. Neither SB nor BA address the circumstances of this case.   BA  concerns
   sur place claims and SB concerns the impact of previous Court proceedings
   in Iran.  However, what both cases do serve to show is when and  in  what
   circumstances an individual would come to the attention  of  the  Iranian
   authorities.  As noted at (3) of the headnote in BA, it is  important  to
   consider the likelihood of the individual coming to the attention of  the
   authorities.  As that case also shows, a person's immigration history  is
   important as a trigger factor.  That is the issue  which  the  Judge  was
   considering at [32].

16. The case of SB  also raises the  issue  of  anti-Islamic  conduct  as  a
   significant risk factor.  The headnote relates to [45] of the decision in
   that case which says the following:-


      "It is plain from the background evidence before us that being accused
      of anti-Islamic conduct  amounts  to  a  significant  risk  factor  in
      respect of likely treatment a person will face  on  return.   Both  Dr
      Kakhi's evidence and that from established  sources  such  as  Amnesty
      International, Human Rights Watch and the US State Department  reports
      concur on this."


17. What that passage does not say is what amounts to anti-Islamic  conduct.
   The circumstances of that case were very different  to  this  Appellant's
   case.  However, based on the  background  evidence  to  which  the  Judge
   referred (see [14] above), the content of those reports coupled with  the
   evidence of the other risk factors in this case which, as I  have  noted,
   was not seriously challenged by the Respondent  and  the  fact  that  the
   Respondent does not challenge the finding that the Appellant  would  come
   to the attention of the authorities, I am unable to find  that  there  is
   any material error of law in the Decision or the Judge's reasoning.  I am
   therefore satisfied that the Decision did not involve the  making  of  an
   error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

I do not set aside the Decision
Signed      [pic]Date   8 January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
