
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01044/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 2 June 2015                     |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            adan mohammed qasali
                            (NO aNONYMITY oRDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before us following a grant of permission to appeal on  18
November 2014.

The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 1  May  1959.  He  claims  to
have arrived in the United Kingdom  in  March  2002,  but  has  provided  no
evidence of lawful entry or residence. On 6 February 2006 he  was  convicted
of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and was  sentenced  on  7
April 2006 to an indeterminate sentence with a minimum term of 20 months.

On 25 July 2006 the appellant was served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
deportation  to  which  he   subsequently   responded,   claiming   in   his
questionnaire at that time and in subsequent  questionnaires  in  July  2011
and October 2013 to hold both Dutch and Somali nationality. He  was  granted
parole on 29 August  2012  and  on  3  September  2012  was  detained  under
immigration powers. On 2 November 2012 the Dutch  Consulate  confirmed  that
he was not a Dutch national and did not have any status in the  Netherlands.


On 25 March 2013 a Deportation Order was signed against him and  a  decision
was made that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied. He  appealed
against that decision.

The appellant's appeal was initially listed for hearing  on  24  July  2013,
but was adjourned for further consideration of  his  claim  that  he  was  a
Dutch national. He subsequently admitted that he was not a  Dutch  national,
but on 1 October 2013  advised  the  respondent  that  he  wished  to  claim
asylum.  Following  a  screening  interview  on  22  October  2013,  he  was
interviewed about his claim on 13 February 2014, and a decision was made  on
29 July 2014 refusing his claim. His appeal was,  in  the  meantime,  listed
for directions hearings and  adjourned  on  several  occasions  pending  the
outcome of his claim and finally came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  13
October 2014.

The Appellant's Claim

Prior to making his  asylum  claim,  in  a  statement  dated  19  July  2013
produced for his deportation appeal, the appellant claimed  to  be  a  Dutch
national born in Hargeisa who married his  wife  in  Somalia  and  who  left
Somalia due to the civil war and went to Holland in 1992 with his  wife  and
eldest child. They all obtained Dutch nationality and he followed  his  wife
and children to the United Kingdom in March 2002. He  could  not  return  to
Somalia as he feared Al-Shabab.

Following his asylum application the appellant  claimed,  in  his  screening
interview, to be a member of the Reer Hamar minority clan  from  Merka,  and
as such to have had problems from the majority clans. He  claimed  that  his
parents and sister were killed in Somalia in 1988 and 1989 and that  he  had
fled Somalia in 1989. He claimed to have married  his  wife  in  Nairobi  in
1987, to have subsequently lived with his  wife  and  children  in  Holland,
where he was issued with a residency card as a  refugee,  to  have  followed
his wife and children to the United  Kingdom  in  March  2002  and  to  have
separated  from  her  in  2003.  His  wife  and  children   obtained   Dutch
nationality prior to coming to the United Kingdom, but  he  did  not  obtain
nationality himself.

In his substantive interview, the appellant claimed to  have  been  born  in
Mogadishu and to have moved to Merka at the age of three years as  a  result
of his father's work for the government  as  a  tax  collector.  He  himself
worked as a nurse in Mogadishu and also, when his father left his work  with
the government and obtained a minibus, he drove the bus. He claimed to be  a
member of the Isaaq clan as his father was Isaaq, although  his  mother  was
Reer Hamar and he considered himself as Reer Hamar. He feared  the  majority
clans and also Al-Shabab and so did  not  want  to  return  to  Somalia.  He
subsequently said that he was not aware of the power of majority  clans  and
was not brought up to be interested in  clan  values  and  had  no  problems
himself before the war. He left Somalia in 1989 as  a  result  of  the  war,
after his house was destroyed and his parents and sister were killed in  the
fighting and he was attacked when driving his bus and stabbed with a knife.

Respondent's Decisions

With respect to the deportation decision made in March 2013, the  respondent
considered whether the exceptions to automatic deportation  applied  to  the
appellant and concluded that they did not. The only  exception  relied  upon
at that stage was Article 8, and in that respect the respondent  noted  that
the appellant had been sentenced  to  a  period  of  at  least  four  years'
imprisonment and that there were no  exceptional  circumstances  outweighing
the public interest in his deportation for the purposes of paragraph 398  of
the Immigration Rules. It was therefore not accepted  that  his  deportation
would breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

In refusing the appellant's asylum claim, in her letter  of  29  July  2014,
the respondent noted that the appellant's evidence had been inconsistent  in
various respects, including his place of birth, his clan, the death  of  his
parents, his  departure  from  Somalia  and  his  marriage.  The  respondent
rejected his claim to come from Mogadishu and concluded,  in  light  of  his
earlier references  to  have  been  born  in  Hargeisa,  that  he  was  from
Somaliland and was a member of the Isaaq majority clan. It  was  considered,
with reference  to  the  country  guidance  in  AMM  and  others  (conflict;
humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT  445,  that  he
would be at no risk in Mogadishu. The respondent  considered,  in  light  of
the risk posed by the appellant to the public as a result  of  his  criminal
offending, that  the  presumption  in  section  72(2)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and asylum Act 2002 was  applicable  to  him,  so  that  Article
33(2) of the Geneva Convention did not prevent his removal from  the  United
Kingdom.  He  was,  for  the  same  reasons,  excluded  from  a   grant   of
humanitarian protection and it was considered  that  his  deportation  would
not breach his human rights.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant's appeal against the deportation  decision  was  heard  before
the First-tier Tribunal, by a  panel  consisting  of  Designated  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Coates  and  Dr  T  Okitikpi.  The  panel  heard  from  the
appellant,  noting  that  no  family  members  had  attended  to  give  oral
evidence. They considered a further statement produced  in  a  supplementary
appeal bundle in which the appellant claimed to have  been  born  in  Barawe
near Mogadishu and denied coming from Somaliland, and claimed to  belong  to
the Reer Hamar minority clan. In addition they had  before  them  an  expert
report  from  Professor  Mario  Aguilar  addressing  the   issue   of   clan
membership. The appellant gave evidence that he was born in Barawe  but  was
brought up in Mogadishu.

The panel concluded that the appellant's account  was  not  credible,  given
his inconsistent evidence on core issues and the timing of his asylum  claim
which they considered had been made solely for the purposes  of  frustrating
removal.  They  upheld  the  section  72(2)  certificate   and   accordingly
dismissed the appellant's asylum appeal. With  regard  to  Article  3,  they
concluded that the appellant would not be at risk  on  return  to  Mogadishu
and that his deportation would not breach his human rights.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on one ground,  namely
that there had been a failure to  apply  all  parts  of  the  head-note  and
relevant paragraphs in  the  country  guidance  in  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
Mogadishu) [2014] UKUT 442, with particular reference to paragraph  (ix)  of
the head-note.

Permission to appeal was granted.

Upper Tribunal: Appeal hearing and submissions

At the hearing it transpired that an application had been made to the  Upper
Tribunal in February 2015, on behalf of the appellant, for a further  ground
to be added which had not elicited any response. That  application  followed
a change  of  legal  representative  to  those  currently  representing  the
appellant. The further ground asserted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
erred in its findings on the s72 certificate as there had been a failure  to
apply the two-stage test required by that  provision  and  no  consideration
had been given to whether the  appellant  posed  a  present  danger  to  the
public.

Mr Tarlow did not object to the amendment to  the  grounds  and,  given  the
fact that the application had been made some time  ago  and  that  it  arose
from a change of legal representative, we admitted  the  additional  ground.
However we did not consider it appropriate to permit a further amendment  to
the grounds requested by Ms Asanovic and referred to in a skeleton  argument
dated 19 February 2015 which did not appear to have  been  received  by  the
Tribunal and which was  therefore  brought  to  our  attention,  and  to  Mr
Tarlow's attention, only at the hearing. No formal written  application  had
been made to amend the grounds in respect to the  further  point,  namely  a
challenge to the panel's approach to the expert report  and  their  findings
on the appellant's clan membership, and we considered there to  be  no  good
reason to allow the further amendment. Accordingly the appeal  proceeded  on
the basis of the two agreed grounds of appeal and we heard submissions  from
both parties in that regard.

Ms Asanovic submitted that the panel had erred by failing  to  consider  the
relevant factors in paragraph (ix)  of  the  head-note  to  MOJ  which  were
particularly relevant given the lengthy period of  the  appellant's  absence
from Somalia and the lack of challenge  to  his  evidence  that  he  had  no
family ties in Somalia and no access to financial resources from his  family
in the United Kingdom. With regard to the section 72 certificate, there  had
been no consideration given to the fact that the Parole Board had agreed  to
release the appellant and to  his  evidence  in  his  statement  as  to  his
remorse for his previous actions. His conviction  dated  back  to  2006  and
there was no evidence that he posed a present danger to the community.

Mr Tarlow asked us to find that the panel had made  no  material  errors  in
their decision and to uphold the decision.

After careful deliberation, we advised the parties that we  did  not  accept
that the panel had made any errors of law such that their decision ought  to
be set aside. Our reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

We turn first of all to the  initial  ground  of  appeal  referring  to  the
country guidance in MOJ. It is plain  that  the  panel  had  regard  to  the
guidance. We agree that it would have assisted if they had provided  a  more
detailed assessment addressing in particular the  factors  in  (ix)  of  the
head-note  and  applying  the  appellant's  own   circumstances   to   those
considerations. However the panel were in some difficulty  in  that  regard,
in that they were unable to make a definitive assessment of the  appellant's
circumstances,  given  the  significant  variations  in  his  evidence.  The
appellant's evidence was completely inconsistent in almost every aspect  and
in respect to all core issues, as the panel pointed out at paragraph  41  of
their decision. He gave contradictory evidence about his clan, his place  of
birth and residence in Somalia, the events leading  to  his  departure  from
Somalia and the timing of his departure, his family and marriage  and  even,
for some time, his nationality. It was therefore impossible  for  the  panel
to make clear findings of fact in regard  to  the  appellant's  profile  and
circumstances.

It is the appellant's case that there was nevertheless  sufficient  evidence
before  the  panel,  which  was  not  compromised  by  inconsistencies,   to
establish a risk on return on the basis of the factors  in  paragraph  (ix).
Such evidence is said to include his length of  absence  from  Somalia,  his
lack of family in Somalia, the lack of resources available to him  from  the
United Kingdom, his lack of financial support whilst living  in  the  United
Kingdom and his dependency upon public benefits and the minimal cost of  his
journey to the United Kingdom as compared to other  migrants.  However,  for
the most part those factors were not the subject of  any  positive  findings
of fact made by the panel and we do not agree that a lack  of  challenge  to
those aspects of the  appellant's  life  ought  to  be  viewed  as  positive
findings of fact, given the overall concerns as to the  reliability  of  his
evidence.

Although the appellant claimed to have no family ties to Somalia, the  panel
had found him to be an entirely unreliable  witness  in  every  respect  and
made no findings on that claim. Whilst they  found  the  absence  of  family
members at the hearing indicated  a  lack  of  any  "significant  degree  of
support" in the United Kingdom, that was for the purposes of a  claim  based
upon family life under Article 8. We agree with the view  expressed  in  the
respondent's rule 24 response, that it is disingenuous of the  appellant  to
rely upon a finding of no support at the  hearing,  when  he  was  otherwise
seeking to rely upon statements of various family  members,  including  that
of his nephew Mustafa Aden who was claiming to provide  him  with  financial
support and to have sent money to him in prison and  who  stood  surety  for
him in his bail applications.

In any event we consider that, based on the findings made by the  panel  and
the parts of the  guidance  they  relied  upon  at  paragraph  45  of  their
decision, there was nothing material in  the  factors  listed  in  paragraph
(ix), or in the guidance at paragraph (xi), that  could  have  assisted  the
appellant. It is clear from their findings at paragraphs 22 and 40 that  the
panel proceeded on the basis that the appellant was a member  of  the  Isaaq
clan from Hargeisa, which was the  conclusion  reached  by  the  respondent.
They referred,  amongst  other  paragraphs  of  the  head-note  to  MOJ,  to
paragraph (vii), albeit quoting from paragraph (viii), as  being  applicable
to the appellant and thus relied upon the significance  of  clan  membership
and the support provided by majority clans. Accordingly  it  is  clear  that
they concluded that the  appellant  would  not  be  returning  to  Mogadishu
without any means of support. With  regard  to  paragraph  (x),  which  they
relied upon at paragraph 45, there was no  evidence  before  them  from  the
appellant to explain why he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
opportunities available in Mogadishu and we note that  the  evidence  before
them was that he was a qualified  nurse  and  had  previously  worked  as  a
nurse, as well as a driver, in Somalia. There was, furthermore, no  evidence
before the panel to suggest  that  a  significant  period  of  absence  from
Somalia would, on that basis alone, put the appellant at risk.

There was an attempt by the appellant's  representatives  to  challenge  the
panel's findings on his clan membership in light of the views  expressed  in
the expert report, but as we have recorded we did not allow the  grounds  to
be amended further to admit such a challenge since that was not part of  the
application for permission.  We  would,  however,  make  it  clear  that  we
consider the panel gave careful consideration to the expert report and  were
entitled to make the findings that they did in that regard. It was  entirely
open to them, in view of the inconsistent evidence given  by  the  appellant
in regard to his clan membership and his place of birth,  to  conclude  that
he was a member of a majority clan and that he would be able to access  some
support on that basis on return to Somalia.

Accordingly we find that the first ground of appeal  is  not  made  out  and
that the panel were entitled to conclude, for the  reasons  properly  given,
that the appellant had failed to show that he would be at risk on return  to
Mogadishu.

In light of such a finding we consider that any claimed error  made  by  the
panel in regard to the section 72 certificate would clearly  be  immaterial,
given that the appellant could not in any event have succeeded in his  claim
on asylum grounds. However we do not consider that there was  any  error  by
the  panel  in  that  regard  and  we  consider  that  they  gave   adequate
consideration to all relevant matters when considering the certification.

The grounds assert that the  panel  failed  to  give  consideration  to  the
second part of the test in  section  72(2),  namely  whether  the  appellant
constituted a present  danger  to  the  community  of  the  United  Kingdom.
However we do not agree. At paragraph 42  they  gave  consideration  to  the
Sentencing Judge's remarks including his consideration of  future  risk  and
his conclusion that the appellant posed a significant risk of  serious  harm
to members of the public. They went on, at paragraph 43, to note that  there
was a presumption that the appellant's  continued  presence  in  the  United
Kingdom would constitute a risk to the community and that the only  evidence
he  had  submitted  by  way  of  rebutting  that  presumption  was  his  own
expression of remorse in his questionnaire and statement, as considered  and
rejected by the respondent at paragraphs  53  and  54  of  the  reasons  for
refusal letter of 29 July 2014.

It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that  the  panel  ought  to  have
given consideration to the fact that the Parole Board  deemed  him  suitable
for release into the community. However that does not appear to be a  matter
raised before the panel. In any event it was not for the panel to  speculate
upon the reasons why the appellant had been released  or  to  conclude  that
that was evidence in itself that he no longer posed a risk,  when  they  had
not been provided with a report or any other  information  from  the  Parole
Board and were unaware of  any  other  considerations  relied  upon  by  the
Parole Board in deciding to release him. The reference in  the  grounds,  at
paragraph 37, to the relevance of him not having been recalled into  custody
whilst on licence  is  undermined  by  the  fact  that  he  was  taken  into
immigration  detention  shortly  after  his  release  and  has  remained  in
detention. Neither was there  any  requirement  upon  the  panel  to  attach
weight to  the  appellant's  own  expressions  of  remorse  in  his  witness
statement, given their findings as to his unreliability  as  a  witness  and
considering also that that same statement contained other  claims,  such  as
those relating to his nationality and place of  birth,  from  which  he  had
resiled.

Accordingly there was a significant lack of evidence before the  panel  upon
which they were able  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  rebutted  the
presumption against him. We note  that  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument
makes mention at paragraph 40 of an OASys report referring to the  appellant
having  received  treatment  for  his  mental  health  problems  and  having
received no adjudications in prison and being an enhanced prisoner.  However
we do not have sight of that report  and  there  is  no  indication  in  the
panel's decision that it was  before  them.  Ms  Asanovic  did  not  suggest
otherwise. We have, amongst our papers, a Pre-Sentence  Report  dating  back
to 2006, but again there is no indication that that was  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal when the panel heard the appeal  and  in  any  event  it  does
nothing to assist the appellant. With regard  to  the  reference  to  mental
health problems we note that that was not a matter raised before the  First-
tier Tribunal and neither  was  there  any  evidence  before  them  in  that
regard.

In all the circumstances it seems to us that the  panel's  consideration  of
the section 72 certificate was adequate  and  that  they  were  entitled  to
uphold the certificate. Accordingly  we  find  that  the  second  ground  of
appeal is not made out.

For all of these reasons we conclude that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  requiring
the decision to be set aside.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. We do not  set  aside  the  decision.
The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  deportation  appeal  therefore
stands.






                               Signed   Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
