
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01980/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 November 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR OSEATOFOH HILARY INEOMO
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jibowu, Counsel

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the  First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in  this  particular  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
         appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibbs
         promulgated on 18  December  2014  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
         Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
         18 October 2014 that section 32 UK Borders  Act  2007  applies  and
         making a deportation order against him dated 16 October 2014.

      2. The background facts so far as it is necessary to  recite  them  at
         this stage are that the Appellant who  is  a  national  of  Nigeria
         arrived in the UK from Kenya in 1995 aged  eleven  years  with  his
         sister to join his mother, stepfather and brother.  He is now  aged
         thirty years.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain on 8  July
         2003.  He has visited Nigeria only once since his arrival here,  in
         2004 for his maternal grandfather's funeral.  The remainder of  his
         family are now British citizens.   The  Appellant  has  been  in  a
         relationship with Stacey Owusu, a British citizen, for eight years.
          They married on 22 February 2013.  At the date  of  Decision,  she
         was pregnant with their first child.  She has since given birth  to
         a son, E, on 5 July 2015.  E is a British citizen.

      3. The Appellant has one conviction for cheating  the  public  revenue
         for which he was sentenced on 21 June 2013 to two years  and  three
         months in prison. I will return to the nature  and  seriousness  of
         that offence below.

      4. The Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal on human  rights  grounds,
         finding that deportation of the Appellant would be unduly harsh and
         that the public interest in his deportation was outweighed  by  his
         ties to the UK and that he has no ties to Nigeria.

    Error of law decision

      5. The Respondent challenges the Decision on the basis that the  Judge
         failed to properly  consider  whether  deportation  would  have  an
         unduly harsh effect on the Appellant's wife by applying  that  test
         only to the impact on her and not  considering  it  as  part  of  a
         balance against the public interest in deportation.  The Respondent
         also challenges the Decision on the basis that the Judge failed  to
         properly  consider  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
         Appellant's wife to remain in the UK without him.  The  grounds  of
         appeal challenge also the Judge's failure to consider whether there
         would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's  integration
         in  Nigeria.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-Tier
         Tribunal Judge Murray on 28 July 2015 on all grounds.

      6. In relation to how the test of undue harshness should be applied in
         the  circumstances  of  this  case,  Mr  Staunton  relied  on   the
         Tribunal's decision in Secretary of State for the Home Department v
         KMO [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC).  He accepted that the Tribunal reached
         the opposite view in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
         MAB [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC)  but  submitted  that  KMO  is  rightly
         decided and MAB is wrongly decided.  Neither decision is binding on
         me.

      7. Mr Jibowu did not disagree with Mr Staunton  that  KMO  is  rightly
         decided but submitted that the Judge in fact applied  the  test  in
         the way advocated by that decision and took account of  the  public
         interest when considering  whether  deportation  of  the  Appellant
         would have an unduly harsh impact on his wife.  He  relied  on  the
         Tribunal's  decision  in  McLarty  (Deportation  -  proportionality
         balance) [2014] UKUT 315 (IAC).  He submitted that  the  Judge  was
         entitled to find that there were compelling  circumstances  in  the
         Appellant's case which tipped the public interest balance away from
         deportation.  He submitted that this was the  basis  on  which  the
         Judge allowed the appeal and that the Judge was entitled  to  reach
         the outcome she did on the basis of her reasoning albeit  that  the
         reasoning was brief.

      8. The decision in McLarty is an error of law decision  in  which  the
         Tribunal found  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal's
         decision and remitted it for reconsideration.  Whilst the  headnote
         may provide some minimal support to the Appellant, it does no  more
         than state principles which are now readily  discernible  from  the
         primary legislation and  case  law,  particularly  SS  (Nigeria)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550.
         As SS makes clear, the Tribunal is required to consider the Article
         8 rights of the deportee and in that case the  deportee's  children
         against the background of the Respondent's policy as now stated  in
         primary legislation that deportation of foreign criminals is in the
         public interest.  In McLarty the Tribunal found that this  had  not
         been done and remitted the appeal for re-hearing.

      9. The same criticism can be made of the Decision in this case, albeit
         in relation to the Judge's consideration of the Article  8  factors
         in the context of the  exceptions  which  were  said  to  apply  in
         paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules.  The  basis  of  the  Judge's
         finding that deportation of the Appellant would be unduly harsh for
         his wife is based on findings that she is a  British  citizen,  has
         all her family in the  UK  and  no  family  in  Nigeria,  that  she
         required monitoring of her pregnancy due to her  medical  condition
         and wishes to bring up her  child  in  the  UK  where  all  of  his
         biological family live.  There is no reasoning for the assertion at
         [25] that it would be unduly harsh for her to  remain  without  the
         Appellant in the UK where she would have support from her  and  the
         Appellant's family.  There  is  no  discernible  balancing  of  the
         public  interest   in   deportation   of   foreign   criminals   or
         consideration of section 117C (1) and (2) when considering  whether
         it would be unduly harsh for her  to  accompany  the  Appellant  to
         Nigeria.

     10. In relation to the consideration of the Appellant's  own  position,
         the focus of the  Judge's  reasoning  is  on  the  ties  which  the
         Appellant has formed in the UK and not on the absence of ties  with
         Nigeria.  This case  is  one  decided  after  the  changes  to  the
         Immigration Rules in July 2014 and therefore the relevant  test  is
         one of whether there are very significant obstacles and not whether
         the Appellant has no ties to Nigeria.  There may be some difference
         in outcome under the former test because the  emphasis  is  on  the
         future possibility of integration and not  the  present  situation.
         In either event, the Decision contains no  statement  of  what  the
         obstacles to re-integration are said to  be  other  than  that  the
         Appellant has lived in the UK for the majority of his life, has not
         visited Nigeria for over ten years and was educated in the UK [18].
            There  is  no  consideration  whether  those  amount  to   "very
         significant obstacles".

     11. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does
         involve the making of a material error of law.  Accordingly, I  set
         aside the Decision.

     12. I indicated at the end of the hearing that if  I  were  to  find  a
         material error of law, I proposed to go on to re-make the  decision
         based on the submissions made at the hearing and  on  the  evidence
         before me, which now includes evidence that  the  Appellant's  wife
         has given birth to their son who is  a  British  citizen.   It  was
         agreed that all of the evidence is contained  in  documents  before
         me, that there is no dispute as to credibility of the Appellant  or
         his witnesses and that no further oral evidence is required. I have
         received and take into  account  the  Appellant's  short  statement
         updating the factual position (although I  note  that  the  version
         which I was given is unsigned and undated). I therefore go on to re-
         make the decision taking into account the findings made and all the
         evidence before me.

    The relevant legal provisions

     13. The Rules applicable to this case are as follows:-

             Deportation and Article 8


             A398.     These rules apply where:

                    (a)      a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims
                    that his deportation would be contrary to the United
                    Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
                    Rights Convention;

                    (b)      ...

             398.      Where a person claims that their deportation would
             be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the
             Human Rights Convention, and

                    (a)      ...

                    (b)      the deportation of the person from the UK is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                    (c)      ...

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
             other factors where there are very compelling circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

             399.      This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or
             (c) applies if -

                    (a)      the person has a genuine and subsisting
                    parental relationship with a child under the age of 18
                    years who is in the UK, and

                        (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                        (ii)      ...

                             (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to
                             live in the country to which the person is to
                             be deported; and

                             (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to
                             remain in the UK without the person who is to
                             be deported; or

                    (b)      the person has a genuine and subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a
                    British Citizen or settled in the UK, and

                        (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the
                        person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their
                        immigration status was not precarious; and

                        (ii)      it would be unduly harsh for that partner
                        to live in the country to which the person is to be
                        deported, because of compelling circumstances over
                        and above those described in paragraph EX.2. of
                        Appendix FM; and

                        (iii)     it would be unduly harsh for that partner
                        to remain in the UK without the person who is to be
                        deported.

             399A.     This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)
             applies if -

                    (a)      the person has been lawfully resident in the UK
                    for most of his life; and

                    (b)      he is socially and culturally integrated in the
                    UK; and

                    (c)      there would be very significant obstacles to
                    his integration into the country to which it is proposed
                    he is deported.

     14. I am required to have regard to section  117.   The  provisions  of
         that section so far as relevant to this case are:-

             "PART  5A   Article   8   of   the   ECHR:   public   interest
             considerations

             117A Application of this Part

               1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
                  determine whether a decision made  under  the  Immigration
                  Acts-

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
                  tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                      117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                      117C.

             (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
                  the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                  under Article 8(2).

             117BArticle 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
             all cases

               1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4) Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6) ...

             117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

               1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

               2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

               3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4) Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

             (6) ...

             (7) ...

             117D Interpretation of this Part

             (1) In this Part-

                  "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention  on
                  Human Rights;

                  "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of
                   18 and who-

                      is a British citizen, or

                      has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                      period of seven years or more;

                  "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

                      is a British citizen, or

                      who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  (within  the
                      meaning of the Immigration Act  1971  -  see  section
                      33(2A) of that Act).

             (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                      offence, and

                  (c)  who-

                      (i)   has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
                           of at least 12 months,

                      (ii)  has been  convicted  of  an  offence  that  has
                           caused serious harm, or

                      (iii) is a persistent offender."

Discussion of the evidence

     15. The Appellant's wife was born in  the  UK  and  has  never  visited
         Nigeria.  Her evidence is that all her family are in the  UK.   She
         works in the UK although is  currently  on  maternity  leave.   She
         would be concerned about going to live in Nigeria with her  husband
         and child because of  the  risk  of  terror  attacks,  particularly
         because they would be  singled  out  as  foreigners  due  to  their
         English accent.  She says that the  socio-economic  environment  is
         alien to her and the Appellant.

     16. The Appellant's wife was diagnosed with "borderline tumour  of  the
         ovary" in 2009.  She has since undergone fertility saving  surgery.
         The medical evidence is that she continues to have  regular  follow
         up to monitor her progress.  The latest evidence is a  letter  from
         her consultant dated 7 November 2014 in  which  he  opines  on  the
         prospect for her treatment if she were to  move  abroad.   He  says
         that "from her medical point of view she would be  best  served  by
         staying in the country and if however she decides to  relocate  the
         advice would be to a country where  there  are  the  resources  and
         expertise for management of her on-going clinical care". Her follow
         up treatment appears to be blood tests to check for further tumours
         and CT scans.  There is no evidence  that  such  treatment  is  not
         available in Nigeria. The Appellant's wife says that she would like
         to have more children within  a  short  timescale  because  of  the
         gynaecological complications.

     17. The couple now have a son who is aged about four months.  There  is
         no dispute that the child is British.  The child is  obviously  too
         young to have formed any independent life  beyond  his  mother  and
         father.  I deal below with his best interests.

     18. The Appellant has been in the UK since the age of eleven years.  He
         received his  secondary  education  in  the  UK  up  to  "A"  level
         standard.  He appears to have continued his education thereafter to
         some limited extent  and  has  obtained  a  certificate  of  higher
         education in law in 2007.  He had some sporting  prowess  which  is
         evidenced by various certificates in the Appellant's bundle.

     19. I do not downplay the Appellant's  contribution  to  the  voluntary
         sector.  His work with young people to deter them  from  committing
         criminal offences is laudable.  I note also the letters of  support
         in particular  from  the  Chaplain  at  HMP  Brixton  praising  his
         behaviour whilst in prison and that he received  a  certificate  in
         relation to his exemplary behaviour.  He has  also  worked  with  a
         charity called Gharweg since his release and they have  written  in
         his support as have BBC News in relation to his work with them.

     20. The Appellant relies also on  his  voluntary  contributions  to  UK
         society in the period before his conviction. Although there is some
         evidence of the work which he carried  out  in  that  period,  that
         evidence is limited in terms of the nature and extent of that  work
         and the assertions made by him may  be  overstated.  There  is  for
         example a lack of  evidence  in  relation  to  the  setting  up  of
         SkillsPlus Project which the  Appellant  claims  to  have  set  up,
         securing funding from Jobcentre Plus.  The work experience detailed
         in his statement appears to have been mainly as a salaried employee
         albeit often working with disadvantaged people  and  to  have  been
         temporary in nature.  I note that there is reference in  the  OASys
         report to the Appellant being in receipt of Job  Seekers  Allowance
         at the time of his conviction and to  his  financial  circumstances
         being one of the drivers of his offending.

     21. In relation to the Appellant's family ties to the UK, his  evidence
         is that all his known family are in the UK.  He  indicates  in  his
         statement that he has at times been estranged from his  family  due
         to his relationship with his wife and his religious  beliefs  which
         are Christian rather than Catholic.  It is clear that the Appellant
         has strong religious commitment and has  been  baptised  since  his
         release from prison.  The Appellant's evidence in relation  to  his
         family ties is contradictory in parts.  He claims in his  statement
         to be estranged from his family but goes on to say that his younger
         siblings look to him to be there  when  "sensitive  issues  in  the
         family arise".  He  indicates  that,  following  his  release  from
         prison, he is intent on rebuilding his family  ties.  There  is  no
         statement from his mother, stepfather or siblings and they did  not
         give evidence at the hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal.

     22. The Appellant's father apparently remains in Nigeria but he has  no
         contact with him which is understandable in light of the fact  that
         his mother left due to suffering domestic violence.  The  Appellant
         claims to have suffered sexual abuse by  an  employee  when  living
         with his grandparents in  Nigeria  before  coming  to  the  UK  and
         therefore has bad memories of living there.  His  grandparents  are
         now deceased.  He  therefore  apparently  has  no  family  ties  in
         Nigeria.

     23. The Appellant's wife says that she and the Appellant are funded  by
         her employment for the local authority and have no savings so  that
         there would be no financial support for the Appellant if he were to
         be deported.  The Appellant says that  his  stepfather  and  mother
         have always been in full time employment and it  is  reasonable  to
         expect that, if ties with his family are re-established, they could
         provide some financial support to him whilst he establishes himself
         in Nigeria.

     24. The Appellant's offence is described in the Crown Court  sentencing
         remarks as one involving fraudulent VAT  claims  which  started  in
         July 2007 and continued to August 2011.  The Appellant assisted the
         ringleader to recruit a number of people into the  fraud.   He  was
         described by the Judge as "the second in  command".   Although  the
         Appellant appears to have profited only to a limited extent, it was
         found that he was "clearly aware" of the  fraud.   The  Judge  also
         noted in sentencing that the Appellant by his own admission was "an
         essential part of the whole scheme" and the  Judge  also  concluded
         that the Appellant would have  continued  with  the  fraud  if  the
         ringleader  had  disappeared  albeit  would  have  found  it   very
         difficult to do so.  The overall gain to the fraudulent  enterprise
         was in excess of �250,000.   In  sentencing,  the  Judge  noted  as
         follows:-

             "Ineomo, you too are a good character and again, I accept that
             prison will have an enormous impact upon you and your wife and
             your soon to be born child.  I accept that  you  have  carried
             out much good work in the community and that there must be due
             credit.  As I've already said, I accept the submission that  I
             should not put you in the same category as Matthew Ekuku and I
             state that I take as the grid that's appropriate  for  you,  a
             fraud that is fraudulent from the outset and  either  a  fraud
             carried out over a significant  period  of  time  or  multiple
             frauds.  I do not put you in the same professional category as
             Matthew Ekuku.  The starting point I take in your case is  one
             of two and a half years' imprisonment,  that  is  towards  the
             lower end of the range and I put you  towards  the  bottom  of
             that because I accept that yours was a subsidiary role and  as
             I've already said, I doubt that you would have  been  able  to
             carry out this fraud at all if  Matthew  Ekuku  had  for  some
             reason (sic).  I will also give you some credit for your  good
             character but I can give you no credit for a guilty  plea  and
             therefore the sentence you must  serve  is  two  years,  three
             months.  You too will be banned from being  a  director  of  a
             company, but in your case, the period  will  be  one  of  five
             years."

     25. Although the OASys assessment as to risk of re-offending is low and
         the Appellant expresses remorse and indicates in his statement that
         he has learned his lesson,  there  are  indications  in  the  OASys
         assessment that the Appellant does not  accept  responsibility  for
         his crimes, continues to maintain that he is innocent and was duped
         by others and fails to recognise the consequences of  his  actions.
         There are also indications in that assessment that the  Appellant's
         financial circumstances formed a large part of his  motivation  for
         the crime  and  that  should  he  continue  to  be  unemployed  and
         associate with the peer group with whom he associated in the  past,
         he might well re-offend (see in particular sections 2  and  4-7  of
         the report).

    Unduly harsh

     26. I deal first with the impact of the Appellant's deportation on  his
         wife  and  child.  There  is  no  dispute  that   the   Appellant's
         relationship is genuine and subsisting.  It began at a time when he
         had indefinite leave to remain.   It  is  common  ground  that  the
         Appellant's relationship with his wife and child would amount to an
         exception to the public interest in deportation if  the  effect  of
         deportation would be unduly harsh.  In considering  the  impact  of
         deportation on them, I  am  also  required  to  consider  the  best
         interests of the Appellant's child. Those are a primary but not the
         primary consideration and can be outweighed by other factors in the
         public interest.

     27. The Appellant's partner and child  are  British  citizens.   It  is
         therefore evident that neither can be deported with  the  Appellant
         and to that extent whether they would go to Nigeria with them would
         be a matter of choice.  I readily accept that the best interests of
         a child who is of the young age of the Appellant's son  are  to  be
         with both his parents.  It matters not to him at  his  age  whether
         that is in the UK or Nigeria  although  obviously  if  his  parents
         remain in the UK with him then he would also  have  access  to  his
         extended family. I also  accept  as  he  grows  up  that  his  best
         interests lie in remaining in the UK where  most  of  his  extended
         family live and in receiving the education to which he is  entitled
         as a British citizen.

     28. I also readily accept that the Appellant's  wife  would  prefer  to
         remain in the UK where  she  has  family  support  and  employment.
         However, the issue of whether it would be unduly harsh for them  to
         accompany the Appellant to Nigeria if he were  deported  is  not  a
         matter of mere hardship.  Whether KMO or MAB is followed, the issue
         is whether the consequences would be  inordinately  or  excessively
         severe or bleak.  If I apply  KMO  the  impact  is  to  be  weighed
         against  the  public  interest  in   deportation   which   requires
         consideration of the nature  and  seriousness  of  the  Appellant's
         offence.  If I apply MAB the consideration is only  the  impact  on
         the Appellant's wife and child.

     29. I have reached the conclusion that KMO is to be  preferred  and  Mr
         Jibowu did not suggest otherwise.  If the Appellant  and  his  wife
         were to both go to Nigeria, their  son  would  obviously  accompany
         them.  He would then  lose  immediate  contact  with  his  extended
         family in the UK but the Appellant's wife could continue  to  visit
         the UK  with  him.   Admittedly,  he  would  lose  the  benefit  of
         education in the UK but that would be  a  matter  of  his  parent's
         choice since he could not be compelled to leave. In relation to the
         Appellant's  wife,  English  is  widely  spoken  in  Nigeria.   The
         Appellant's wife has a job in the UK working for a local  authority
         and will therefore have skills which are transferable  in  Nigeria.
          The Appellant has worked in the UK and there is no  evidence  that
         he would not be able to find work in Nigeria.  There is no evidence
         that the Appellant's wife's medical treatment could not be obtained
         in Nigeria and, if it were not or were unaffordable or not as good,
         it would be open to the Appellant's wife to come to the UK to visit
         her family  and  attend  medical  appointments  here.  I  reiterate
         however that this would be a matter of choice for  the  Appellant's
         wife as neither she nor their son could be  required  to  accompany
         the Appellant on return.

     30. I recognise also that the Appellant's wife would prefer  to  remain
         in the UK where she has family and would prefer  to  bring  up  her
         child who is a British citizen within the education system here.  I
         recognise also that it is in the child's longer term best interests
         to be educated in the UK. I have therefore also considered  whether
         it would be unduly harsh for her and the Appellant's son to  remain
         in the UK without him if they choose not to leave.  The evidence is
         that the relationship is genuine and subsisting and the couple have
         been together for a number of years.  The relationship  was  formed
         at a time when the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and  his
         immigration status was not precarious (as otherwise  the  exception
         in paragraph 399 could not apply at all).  However, the Appellant's
         wife is in employment in the UK and can therefore  support  herself
         and her child (there being no evidence that  the  Appellant  is  in
         gainful employment and supporting  the  family).   The  Appellant's
         wife's family are in the UK and could support her if the  Appellant
         were deported and she did not accompany him.

     31. On the basis that the impact on the Appellant's wife and son has to
         be  balanced  against  the  public  interest  in  deportation  when
         considering whether that impact would be unduly harsh and  applying
         section 117C (1) and (2), I am  required  to  have  regard  to  the
         public interest in deportation of foreign  criminals  and  to  have
         regard also to the nature and seriousness of the offence.  As noted
         in SS  at [54]:-

             "...the more  pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or
             deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if
             it is to prevail.  The pressing nature of the public  interest
             here is vividly informed by  the  fact  that  by  Parliament's
             express declaration the public  interest  is  injured  if  the
             criminal's deportation is not effected.  Such a  result  could
             in my judgment only  be  justified  by  a  very  strong  claim
             indeed"

     32. In the Appellant's favour, he has committed no offences other  than
         the index offence.  However, I have regard to  the  fact  that  the
         offence was committed over an extended period of  four  years.   It
         was an offence committed against the  public  revenue  involving  a
         substantial amount of public money albeit  the  Appellant  did  not
         personally benefit significantly. I also have regard to  the  OASys
         report referred to at [25] above.  Although the report  finds  that
         the Appellant is at a low risk of re-offending, that is based on  a
         points scoring exercise and the narrative does  not  paint  such  a
         positive picture.  In his statement, the Appellant  does  recognise
         the adverse consequence  of  his  offending  and  remorse  for  his
         actions but that is in the light of action  by  the  Respondent  to
         deport him.  I also take account of the need to deter other foreign
         criminals  from  committing  similar  offences  (see  N  (Kenya)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1094.
         The fact that the Appellant is a very low risk of re-offending does
         not mean that it is not in the public interest to deport: Gurung  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 62.

     33. Balancing the impact of deportation of the Appellant  on  his  wife
         and child  against  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
         Appellant as a foreign criminal and having regard to the nature and
         seriousness of the Appellant's offence, I find that it would not be
         unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife and child to remain in the UK
         without him or to return to Nigeria with him should they choose  to
         do so.  The consideration is more finely balanced if I am  required
         to consider the impact without reference  to  the  public  interest
         balance and based only on the impact on the  Appellant's  wife  and
         child.  However, on the basis that the threshold for what is unduly
         harsh is a high one, I am satisfied that it  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh for them to accompany him to Nigeria should they choose to do
         so or remain in the UK without him.

    Very significant obstacles

     34. I turn now to consider the Appellant's case under paragraph 399A of
         the Rules in relation to the impact on his private life.  There  is
         no dispute that the Appellant meets paragraph  399A  (a).   He  has
         lived in the UK for twenty years from the age of eleven years.   In
         terms of his  social  and  cultural  integration  in  the  UK,  the
         evidence is as follows.  He received his secondary education in the
         UK.  He spent his  first  ten  years  in  Nigeria.  There  is  some
         evidence that he has been employed intermittently  in  the  UK  and
         that some of that employment has been in the  furtherance  of  good
         causes.   He  attends  church   regularly   with   his   wife   and
         representatives.  Before his conviction and since his release  from
         prison, he has been involved  in  some  voluntary  work.   All  his
         family with whom he has retained contact are in the  UK.  There  is
         some evidence that he has at times been estranged from  his  family
         in the UK and it is not clear what the current position is  but  he
         now of course has his own family and there is evidence of ties also
         with his wife's family.

     35. In  terms  of  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in  Nigeria,  his
         relatives there are dead with the exception of his father with whom
         he understandably has no contact  and  no  wish  to  make  contact.
         Balanced against that, though, the Appellant speaks  English  which
         is a main language in Nigeria.  He had the ambition and aptitude to
         find work in the UK and has skills in  recruitment,  mentoring  and
         other areas of work which would be transferable in Nigeria.   There
         is no evidence that he would not be able to  continue  to  practise
         his religion in Nigeria.

     36. The  high  point  of  the  Appellant's  case  in  relation  to  the
         difficulties  which  he  would  face  if  deported  to  Nigeria  is
         contained in paragraph [3] of the Appellant's witness statement  as
         follows:-

             "My close extended family members are all in the UK.   I  have
             never had any contact with my biological  father,  because  he
             was domestically abusive to my  mother,  hence  why  she  fled
             Nigeria.  In my early years, I was  temporarily  left  in  the
             custody of my maternal  grandparents  Mr  and  Mrs  Ineomo  in
             Nigeria; who are now both deceased.  At this time, when I  was
             about 7 years of age, I was sexually  molested  by  a  "house-
             help" employee to the family.  I suffered in silence until  it
             was discovered and she was subsequently sacked.  I do not have
             any pleasant memories of my early life in Nigeria and  do  not
             know any family there.  All my family connections are  in  the
             UK and my only language is English".

     37. I accept that the Appellant has lived in the UK for  a  substantial
         period and enjoyed his secondary education  here.   I  accept  also
         that all of his family ties are in the UK although as I note  above
         his evidence is that  the  relationship  is  precarious  due  to  a
         difference in religious beliefs and a disagreement about his choice
         of wife. I note the Appellant's employment in  the  UK  but,  as  a
         young adult male,  there  is  no  reason  why  he  could  not  find
         employment in Nigeria.  He speaks English and there is therefore no
         language barrier on return.  Whilst he has not lived in Nigeria for
         some time, he would be aware  of  the  Nigerian  culture  from  his
         formative years spent there.  Re-integration is a  forward  looking
         assessment and is not  based  on  the  current  position.    Simply
         because he has not lived in Nigeria for a long period  and  has  no
         family  there  does  not  mean  that  he  could  not   reintegrate.
         Furthermore, the factors  which  the  Appellant  prays  in  aid  as
         obstacles to his  reintegration  may  very  well  be  difficult  to
         surmount.  However, the issue is whether they can  be  said  to  be
         very significant.  On the basis of the evidence  before  me,  I  am
         satisfied that there are not  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
         reintegration in Nigeria.

    Compelling circumstances

     38. For the foregoing reasons, I find that the Appellant does not  fall
         within one of the exceptions  to  the  presumption  of  deportation
         contained in paragraph 398 of the Rules.  The  Appellant  can  only
         succeed therefore if there are compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those already considered under paragraphs 399 and 399A of the
         Rules which, when  balanced  against  the  public  interest,  would
         render the decision to deport disproportionate.  There  is  nothing
         in  the  evidence  before  me  which  suggests   that   there   are
         circumstances beyond the Appellant's relationship with his wife and
         child, his personal circumstances in the UK and difficulties  which
         he  would  face  in  Nigeria.   I  have  already  considered  those
         circumstances in detail  and  reached  the  conclusion  that,  when
         balanced against the public interest, those are not  sufficient  to
         outweigh the public interest.  I find that there are no  compelling
         circumstances over and above the factors already  considered  which
         justify allowing the Appellant to remain in the UK.

     39. It follows that I am satisfied that the  Respondent's  decision  to
         deport the Appellant is proportionate.

DECISION

I dismiss the appeal under the Rules and on Article 8 grounds


Signed      [pic]      Date 19 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
