
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01288/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2018                  |On 19 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AHMED [A]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C. Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Yeo, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.
                    Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. We can deal with this appeal quite shortly,  given  its  history.   The
    respondent, whom we  shall  call  "the  claimant",  is  a  national  of
    Somalia.  Following his convictions for offences committed in 2008  and
    2010 he became liable to deportation.  He invoked the protection of the
    European Convention on Human Rights but the Secretary of State rejected
    his claim and on 7 May 2014 made a deportation order against him.

 2. He appealed.  In the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Britton  allowed  his
    appeal on the basis of article 8.  The Secretary of State  appealed  to
    this Tribunal on three grounds, of which the first was not  pursued  at
    the hearing.  The others were that the judge had wrongly applied s 117C
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as  amended)  in
    concluding that the effect on the claimant's partner and children would
    be "unduly harsh" if the claimant were deported, and that the judge had
    erred in assessing the best interests of the children and in concluding
    that it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  claimant's  wife  and
    children to integrate into Somali society and in making that  error  he
    had failed to have sufficient regard to the public interest.

 3. In this Tribunal Judge Grubb held that the First-tier Tribunal had  not
    dealt adequately with these issues.  His decision to  that  effect  was
    given on 18 June 2015.  He directed adjournment to a further hearing at
    which these aspects of the case could be canvassed again.  That hearing
    took place on 2 September 2015.  Judge Grubb's decision, again allowing
    the claimant's appeal, was given on 14 September 2015.

 4. In making his decision Judge Grubb noted the effect of the evidence  he
    had heard, which he accepted almost without reservation.  He found that
    there was a deep and genuine relationship  between  the  claimant,  his
    wife and the children.  The Secretary of State  had  conceded  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the other family members to  relocate
    to Somalia;  and  Judge  Grubb  decided  that  it  would  also  not  be
    reasonable to envisage them making visits there given the situation  in
    that country and FCO advice.  The effect of the claimant's  deportation
    would therefore not be merely to remove  the  claimant  from  the  home
    where in Judge Grubb's view his influence and support would be positive
    and beneficial: it would deprive the  children  of  any  real  paternal
    contact and influence.  The claimant's wife would  also  be  likely  to
    become a full-time carer for another family member, which would further
    reduce the maternal attention she could give to the two children and to
    another then about to be born.  Applying the  approach  in  MAB  [2015]
    UKUT 00435 Judge Grubb concluded that  the  impact  of  the  claimant's
    deportation on his wife and children would be unduly harsh  because  it
    would be excessively severe; and that the assessment of that feature of
    the case did not require balancing against the public interest.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal on two grounds.  The first was that Judge  Grubb  had  erred  in
    failing to appreciate that the consequences to  the  claimant's  family
    were no more than the ordinary consequences of  deportation  and  could
    not properly be characterised as "unduly harsh".  The second  was  that
    Judge Grubb had failed to take into  account  the  public  interest  in
    determining whether any harshness was "undue".   Permission was refused
    by Judge Grubb but on renewal was granted by Laws LJ in  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  It is clear that the grant of permission was directed  to  the
    second ground, because it refers to  MM  (Uganda)  and  others  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450, in which the Court of Appeal  held  that  MAB  was
    wrongly decided and that an assessment of what would  be  unduly  harsh
    required "regard to be had  to  all  the  circumstances  including  the
    criminal's immigration and criminal history" (at [26]).

 6. In an appeal by KO (one of those others whose appeal was heard  by  the
    Court with MM) the Supreme Court has now held that  the  interpretation
    in MAB was correct and that the evaluation of what is unduly harsh  for
    the purposes of s 117C of the 2002 Act and associated Immigration Rules
    is not affected  by  considerations  of  the  public  interest  in  the
    criminal's removal : KO v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53  at  [28]-[32].   In  the
    mean time the proceedings in the Court of Appeal were  settled  on  the
    basis of MM in the form of  an  Order  remitting  the  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal  "for  the  reconsideration  of  the  [Secretary  of  State's]
    appeal".  Following the decision of the Supreme Court, however,  it  is
    now clear that that reason for doubting the conclusion of  Judge  Grubb
    has vanished.

 7. There remains the task of carrying out the  terms  of  the  Order.   Mr
    Howells told us that it is still the position of the Secretary of State
    that the consequences to the claimant's children are no more than those
    of the family of any deportee.  We reject that submission.  It was  not
    suggested that we should hear or consider any further evidence.  It  is
    clear from the evidence before  Judge  Grubb,  which  is  part  of  the
    history  of  this  case  and  which  it  is  not  suggested  should  be
    disbelieved, is that the family is  exceptionally  close-knit  and  has
    benefitted from increasing the depth of the claimant's relationships as
    husband and father since his release  from  prison  in  February  2013,
    which, given the delays in awaiting the judgments of the higher courts,
    is now five and three-quarter years  ago.   This  is  quite  different,
    therefore, from a case where at the time  of  the  hearing  the  family
    relationships  have  to  be  considered  through  the  prism   of   the
    appellant's currently serving or having very recently finished a period
    of custody, which  ought  to  be  the  usual  factual  situation  in  a
    deportation appeal.

 8. Although the effect of the Order of the Court of Appeal is  that  Judge
    Grubb's determination has been set aside, we see no reason  at  all  to
    depart from his assessment of the evidence before him,  the  record  of
    which is the evidence before us.  We are reinforced in that  conclusion
    by noting that although the grounds  of  appeal  against  his  decision
    raised the issue of the rationality (for that  is  what  the  challenge
    would have to be) of  his  assessment,  there  is  no  suggestion  that
    permission was granted or ought to have been granted  on  that  ground,
    and, frankly, we do not see that  it  realistically  could  have  been.
    Although Mr Howells  did  not  by  any  means  concede  the  appeal  he
    intimated that on this issue there was no good reason for  us  to  make
    findings differing from those Judge Grubb made.  We adopt them  as  our
    own.

 9. The appeal before us is  that  of  the  claimant,  to  be  redetermined
    following the setting aside of the decision of Judge Britton.  For  the
    reasons given above we allow the appeal.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 26 November 2018.
