
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01334/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 April 2015                     |On 24 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                               DANIEL WILLIAMS
                      (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ogunnubi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This matter came before us as an appeal against a decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  dated  12  January  2015.   The   First-tier   Tribunal
    considered a number of appeal grounds against a deportation order  made
    by  the  respondent  on  3  July  2014.   These  grounds  included  the
    following: that the deportation order was not proportionate in terms of
    Article 8.  Among the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  was  this:  the
    deportation order  was  proportionate  in  terms  of  Article  8.   The
    appellant sought permission to appeal against that decision and certain
    others.  Permission to appeal was granted only in relation to the First-
    tier Tribunal's Article 8 decision.

Background

Immigration History

 2. The respondent noted that the appellant who is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria
    claimed to have first arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  20  September
    2000.  He married an EEA national on 15 September 2008 and applied  for
    a residence card as the dependant of an EEA  national  on  29  December
    2008.  He was issued a residence card on 15 December 2009 and the  card
    expired on 15 December 2014.  The  appellant  was  convicted  at  Inner
    London  Crown  Court  on  3   December   2013   of   four   counts   of
    possession/control of articles for use in fraud and was sentenced to  a
    total of 14 months' imprisonment.  On 24 December  2013  the  appellant
    appealed against the sentence and, on 14 February  2014  the  Court  of
    Appeal refused him permission to appeal.  The respondent noted that the
    appellant met the criteria of a family member of an  EEA  national.   A
    decision to make a deportation order was made on 3 July 2014.   By  the
    date of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant  was  no
    longer a family member of an EEA national.

Findings in Fact

 3. For the purposes of this appeal the only findings in fact to  which  we
    require to refer are these:

       . The appellant resides with his partner.

       . He has a step-daughter who is 9 years  old  and  resides  with  the
         appellant and his partner.  She is a UK citizen.

       . He and his partner have a daughter who is 3 years old.  She resides
         with the appellant and his partner.  She is not a UK citizen.

       . "I find that removing the Appellant from the United  Kingdom  would
         interfere with the relationship the Appellant has with his daughter
         and his partner.  I also note that the Appellant's partner  has  an
         application which is pending before the Respondent.  It  will  also
         affect  the  right  of  a  third  party  namely   the   Appellant's
         stepdaughter who is a British citizen". (See: paragraph 20  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal's determination).

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. The submission on behalf of the appellant was a short one:  within  any
    Article 8  consideration  which  was  carried  out  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal there was no consideration of the best interests  of  the  two
    children.  Reference was made to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  This failure to consider the best  interests
    of the children amounted to a material error of law.

Reply on behalf of the Respondent

 5. It was submitted by Mr Nath that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  carried
    out a consideration of Article 8  from  paragraph  20  onwards  in  its
    determination.  In the course of that consideration it made  a  finding
    that the appellant was not the step-father of the older child as he was
    not married to his partner.

 6. With respect to the younger child it was accepted that  there  appeared
    to be no  separate  consideration  of  her  within  the  determination.
    However, it was submitted having regard to the particular circumstances
    of the younger child, that there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in
    failing to consider Section 55 in  relation  to  her.   The  particular
    circumstances relative to the child which were relied  on  were  these:
    she is 3 years old and a citizen of Nigeria.   On  this  basis  it  was
    argued that, having regard to past and present policies to  the  effect
    that seven years  was  the  relevant  period  in  establishing  lengthy
    residence and given that very young  children  are  focussed  on  their
    parents rather than their peers and are adaptable then even if  Section
    55 had been considered in  relation  to  her  it  would  have  made  no
    difference  to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was
    submitted that in those circumstances consideration of Section 55 would
    not have resulted in a finding that her best interests were  to  remain
    in the  UK,  to  a  degree  that  outweighed  the  public  interest  in
    deportation of the appellant.

Discussion

 7. We are, without difficulty, persuaded that there is a material error of
    law.

 8. There is no consideration of the best interests of either child.   This
    is no mere error of form by  failing  to  refer  expressly  within  the
    determination to Section 55.  This is an error of  substance.   Looking
    to the determination there is no attempt to engage with the question of
    the best interests of the children and to weigh this against the public
    interest.

 9. Mr Nath referred us, in the course of his submissions, to paragraph  23
    of the First-tier Tribunal's determination where he submitted there was
    some consideration of one of the children.  It is correct that there is
    reference to one child within the said paragraph, however, there is  no
    consideration of what is in that  child's  best  interests.   Moreover,
    there is no reference to the other child and  the  issue  of  her  best
    interests.  The issue of the children's best interests appears to  have
    been entirely overlooked by the First-tier Tribunal.

10. In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC  74
    the Supreme Court at paragraph 10 said this regarding the  approach  to
    an Article 8 assessment involving children:

        "In their written  case  counsel  for  Mr  Zoumbas  set  out  legal
        principles which were relevant in this case and which they  derived
        from three decisions from this court, namely ZH (Tanzania) (above),
        H v Lord Advocate 2012 SC (UKSC) 308 and H(H) v  Deputy  Prosecutor
        of the Italian Republic [2013] 1AC 338.  Those principles  are  not
        in doubt and Ms Drummond on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  did
        not challenge them.  We paraphrase them as follows:

              i) The best interests of a child are an integral part  of  the
                 proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

             ii) In making that assessment, the best interests  of  a  child
                 must be a primary consideration, although  not  always  the
                 only primary consideration; and the child's best  interests
                 do not of themselves  have  the  status  of  the  paramount
                 consideration;

            iii) Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed by
                 the cumulative effect of  other  considerations,  no  other
                 consideration   can   be   treated   as   inherently   more
                 significant;

             iv) While different judges might approach the question  of  the
                 best  interests  of  a  child  in  different  ways,  it  is
                 important to ask oneself the right questions in an  orderly
                 manner in order to avoid the risk that the  best  interests
                 of a child  might  be  undervalued  while  other  important
                 considerations were in play;

              v) It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
                 circumstances and of what is in a  child's  best  interests
                 before  one  asks  oneself  whether  those  interests   are
                 outweighed by the force of other considerations;

             vi)  To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a   careful
                 examination of all relevant factors when the interests of a
                 child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

            vii) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or  she
                 is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent".

11. We are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard  to
    paragraphs (i) - (vi) of the guidance given by the Supreme Court.

12. Moreover the First-tier Tribunal has failed to consider the  importance
    of the older child's UK citizenship.  The importance of  a  child's  UK
    citizenship was emphasised in the  observations  of  Lady  Hale  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 (see: paragraph 30).

13. For the foregoing reasons we allow the appeal.

14. We have considered whether we should re-make  the  decision.   We  have
    decided that we should not.  The failure to consider the  interests  of
    the children within the First-tier Tribunal's  determination  is  total
    and we believe that in these circumstances  the  interests  of  justice
    would only be served by this matter being  remitted  to  a  differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal for  reconsideration.   We  accordingly
    order that such reconsideration should take place.

15.  We make no anonymity direction.



Signed        Date 24 April 2015

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
