

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01743/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 12th May 2014                              |On 3rd July 2014             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     BM
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr O'Ryan instructed by Paragon Law.
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal  against  a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge PLM Hollingworth  and  Mr  FT
        Jamieson JP (hereinafter referred to  as  'the  Panel')  who  in  a
        determination promulgated on 4 March 2014 dismissed the Appellant's
        appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to  deport  him
        from the UK.


     2. The Appellant was born in April 1977 and is a citizen of  Zimbabwe.
        The Panel set out the evidence they received during the  course  of
        the hearing in some detail and in paragraph 9 of the  determination
        set out the following self-direction:


     9.   In the consideration of this appeal we take this approach. Is  the
              Appellant a refugee? If  not  is  the  Appellant  entitled  to
   humanitarian            protection? If not is the Appellant  entitled  to
   resist removal on                human rights grounds?


     3. It is a relevant  factor  in  this  case  that  the  Appellant  was
        previously recognised as a refugee. The Secretary of State  revoked
        his refugee status as part of the process leading to the making  of
        the deportation order. In relation to this issue the  Panel  record
        at paragraphs 58 and 59 of the determination:


     58.  Learned Counsel has argued as we  have  set  out  above  that  the
     burden of proof in this case rests upon the Respondent in the light  of
          what has taken place in the context of the  cessation  of  refugee
   status              of the Appellant as set out in the correspondence  of
   May 2013.               Learned Counsel was unable to assist us with  the
   standard of proof            in  relation  to  his  contention  that  the
   burden of proof rests upon the            Respondent.


     59.  We reject learned Counsel's contention in this  context.  We  find
   that it             is clear that it is for the  Appellant  to  establish
   that he falls within an               exception to automatic deportation.
   We find that the  burden  of  proof               is  upon  him  in  this
   respect. We have proceeded in this case  to  apply             the  lower
   standard of proof.


     4. The Panel found that the Appellant had not  discharged  the  burden
        upon him and accordingly found that no exception to  the  automatic
        deportation provisions had been established.


     5. The grounds seeking permission to appeal are detailed  but  can  be
        summarised as follows: (a) that the  Panel  materially  misdirected
        themselves in law in relation to the burden of proof  in  light  of
        the fact that the Appellant had previously  been  recognised  as  a
        refugee, (b) made a misdirection in law and failed to have  regards
        to a material consideration in  failing  to  determine  a  relevant
        legal  point  that  the  Respondent's  proposal  to  restrict   the
        residence of the Appellant, a recognised refugee, to  one  location
        in his country of origin was unlawful and contrary to  the  refugee
        convention law regarding cessation and UNHCR guideline, para 17, in
        particular, (c) the Panel failed to have  regard  to  the  relevant
        evidence and (d) the Panel failed to make relevant findings  or  to
        give adequate reasons in relation to  the  risk  be  faced  by  the
        Appellant on return to Zimbabwe.


     6. Permission to appeal was granted by a different judge of the First-
        tier  Tribunal  on  24th  March  2014.  The  grant  summarises  the
        procedural  history  and  grounds  of  appeal  before  stating   in
        paragraph 5 that "the grounds of appeal disclose arguable error  of
        law". No further reasoning or explanation was provided.



Error of law


     7. As a result of the brevity of the grant of permission to appeal the
        first issue that arose at the hearing was  whether  permission  had
        been granted on all grounds. Mr  O'Ryan  accepted  that  the  grant
        referred to all the grounds on which permission to appeal had  been
        sought but submitted it  was  not  clear  from  the  grant  whether
        permission had been granted on all heads of  claim  or  only  on  a
        limited basis.


     8. In Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304(IAC) the
        Tribunal held that (i) In deciding an application for permission to
        appeal to the UT a judge should consider carefully the  utility  of
        granting permission only on limited grounds. In  practice,  such  a
        limited grant is unlikely to be as  helpful  as  a  general  grant,
        which identifies the ground or grounds that are considered  by  the
        judge to have the strongest prospect of  success.  (ii)  Where  the
        judge nevertheless intends to grant permission only in  respect  of
        certain of the applicant's grounds,  the  judge  should  make  this
        abundantly plain, both in his or her decision and by ensuring  that
        the Tribunal's administrative staff send  out  the  proper  notice,
        informing the applicant of the right to apply to the Upper Tribunal
        for permission to appeal on grounds on which the applicant has been
        unsuccessful in the application to the First-tier  Tribunal;  (iii)
        If an applicant who has been granted permission to appeal to the UT
        on limited grounds only applies to the Upper Tribunal on grounds in
        respect of which permission has been refused,  the  Upper  Tribunal
        judge considering that application should not  regard  his  or  her
        task as merely some form of review  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        decision on  the  application;  (iv)  In  the  IAC  the  overriding
        objective of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  is
        unlikely to be advanced by adopting a procedure whereby new grounds
        of appeal can be advanced  without  the  permission  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal under rule 5 of those Rules.


     9. In light of there being no such restriction apparent on the face of
        the grant of permission and in light of the fifth paragraph of  the
        grant stating that the grounds of appeal disclose arguable error of
        law it appears the only possible interpretation  of  the  grant  is
        that permission was granted on all grounds.


    10. In relation to the four grounds Mr McVeety accepted there is  merit
        in the  assertion  the  Panel  misdirected  themselves  in  law  in
        relation to where the burden and standard of  proof  lies  in  this
        appeal.  I find the Panel erred as alleged in the grounds.  In  the
        case of RD (Cessation - burden of proof - procedure) Algeria [2007]
        UKAIT 00066 the tribunal held that if the appellant challenges  the
        decision to revoke indefinite leave to remain because he has ceased
        to be a refugee for one of the reasons given in section 76  (3)  of
        the 2002 Act the Secretary of State must prove that such  a  reason
        existed and in doing so must rely only on an action that took place
        after  that  section  came  into  force  in  February  2003.    The
        suggestion that the burden of proof lay upon  the  Appellant  is  a
        material misdirection of law. It was for the Secretary of State  to
        prove that justifiable grounds existed for revoking the Appellant's
        status. Dang (Refugee - query revocation - Article 3)  [2013]  UKUT
        00043 also considered.


    11. I also find from a reading of the determination that  it  is  clear
        that  the  evidence  concerning  the  risk  to  the  Appellant   in
        travelling to a  safe  area  and  the  poor  conditions  there  for
        returnees which, it was  contended,  would  breach  his  Article  3
        rights, was not adequately considered by the Panel. It was found in
        Dang that whilst the past may be relevant in shedding light on  the
        current situation and a prospective Article 3 risk, it remains  the
        case that the question whether there is a real risk  of  Article  3
        ill-treatment must be answered at the date of the  hearing  and  is
        forward looking.


    12. There was no opposition to the third ground on which permission  to
        appeal was sought before me and in relation to the fourth ground Mr
        McVeety  accepted  he  was  not  able  to   dispute   the   alleged
        misdirection which he accepted may have  had  an  effect  upon  the
        Panel's approach to the remainder of the evidence.


    13. I find there are clear material errors that go to the core  of  the
        Panel's determination and that accordingly that determination  must
        be set aside. As all  relevant  issues  have  not  been  adequately
        considered by the Panel Mr O'Ryan was asked to consider whether  he
        wished the Upper Tribunal to deal with this matter or for it to  be
        remitted with there being no preserved findings.  Having been given
        time to take instructions he requested that the matter be  remitted
        which the Tribunal agreed too, especially in light of the fact that
        this preserved the Appellant's right  to  have  his  case  properly
        considered in the First-tier Tribunal and maintains  the  two-stage
        appeal process in his favour.


    14. The following direction shall apply to  the  future  management  of
        this appeal:


              i.  The determination shall be set aside. There  shall  be  no
   preserved               findings.


              ii. The parties shall prior to the substantive hearing produce
   a schedule                   of agreed  facts  and  issues  remaining  in
   dispute in an attempt to                      narrow  the  issues  to  be
   considered on the next occasion. Such an                agreed  scheduled
   to be included in the consolidated bundle.


              iii.     The  appeal  shall  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
   hearing centre at Stoke                   to be listed before a  salaried
   judge of that centre nominated by the                  Resident Judge, or
   her nominee, on the first  available  date  with  a                  time
   estimate  of  three  hours  and  taking  into  account  the  availability
     of Mr O'Ryan who shall file details of his availability for the  months
              of June July and August by Friday 16th May 2014.


              iv. Consolidated  indexed  and  paginated  bundles  containing
   copies of all                documentary evidence being relied upon shall
   be filed and served                   with  the  First-tier  tribunal  at
   Stoke and opposing party no later than                 7 days before  the
   date    of    the     next     hearing.     Those     responsible     for
   preparation   of   the   bundle   must   not   assume   that    documents
   previously filed remain available to  the  Tribunal.  Witness  statements
          shall stand as the evidence in chief of  the  maker  and  must  be
   signed,                  dated,  and  contain  a  declaration  of  truth.
   Evidence not contained                within  the  bundle  shall  not  be
   admissible without permission of the               trial judge which must
   be sought on a written application filed  prior                   to  the
   expiration of the  final  date  on  which  the  bundle  is  to  be  filed
     and which identifies the reason for the failure  to  comply  with  this
          direction, the date when the evidence will be available and filed,
                  whether the opposing party consents to such evidence being
                        adduced  late,  and  the  name  of  the   individual
   responsible  for  the                    failure  to  comply  with   this
   direction.


              v.  No interpreter is required.


Decision

    15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge. The appeal shall be remitted to
        the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Stoke  and  case  managed  in
        accordance with the directions set out above.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3rd July 2014






