
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01121/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 July 2013                               |On 01st Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and


                       KERON GEORGE MCLEOD TERRELONGE
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Claimant:      Mr A Slatter, Counsel, instructed by


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (the panel  comprising  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge KW Brown and Mr GF Sandall) promulgated on 25 March
    2014 in which they allowed the claimant's appeal against  the  decision
    of the respondent of 21 May 2013 to refuse to  revoke  the  deportation
    order against him.

 2. The claimant was born on 21 September 1967 and is a citizen of Jamaica.
     He entered the United Kingdom on 26  January  1997  with  leave  as  a
    visitor which was subsequently varied to leave as a  student.   He  was
    later granted leave to remain on the basis of his marriage to a British
    citizen and on that basis was granted indefinite leave to remain on  11
    October 2001.  The couple have a daughter who lives  with  her  mother;
    the marriage no longer subsists.

 3. On 21 November 2001 the claimant  was  convicted  of  causing  grievous
    bodily  harm  with  intent.   The  initial  sentence  of  three  years'
    imprisonment was subsequently increased by the Court of Appeal to three
    years and nine months.

 4. Consequent to that conviction, the Secretary of State decided to make a
    deportation order against him.  The appeal against  that  decision  was
    dismissed in 2004 but, for reasons which are  unclear,  no  deportation
    order was signed until 27 July 2011 after which time the  claimant  had
    twice applied for and had been  refused  naturalisation  as  a  British
    citizen.

 5. Subsequent to  the  signing  of  a  deportation  order  the  claimant's
    representatives made representations to the Secretary of State  to  the
    effect that the order should be revoked. It is against the  refusal  to
    do so that the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was made.

 6. The reasons for the refusal to revoke deportation are set  out  in  the
    refusal letter dated 21 May 2013.  In  summary,  the  respondent  noted
    [18] that the claimant had failed to comply with his release conditions
    upon completion of his sentence on  21  November  2003  and  failed  to
    notify his change of  address.   It  is  noted  that  he  came  to  the
    attention of the Criminal Casework section through representations made
    in respect of his son, Keron Anthony Terrelonge, who was deported  from
    the United Kingdom on 1 July 2012.

 7. The respondent considered that the claimant did  not  fall  within  the
    exceptions set out in paragraph 399(a) or  399(b)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as she was not satisfied that he was in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with his daughter as he was no longer in  regular  contact
    with her and thus he was no longer in a  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen spouse or partner.  She considered also that he did not  fulfil
    the requirements of paragraph 399(a) as he had not lived in the  United
    Kingdom continuously for at least twenty years and  he  had  not  shown
    that he has no ties to Jamaica [47].

 8. The respondent considered  also  that  there  were  not  in  this  case
    exceptional circumstances although she did note that he suffers from  a
    rare condition of the spinal cord, HTLV-I associated myelopathy  (HAM),
    and whilst it was incurable, the  medication  currently  prescribed  is
    available in Jamaica.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal directed themselves that this is a  case  where
    they had  to  consider  whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
    whereby the public interest in  deportation  was  outweighed  by  other
    factors [31] and, having  directed  themselves  in  line  with  Razgar,
    concluded that:-

      i) the evidence of the claimant's family life in  the  UK  is  minimal
         [33]; that his private life has largely developed since his release
         from prison involves membership of a Pentecostal Church [34] and as
         he is being treated for a rare condition which will lead to further
         disability [34] asserting that he was unable to  work  due  to  his
         condition;

     ii) substantial weight was to be given in the claimant's favour due  to
         the lack of action to enforce the deportation order made on 27 July
         2001 (sic), there being no evidence whatsoever that the  respondent
         had sought to enforce that order and there being no evidence of any
         failure of the claimant to report  or  a  non-compliance  with  the
         conditions of his release [38];

    iii) a new deportation order had been signed on 27 July 2011 there being
         a considerable number of  opportunities  prior  to  that  when  the
         respondent might have considered deporting the claimant but took no
         action [40]; that although the claimant has a  family  and  private
         life  attracting  protection,  it  is  not  extensive   and   "only
         marginally passes the first  steps  set  out  in  Razgar"  and  the
         respondent's  inaction  in  failing   to   enforce   the   original
         deportation order in a prompt and timely manner weighs  heavily  in
         the balance in favour of the claimant

10. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in law as they had:-

      i) failed to identify why the claimant's circumstances are exceptional
         as there was no evidence that  he  is  in  a  relationship  or  has
         contact with his daughter other than his own self-serving evidence;
         that  there  is  no  reasons  why  he  could   not   continue   his
         relationships with family by modern methods of communication and by
         visits; that there is no evidence he requires any support currently
         and his dependence arising  from  medical  conditions  went  beyond
         normal emotional ties; that there is nothing exceptional about  his
         private life that cannot be continued  in  Jamaica,  a  country  to
         which he has ties in the form of his  son  who  had  been  deported
         there recently and thus the circumstances are not exceptional;

     ii) failed to give adequate consideration to public  interest,  failing
         to make findings as to whether he has addressed his behaviour or as
         to his future risk of harm;

    iii) erred in their assessment of the Secretary of  State's  failure  to
         enforce the deportation, they  delay  being  in  fact  due  to  the
         claimant's actions and he had failed to provide  evidence  that  he
         had informed the Secretary of  State  through  his  representatives
         regarding failure to comply with reporting restrictions in 2003, it
         being submitted that he had in fact absconded, had failed to comply
         with reporting constrictions and failed to provide evidence  as  to
         why he had not reported;

     iv) failed to carry out a thorough assessment of the  public  interest,
         taking  into  account  the  fact  that  deportation  is   not   one
         dimensional effect but deters other foreign nationals and preserves
         public confidence in the system of control, the public interest  in
         deportation going well beyond the need to  deprive  individuals  of
         the chance to re-offend in this country.

11. On 23 May 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic granted permission to appeal.



The hearing

12. After some discussion it was agreed that contrary to what the  Tribunal
    had believed, no deportation order had been signed in  respect  of  the
    claimant until 2011.  As there had been an earlier decision, to make  a
    deportation order, and it is that decision which gave rise to the first
    appeal in 2003, there was no "new" order signed.

13. Mr Whitwell submitted that there were no exceptional  circumstances  in
    this case and it was to be noted  the  Tribunal  had  found  a  minimal
    family and private life.  He submitted also that it was clear from  the
    refusal letter that the applicant had not been reporting  and  that  it
    appeared that at points the claimant had left the United  Kingdom.   Mr
    Whitwell submitted also that the panel  had  made  no  mention  of  the
    public interest which was a  serious  error  given  the  very  marginal
    nature of the claimant's private and family life.

14. Mr Slatter submitted that it was evident from the Tribunal's  reference
    to exceptional circumstances  in  their  self-direction  at  [31].   He
    submitted further that the panel were entitled to  conclude  that  this
    was an exceptional case given the substantial period of inaction during
    which time the claimant had made two  applications  for  naturalisation
    and it was significant that the Secretary of State had taken no actions
    to enforce.  He submitted further that the  panel  had  given  adequate
    consideration to the public interest and  that  the  findings  of  fact
    impugned in the grounds were sustainable.

Decision

15. The Tribunal directed themselves  correctly  [31]  that  they  have  to
    consider whether there are exceptional circumstances in the  claimant's
    case whereby the public interest in deportation is outweighed by  other
    factors.  That, given the acceptance that the exceptions set out within
    paragraph 398 and 399(a) were not met is the correct  approach  but  in
    doing so, careful attention needs to be  brought  on  what  the  public
    interest requires.

16. In MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  (decided  shortly  after  SS
    (Nigeria)) the Court of Appeal  also  addressed  the  strength  of  the
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals. In particular the court
    focused upon the strength of the "other factors" which  would  need  to
    exist before a justification for deportation would  be  set  aside.  In
    paragraph 40 of their judgment the Court of Appeal stated:

         "Does it follow that the new rules have effected  no  change  other
         than to spell out the circumstances in which a  foreign  criminal's
         claim that deportation would  breach  his  Article  8  rights  will
         succeed? At this point, it is necessary to focus on  the  statement
         that it will only be 'in exceptional circumstances that the  public
         interest in deportation will be outweighed by  other  factors'.  Ms
         Giovannetti submits that the reference to exceptional circumstances
         serves the purpose of emphasising that, in the balancing  exercise,
         great weight should be given to the public  interest  in  deporting
         foreign criminals who do not satisfy paras 398 and 399 or 399A.  It
         is only exceptionally that such foreign criminals will  succeed  in
         showing that their rights  under  Article  8(1)  trump  the  public
         interest in their deportation."

17. In paragraph 42 the Court stated that in cases of criminal deportation:
    "...the scales are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of  deportation  and
    something very compelling (which will be exceptional)  is  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in removal". In  paragraph  43  the  Court
    stated that the general rule was that in the case of foreign  prisoners
    to whom paragraphs 399 and 399A did not apply "very compelling reasons"
    would be required to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

18. While the Tribunal did carry out  a  balancing  exercise  in  assessing
    proportionality, as they are required to do, there is little indication
    of what weight they attached to the public interest in so doing. It was
    incumbent on them to take into consideration the aims or object of  the
    policy in question and then to set against that assessment the  factors
    said to warrant departing from the stated  object  or  policy.  In  the
    present case the object or policy in question is the  public  interest,
    set out in an Act of Parliament,  in  favour  of  deporting  criminals.
    There can be little doubt that Parliament views the object of deporting
    those with a criminal record as a very strong policy  albeit  that  the
    weight to be attached to that  object  will  also  include  a  variable
    component which reflects the criminality in issue

19. In considering how the Tribunal approached the balancing  exercise,  it
    is important to note in this case that they found the strength  of  the
    claimant's private and family  life  was  described  as  "minimal"  and
    accepted [41] that he only marginally passed the first steps in Razgar.
     It is established law  that  the  threshold  set  out  in  the  second
    question in Razgar is low.

20. Further, it is to be borne in mind that in the balancing exercise,  the
    final step set out in  Razgar  the  scales  are  not  evenly  weighted;
    Parliament has tilted them strongly in favour  of  deportation.  It  is
    clear from case law that for the tilted scales to return to  the  level
    and then swing in favour of a criminal opposing deportation that  there
    must be compelling reasons which must be exceptional, all the  more  so
    where, as here, there was little in the way of family or  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom.

21. In this case other than the respondent's  inaction  and  the  fact  the
    claimant had not committed  further  offences,  no  other  factors  are
    relied upon by the Tribunal in concluding that the scales  have  tipped
    in the claimant's favour.

22. Whilst a long period of  delay  may  be  capable  of  amounting  to  an
    exceptional circumstance, in this case  the  mistake  of  fact  in  the
    determination [38].  They referred to  a  lack  of  action  to  enforce
    deportation made on 27 July 2001.  Whilst that might be thought of as a
    typographical error given that the deportation order was signed  on  27
    July 2011, they then go to refer to the appeal rights  being  exhausted
    by September 2004 and to say that there is no evidence whatsoever  that
    the respondent sought to enforce that order.   In  fact,  as  is  noted
    above, there was a notice  of  intention  to  deport  issued  in  2003,
    followed by an appeal.  There was no "new" deportation order; there was
    only one order signed in July 2011.

23. It is, however, evident that the Tribunal had  in  mind  a  failure  to
    enforce a deportation order for some ten years which  is  significantly
    different from the lesser period which occurred here.

24. The fact that the claimant had not committed further  offences  is  not
    one which can properly attract weight in  his  favour;  not  committing
    crimes is something that is expected of all members of society.

25. In the circumstances, I consider that the reasons given by the Tribunal
    for finding that the strong public interest in deporting  the  claimant
    was displaced are inadequate and unsustainable.

26. Accordingly, I am satisfied that both the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law.

27. In considering whether to remit the decision to be remade in the  Upper
    Tribunal or remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, I am  mindful  of  the
    fact that both parties wish to adduce additional  evidence  which  will
    result in a requirement to make fresh  findings  of  fact  both  as  to
    whether or not the claimant had complied  with  reporting  restrictions
    and as to whether, as the respondent  contends,  he  had  continued  to
    commit criminal offences.

28. Given the strong similarity between the claimant and his  son's  names,
    and given that the son was deported following a number of  convictions,
    a detailed fact-finding exercise will be necessary.  Accordingly, I  am
    satisfied that, having had regard to the overriding procedure  and  the
    presidential statement, that it would on the  facts  of  this  case  be
    appropriate to remit the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh determination.  None of the findings of fact are preserved.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


