


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01767/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Sheldon Court, Birmingham          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 2 March 2016                             |On : 18 March 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     Y L
                           (aNONYMITY oRDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Manning, instructed by Scott-Moncrieff &
                    Associates Ltd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing her appeal against the decision to deport  her  from  the  United
Kingdom  pursuant  to  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations").  Permission  to
appeal was granted on 3 August 2015.

The appellant is a national of Norway, born on 6  October  1970.  She  first
came to the attention of the United Kingdom authorities on 6 February  2009,
having, she claims, previously resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  from  2002
until 2008, when she returned to the United Kingdom  from  Norway.  She  was
apprehended on arrival in the United Kingdom, as there  was  an  outstanding
warrant for her arrest.

On 19 November 2009 the appellant was  convicted  of  money  laundering  and
concealment  of  criminal  property  and  was  sentenced  to  three   years'
imprisonment.  The  Home  Office  considered,  but  decided  not  to  pursue
deportation at that time, but she  was  warned  that  deportation  would  be
considered if she re-offended.  On  20  September  2013  the  appellant  was
convicted  again  of  concealing  or  converting  or  transferring  criminal
property and possessing criminal property and was sentenced  to  two  years'
imprisonment.

On 2 December 2013 the appellant was served with a notice  of  liability  to
deportation and she responded  accordingly.  Her  daughter's  views  on  her
possible deportation were sought by the Home Office in  July  2014  and  she
also responded.

On 2 September 2014 a deportation order was signed and the  respondent  made
a decision  to  deport  the  appellant  under  the  EEA  Regulations  on  11
September 2014. In making her decision, the respondent did not  accept  that
the appellant had acquired a permanent right  of  residence  in  the  United
Kingdom and considered that she posed a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
serious threat to the interests of  public  policy  pursuant  to  Regulation
21(5). It was considered further that her deportation would not  breach  her
Article 8 rights under the ECHR.

The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was heard on  27
March 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson.

Judge Ferguson heard from the  appellant,  her  former  partner  PF  (and  a
father-figure to F) and two other witnesses. He accepted that the  appellant
had acquired a permanent right of residence in the  United  Kingdom  and  he
found that the correct test was therefore the "serious grounds"  test  under
Regulation 21(3). He found that the  appellant  represented  a  genuine  and
serious risk and that there was a serious risk to public policy and went  on
to consider whether the decision to deport was proportionate.  In  so  doing
he considered the circumstances and interests of  the  appellant's  daughter
F, who was 16 years old at the time and was a student at  a  private  girls'
boarding school, and he concluded that it was proportionate for F to  remain
in the United Kingdom without her mother, if she were  deported  to  Norway.
He found the decision to deport the appellant to be proportionate.

The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that  the  judge,  in  considering  whether  or  not  the  appellant
presented a genuine and sufficiently serious threat, had  erred  in  law  by
failing to  give  adequate  reasons  for  preferring  the  evidence  of  the
probation service over the evidence of a  consultant  forensic  psychologist
and for finding that the serious grounds threshold had been  met;  that  the
judge had erred by making numerous references to the Morecombe  Bay  tragedy
when there was no evidence that the appellant was linked to that;  and  that
the judge, in concluding that deportation was proportionate, had  failed  to
consider material matters, including in particular the evidence  from  F  in
her answer to the Home Office questions and in her  statement,  as  well  as
the effect of the appellant's deportation on F.

Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently granted  on
a renewed  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  3  August  2015,  with
particular reference to the ground relating to F's evidence.

Appeal hearing and submissions

Ms Manning pursued all  the  grounds.  She  submitted  that  the  consultant
forensic psychologist's report revealed flaws  in  the  probation  service's
assessment of risk and that the judge had erred by preferring the report  of
the probation officer in concluding that the appellant posed a  medium  risk
of  re-offending.  She  submitted  further  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
referring to the Morecombe Bay tragedy, when the appellant  was  not  linked
to that in any way. She submitted that the judge's proportionality  decision
failed to  consider  F's  own  evidence,  as  well  as  the  impact  on  her
education, her right to stay in the United Kingdom as an  EEA  national  and
PF's evidence about F's situation.

Mr McVeety submitted that the judge was entitled to find that the  appellant
posed a medium risk, that the Morecombe Bay tragedy was referred to only  by
way of an example and that the judge had taken  into  account  F's  evidence
and was entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
proportionate.

Ms Manning, in response, reiterated her previous submissions.

I advised the parties that, in my view, the judge's  decision  contained  no
errors of law. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

The appellant challenges the judge's assessment  of  risk  of  re-offending,
asserting that he was wrong to rely on the  probation  reports  rather  than
the expert's report, particularly where the expert identified errors in  the
probation reports. However it seems to me  that  this  ground  is  simply  a
disagreement with the weight  that  the  judge  attached  to  the  probation
reports, whereas the weight to be attached to the different  reports  was  a
matter for the judge. It cannot in any way be said that the  judge  did  not
give full and proper consideration to the expert's views and neither can  it
be said that he did not provide reasons for accepting the  evidence  of  the
probation services. At [34] and [35] he set  out  the  submissions  made  on
behalf of the appellant raising the same points as are now  raised  in  this
challenge, and, in considering those matters undertook, at [44] to  [52],  a
very detailed and careful  analysis  of  both  the  probation  reports  (the
National Offender Management Service, NOMS  report  of  June  2014  and  the
additional NOMS report of 17 September 2014) and the expert  report,  giving
cogent reasons for attaching the weight that he did to the reports.

It is argued on behalf of the appellant that the  expert's  view,  that  the
commission by the appellant of the second offence whilst on licence did  not
increase the risk of re-offending, was to  be  preferred  to  the  probation
service's view that the risk was increased  to  a  medium  risk.  However  I
would agree with Mr McVeety that the judge  was  entitled  to  place  little
weight on the expert's view in that  respect  and  to  prefer  that  of  the
probation services. I would also agree with Mr  McVeety  that  the  expert's
criticism  of  the  probation  service's  apparent   failure   to   consider
"protective factors" including the financial and other support available  to
the appellant from PF, failed  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  those
factors had always been there and  had  not  prevented  the  appellant  from
offending. As Mr McVeety submitted, the  panel  clearly  took  such  matters
into account in assessing the overall risk.

For the reasons given by the judge, and having  considered  the  expert  and
probation reports myself, it seems to me that the judge  properly  gave  the
weight that he did to the  reports  and  was  perfectly  entitled  to  place
little weight upon the expert's  criticisms  of  the  NOMS  reports  and  to
accept  the  conclusions  of  the  probation  service  that  the   appellant
presented a medium risk of re-offending.

The grounds also criticise the judge for having relied  on  the  tragedy  at
Morecombe Bay as justification for  his  conclusion  on  "serious"  grounds,
when the appellant was not linked in any way to that incident.  However  the
judge clearly did not proceed on an understanding  that  the  appellant  was
directly linked to the incident. He referred to it firstly  because  it  was
mentioned in the NOMS report in relation to associations  of  the  appellant
and her sister, but also to emphasise at [53] and  [54]  that,  contrary  to
the  appellant's  view  of  the  harmless  nature  of  her  offence,  money-
laundering was not a victimless crime and was in  fact  linked  to  criminal
gangs and resulted in threats and harm  to  vulnerable  people.  Accordingly
there was no error on the part of the judge in referring to the  tragedy  in
the context  that  he  did.  Neither  was  there  any  error  in  the  judge
concluding that the "serious grounds" test had been met.

The grant of permission was granted primarily upon  the  last  ground  which
challenged the  judge's  decision  on  proportionality,  asserting  that  he
failed to take into account the evidence of  the  appellant's  daughter,  F,
and the effect the appellant's deportation to  Norway  would  have  on  her.
Reference is made in particular to F's answers to the 22  questions  put  to
her by the Home Office and to her statement. However it is  clear  from  the
judge's findings at [56] to [69]  that  he  undertook  a  very  careful  and
detailed assessment of F's circumstances and best interests, recognising  at
[56] that that was the focus of  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
appellant in regard to proportionality. Whilst he did not refer directly  to
F's answers to the questions or to her  statement,  it  is  plain  that  the
contents of that evidence formed part of his overall conclusions as  to  her
best interests.

Ms Manning submitted that, by failing to consider F's  evidence,  the  judge
had given no consideration to the impact on her education  if  she  went  to
Norway and to her right as an EEA national to stay in  the  United  Kingdom.
However it was, of course, the judge's conclusion  that  she  would  not  be
compelled to leave the United Kingdom and go to Norway with her  mother  and
that she could continue with her education and with her life in  the  United
Kingdom with minimum disruption, despite her mother's  deportation.  Indeed,
having carefully considered F's evidence in her answers to the questions  it
seems to me that it serves only to confirm that conclusion.  Her  answer  to
question 4 confirms the limited nature of F's  visits  to  her  mother  and,
significantly, her answer to question 6 confirms that her mother's  move  to
Norway would be no different to her  friends'  circumstances  whose  parents
lived abroad. As Mr McVeety submitted, the appellant's  evidence  in  answer
to questions 16 and 17, that she was only boarding  at  school  because  her
mother was in prison and that she would otherwise prefer to  be  a  daygirl,
is contradicted by the fact that she has  remained  a  boarder  despite  her
mother's release from prison some time ago. Ms Manning's response  was  that
that was because her mother lived at some distance from the school  and  was
bound by her bail conditions to remain living where she  was,  but  she  was
unable to respond to the suggestion that F could have moved  schools  to  be
closer to her mother.

Clearly, as the judge properly found at [65] to [67], and  for  the  reasons
properly given, the priority was for F to remain at her current  school  and
complete her education there, as a boarder, and there was no  reason,  given
PF's commitment to continue funding her education and given F's  ability  to
visit her mother in Norway during school holidays or even at  weekends,  why
the appellant's deportation would prevent that. There is  no  merit  in  the
assertion in the grounds that the judge failed to give proper  consideration
to F's evidence and to the evidence of PF in  regard  to  F's  circumstances
and interests. As for Ms Manning's reliance upon the  respondent's  previous
decision, on Article 8 grounds, not to pursue deportation, it is clear  that
that was a decision made prior to  the  appellant  re-offending  during  the
period of her licence and that it was in any event a matter which the  judge
took into account at [57]. Having taken all relevant matters  into  account,
and having given full and detailed consideration  to  the  circumstances  of
the appellant, PF and in particular F, and for the reasons  cogently  given,
the judge was perfectly entitled to conclude, and properly  concluded,  that
the appellant's deportation would not be disproportionate.

For all of these reasons I conclude  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  requiring
the decision to be set aside.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision.  The
decision to dismiss the appellant's deportation appeal therefore stands.

    Anonymity Order
    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.













                               Signed                          Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
