
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01745/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                          muhammad mustajab ali rao
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, instructed by Salam & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant Muhammad Mustajab Ali Rao was born on  29  December  1982
    and is a male citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed against the decision of
    the respondent dated 27 August 2014 to refuse to revoke  a  deportation
    order.  The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lloyd-Smith)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 December 2014, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I was assisted at the outset of this hearing by Mr  Harrison,  for  the
    respondent, who did not  seek  to  uphold  the  judge's  decision.   Mr
    Harrison accepted that the judge had erred in law.  At [27], the  judge
    had written:

         "It is accepted that in the refusal letter [of the respondent] that
         the appellant has a subsisting relationship with both  his  partner
         and child and that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  either  of
         them to live in Pakistan with the appellant."

 3. Notwithstanding this recording  of  a  clear  concession  made  by  the
    respondent in the refusal letter, the judge went on to find  [28]  that
    the appellant's wife could possibly "leave with the appellant  so  that
    family life could be built in  Pakistan."   Again  at  [28]  the  judge
    noted, referring to the appellant's wife:

         "It is not a culture that is unknown to [the appellant's wife]  and
         whilst there may be a period of adaptation she may decide that  the
         initial upheaval would be worth it for the family to  remain  as  a
         unit.  Whilst that may be harsh initially I do not find it would be
         unduly harsh."

 4. In her consideration of the concession  made  by  the  respondent  (see
    above) the judge had also noted:

         "What is not accepted is that it would be unduly harsh for the wife
         and the child  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  the  appellant  to  be
         deported."

 5. I am not satisfied that  the  judge  has  addressed  her  mind  to  the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules  or  that  she  has  given
    adequate reasons for finding that (to use her own words) the impact  of
    deportation  "may be  harsh,  even  very  harsh,  ...  [but]  does  not
    necessarily amount to it being unduly harsh" [26].  A main  purpose  of
    any judicial decision is to explain to a losing party  exactly  and  in
    very clear terms why he or she has lost.  It is not clear to me exactly
    what provisions the judge is applying in the passage  of  her  decision
    from which I have quoted above or, indeed, the principles which she has
    used to make distinctions between degrees of harshness,  in  particular
    between "very harsh" and "unduly harsh."  Anyone reading  the  decision
    is likely, in my opinion, to be left confused by the judge's analysis.

 6. In the circumstances, it is appropriate to  set  aside  this  decision.
    Given the need for a thorough re-investigation of the evidence,  it  is
    appropriate that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  10
December 2014 is set aside.   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Lloyd-Smith) for that Tribunal to remake  the  decision.
None of the findings of fact shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 4 August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
