
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01300/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 November 2015                   |On 2 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR MOHAMED MUMIN MOHAMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson, Counsel


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the  First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in  this  particular  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
         appeals against a decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
         promulgated on 18  December  2014  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
         Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
         20 June 2014 to make a deportation order against him under  section
         5(1) Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that his presence in the  UK
         is not conducive to the public good (section 3(5)(a)).

      2. The background facts so far as it is necessary to  recite  them  at
         this stage are that the Appellant who  is  a  national  of  Somalia
         arrived in the UK from Kenya in June 2002 aged ten years  with  his
         mother and younger sister.  Prior to that, from  the  age  of  five
         years to ten years, he lived in Kenya.  He is now aged twenty-three
         years.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain with  his  family
         in January 2008 and the remainder of his family  (mother,  siblings
         and their  children)  are  now  British  citizens.   The  Appellant
         married his wife on 28 November 2014.  She is of Somali origin  but
         now has indefinite leave as a refugee.  He met his wife towards the
         end of 2013, they formed a relationship from  August  2014  and  he
         proposed to her in September 2014.

      3. The Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  protection  grounds
         and there is no challenge to that decision.  He allowed it  however
         on human rights grounds, finding that the Appellant has  "no  ties"
         to Somalia and, taking account of the Appellant's private  life  in
         the UK and relationship with his family and wife outside the Rules,
         finding that there were compelling circumstances also  to  outweigh
         the public interest so that the appeal was allowed also on  Article
         8 grounds outside the immigration rules ("the Rules").

    Error of law decision

      4. The Respondent challenges the Decision on the basis that the  Judge
         applied the wrong version of the Rules.  The Secretary  of  State's
         decision pre-dates the changes to the Rules on 28 July  2014.   The
         hearing of the appeal and Decision both post-date  the  changes  to
         the Rules by a considerable margin (December 2014).  The  Court  of
         Appeal in YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 makes clear at [39] that the  version  of  the
         Rules to be applied is the version in force as at the date  of  the
         hearing before the Tribunal.  The same position applies in relation
         to  section  117  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
         ("section 117").

      5. In this case, there is  no  dispute  that  the  Judge  applied  the
         previous version of  the  Rules  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
         private life at [28] of the Decision by  applying  a  test  of  "no
         ties".  The Judge also applied the previous version  of  the  Rules
         when considering the Appellant's relationship with  his  spouse  in
         finding that he could not  consider  that  relationship  under  the
         Rules as the Appellant had not lived in the  UK  for  a  sufficient
         period (of 15 years) [28].  Conversely, the Judge did  indicate  at
         [29] that he was required to and did apply section 117A-D.

      6. In granting permission to appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Macleman
         indicated that the Judge may  have  fallen  into  error  due  to  a
         failure by the representatives to bring the amendments to the Rules
         to the attention of the Judge.  Ms Peterson for the Appellant  very
         fairly pointed me to the fact that both parties had  in  fact  made
         submissions that the  post  28  July  2014  version  of  the  Rules
         applied.  She accepted very fairly that the Judge made an error  of
         law but submitted that  it  was  not  material  as,  based  on  his
         findings as to the extent of the Applicant's private life  and  his
         relationship with his wife, the same outcome would be reached.  She
         also pointed out that the Judge applied section 117 which is  to  a
         similar effect to the post 28  July  2014  version  of  the  Rules.
         Further,  the  Judge  made  findings  in  relation  to   compelling
         circumstances outside the Rules to which  the  same  considerations
         would now apply.

      7. Mr Staunton submitted that when  the  Judge  considered  compelling
         circumstances in the instant case he should (per Secretary of State
         for the Home Department v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA  Civ  1636)  have
         considered the case "through the lens of the new rules themselves".
          If the Judge had not considered the correct Rules  then  it  could
         not be said that he considered  the  case  correctly  through  that
         lens.  He also submitted that, in considering  whether  there  were
         compelling circumstances to allow the appeal outside the Rules, the
          Judge erred in failing to accord the proper weight to  the  public
         interest and therefore finding that the factors in this  case  were
         sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public  interest.   In
         relation to the case under the Rules, he submitted that the test of
         "no ties" is different to that of "very significant obstacles"; one
         looks  to  the  current  position  and  the  other  to  the  future
         possibility of integration in the deportee's home country.

      8. Ms Peterson submitted that there would in fact be a  difference  in
         treatment of the Appellant's relationship with his wife due to  the
         change in the Rules as there is no  longer  a  requirement  that  a
         person be in the UK for 15 years preceding the date of decision  in
         the current paragraph 399 of the Rules.  That led  me  to  question
         whether the Appellant's relationship was formed at a time  when  he
         was here unlawfully or precariously and I was told that it was not.
          He was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2008.  Having  looked
         at the evidence, however, I find that Ms Peterson's  submission  is
         not correct.  The relationship was  formed  in  August  2014.   The
         notice of liability to make a deportation order was made on 20 June
         2014.  It is the case in law that the Appellant's indefinite  leave
         would not be cancelled by deportation until the  deportation  order
         is signed (which has not yet occurred) but in my view, by the  fact
         of notice of liability to deportation having been given, it  cannot
         be said that the Appellant's status  was  not  precarious  when  he
         entered into the relationship.  I find therefore that he could  not
         meet paragraph 399 even on the current position and  accordingly  I
         would still need to consider the Appellant's relationship with  his
         wife outside the Rules, taking into consideration of course that he
         is unable to meet the Rules based on that relationship.

      9. I have considered [29] to [39] of the  Decision,  where  the  Judge
         considers the case outside  the  Rules.   The  Judge  has  directed
         himself  to  relevant  case  law,  in  particular  SS  (Nigeria)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  He
         has properly directed himself  to  the  need  for  a  "very  strong
         claim".  The Judge has properly taken into account section 117  and
         has considered  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  Appellant's
         offence in particular.  The Judge notes that the  crime  of  street
         mugging, which the Appellant committed in  2009,  was  serious  and
         involved violence.  Against that, he notes that the Appellant was a
         juvenile at the time of the offence, that this was the only offence
         which he committed and that this was due to peer pressures which no
         longer exist (due  to  his  move  from  Scotland  to  London).   He
         therefore regards the risk of re-offending as low.  The Judge  also
         has regard to the fact that all of the Appellant's  family  members
         are in the UK and that, although the relationship  is  not  one  of
         sufficient dependency to form family life, this forms part  of  the
         Appellant's private life and that his ties are strong.   The  Judge
         also accepts that the Appellant's wife could not return with him to
         Somalia as she is a recognised refugee from that country.  As such,
         his marital ties if he were deported would be "utterly disrupted".

     10. The Judge allowed the appeal "on human rights grounds (Article 8)".
          It is not clear from that conclusion whether the Judge found  that
         the  Appellant  fell  within  the  exceptions  to  deportation   in
         particular in paragraph 399A or whether he allowed  the  appeal  on
         the basis that there were compelling circumstances over  and  above
         the exceptions. In that regard, the conclusion and also [28] of the
         Decision, where the  Judge  indicates  that  the  Appellant  "falls
         within the ambit of paragraph 399A" are ambiguous  and  it  remains
         unclear as to the basis on which the appeal  was  allowed.   If  my
         decision as to whether there is an error of law were constrained to
         considering the Judge's reasoning on the basis of whether there are
         very compelling circumstances beyond paragraph  399A,  I  would  be
         satisfied that there is no error of law.  However, mindful  of  the
         ambiguity in relation to the basis on which the appeal was  allowed
         and the fact that the Judge could only go on to consider compelling
         circumstances once he had properly  considered  the  exceptions  in
         paragraphs 399 and 399A, I am  satisfied  that  the  Decision  does
         involve the making of a material error of law.  Accordingly, I  set
         aside the Decision.

     11. I indicated at the end of the hearing that if  I  were  to  find  a
         material error of law, I proposed to go on to re-make the  decision
         based on the submissions made at the hearing and  on  the  evidence
         before me, which now includes evidence that the Appellant's wife is
         pregnant with their first  child  and  is  due  to  give  birth  in
         February 2016.  It was agreed that none of the Judge's findings  of
         fact are in dispute, that there is no issue as  to  credibility  of
         the Appellant or his witnesses and that no further oral evidence is
         required.  I therefore go on to re-make the  decision  taking  into
         account the findings made and all the evidence before me.

    Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules

     12. In relation to the exceptions set out in the Rules, as  I  indicate
         above, only paragraph 399A is material.  I find that paragraph  399
         cannot avail the Appellant as, although it  is  accepted  that  his
         relationship with his wife is genuine and subsisting, it was formed
         at a stage when his presence has been precarious.   The Appellant's
         child is as yet  unborn  and  therefore  paragraph  399(a)  has  no
         application.

     13. Paragraph 399A reads as follows:-

             "399A     This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)
             applies if-

                    (a)      the person has been lawfully resident in the UK
                    for most of his life; and

                    (b)      he is socially and culturally  integrated  into
                    the UK; and

                    (c)      there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
                    his integration into the country to which it is proposed
                    he is deported"

     14. There is no dispute that the Appellant meets paragraph 399A(a).  He
         has lived in the UK for thirteen years from the age of  ten  years.
         In relation to his integration in the UK, all his family are in the
         UK.  There is evidence that this is  an  extended  family  of  four
         generations who all live in the UK and have made the UK their home.
         The Appellant has worked in the UK although was made redundant from
         his last job.   He  has  faced  obvious  difficulties  in  securing
         employment since his release  but  notwithstanding  that  there  is
         evidence that he has found gainful employment in three  jobs  since
         he left prison.  He is now married and  the  couple  are  expecting
         their first child very shortly.

     15. In relation to the obstacles he would face on  return  to  Somalia,
         the Judge found that he spent his formative years outside  Somalia.
         He left there aged five and spent five years in Kenya before coming
         to the UK.  His main language is English.   The  Appellant  accepts
         that he speaks the language of Somalia albeit imperfectly.  He does
         not read or write in Somali.  He has no idea  how  the  culture  or
         society operates in Somalia. He has no family in  Somalia  that  he
         knows of.  His mother, siblings and their children are all  in  the
         UK.  His father from whom  his  mother  is  divorced  did  live  in
         Somalia but left Somalia with the  rest  of  the  family  when  the
         Appellant was aged five years. The Appellant  has  had  no  contact
         with his father or his father's family and it is therefore  unclear
         whether they are still in Kenya, have returned to Somalia  or  live
         elsewhere.

     16. The security situation in Somalia is improved.  The Judge found  in
         the Decision that there would be  no  real  risk  of  a  breach  of
         Article 3 ECHR on return.  The Appellant would not be  forced  into
         an IDP camp.  It is nonetheless the case that the  Appellant  would
         face very real difficulties in integrating into society in Somalia.
         He grew up outside that  country  and  has  no  family  members  or
         friends there who could assist his reintegration.  Although he  has
         been found not to be a  member  of  a  minority  clan  and  is  not
         therefore at risk on that account,  he  is  unlikely  to  have  any
         knowledge of how the clan system  operates  in  Somalia  given  the
         length of time he has been out of the country and the young age  at
         which he left.  It would therefore be difficult for him to look  to
         the majority clan for  assistance  in  reintegration.  I  note  the
         Judge's finding at [26] of the Decision that, although there may be
         some limited financial support  available  to  the  Appellant  from
         family in the UK, his family here would find it difficult  to  send
         him much due to their own circumstances. The position in Somalia is
         not sufficient to reach the high threshold for a real risk to arise
         under Article  3  ECHR  which  is  of  course  an  absolute  right.
         However, that  is  not  to  say  that  those  factors  may  not  be
         sufficient to meet the threshold of "very  significant  obstacles",
         particularly when coupled with other factors.

     17. Taking into account as a whole the factors to which I  refer  above
         at [12] to [16] and on the basis of all the evidence before  me,  I
         find that the Appellant is socially and culturally integrated  into
         the UK and that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
         integration in Somalia.

    Very compelling circumstances

     18. In case I am wrong about that, I go on to consider the case on  the
         basis of whether there are  very  compelling  circumstances  beyond
         those in paragraph  399A  of  the  Rules  which  might  render  the
         Appellant's deportation disproportionate.

     19. The Appellant's life with his family members and wife in the UK  is
         not something which can be considered under paragraph  399  of  the
         Rules.  The Appellant's evidence in relation to  his  relationships
         with his mother, siblings and their children is set out at [37]  of
         the Decision and I do not need to repeat the  findings  there  made
         which are not disputed.  Although the  Judge  did  not  find  those
         relationships  to  amount  to  family  life  due  to  the  lack  of
         dependency of the Appellant on his family members and  vice  versa,
         it is clear from the evidence  there  recited  that  the  Appellant
         enjoys very strong ties with his family.   The Appellant lives with
         his family as well as with his wife.  He is the only adult male  in
         the household and sees himself as the male head  of  the  household
         with responsibilities for his family.  There is also evidence  that
         the Appellant makes a significant  financial  contribution  to  the
         family when he is in employment.  I do not need to  decide  whether
         there may be a dependency  which  gives  rise  to  family  life  as
         whether there is interference with the Appellant's and his family's
         family life or their private lives is  largely  irrelevant.   There
         would be a substantial interference if he  were  deported.  As  the
         Judge found at [39] of the Decision, those ties would be "seriously
         ruptured" if the Appellant were deported.

     20. The Appellant is married to  a  woman  of  Somali  origin  who  has
         indefinite leave to remain in the UK as a recognised refugee.   Her
         father was shot and killed in  front  of  her  when  she  lived  in
         Somalia.  She says that "the  memory  alone  of  Somalia  gives  me
         nightmares"  Even though country conditions  in  Somalia  may  have
         changed for the better since the time she was granted status in the
         UK, in light of her background, she could not be expected to return
         to Somalia with the  Appellant.   I  take  into  account  that  the
         Appellant's relationship with his wife cannot meet the requirements
         of paragraph  399  because  his  status  was  precarious  when  the
         relationship was formed.  I take into account that the relationship
         is  quite  short  lived.  I  take  into  account  also   that   the
         relationship was formed after  the  Appellant  had  been  made  the
         subject of a decision to deport him. However, there is  no  dispute
         that the relationship is genuine and subsisting.   The  Appellant's
         wife says that in spite of her  past  experiences  in  Somalia  she
         could not leave the Appellant to go to Somalia alone.   That  shows
         the genuine strength of feeling which she has  for  him.   I  doubt
         however that she would  in  fact  go  with  him  due  to  her  past
         experiences particularly now that she is pregnant with their  first
         child.  She is due to give birth in February 2016.  The child  will
         be a British citizen.  I take into  account  that  the  Appellant's
         wife has her family members and the Appellant's family  members  in
         the UK who can assist her with the new baby.  However, I find  that
         the effect of the Appellant's deportation would be,  as  the  Judge
         recognised, that the relationship  would  be  "utterly  disrupted".
         The effect is likely to be that the Appellant's wife would be  left
         in the UK as a single mother with a very young baby  and  that  the
         Appellant would be separated from them at the very least while  his
         child is growing up.

     21. Although the Appellant  could  not  be  subject  to  the  automatic
         deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007 because he was  a
         juvenile when he was convicted of the offence  which  rendered  him
         liable to deportation, he is nonetheless a foreign criminal for the
         purposes of the Immigration Act 2014.  As such, section 117 applies
         with full  force  to  my  consideration  of  the  public  interest.
         Deportation of foreign criminals is in the  public  interest.   The
         more serious the offence  committed  by  a  foreign  criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation.

     22. In this case, the offence was serious and involved  violence.   The
         Appellant has explained in his statement that he was influenced  by
         peer pressures and due to the lack of a father figure in his  life,
         he committed the offence in order to belong to his group of friends
         who he acknowledges now were a bad  lot.    His  mother  moved  the
         family from Scotland due to her fear of the effect of  the  company
         her son was keeping but unfortunately for  the  Appellant  and  his
         family this came too late to avoid him committing  the  offence  of
         which  he  was  convicted.  The  Appellant  acknowledges  that  his
         imprisonment was "well deserved" and says he has learnt a  lot  and
         has changed his life for the better.  It is  worth  repeating  what
         the Judge who sentenced him said in the sentencing remarks:-

             "You are clearly a young man without convictions with  a  good
             family background. You have potential.  You made admissions to
             the police.  You have not been in trouble since and  you  were
             trying to do what you can by way of education.   You've  moved
             to London.  But robbery is a most  serious  offence  and  this
             complainer was going about his lawful business ...  there  was
             no provocation ...  for  what  happened  to  him  and  he  was
             attacked, robbed and  then  laughed  at  when  he  sought  his
             medication and his house keys.  I am  afraid  that  crimes  of
             that sort simply cannot be tolerated.  It  can  be  said  that
             those who have, as you  have,  clearly  potential,  clearly  a
             young man who has had the benefit of a supportive family, that
             you have known well not to get involved in this  ...  but  the
             gravity of this offence is  such  that  the  only  appropriate
             disposal is a custodial one ... you are sentenced to 24 months
             detention ..."

     23. The sentence was reduced on appeal to sixteen months.   It  is  the
         Appellant's  only  offence.   I  recognise  also,   however,   that
         deportation is intended to have the effect of deterrence  of  other
         non-British citizens from committing similar offences: N (Kenya)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004  EWCA  Civ  1094.
         The fact that the Appellant is a very low risk of re-offending does
         not mean that it is not in the public interest to deport: Gurung  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  62.   I
         note also case law such as AJ (Angola) and SS  (Nigeria)  which  is
         all to the effect that, in order to outweigh the public interest in
         deportation even where the case concerns only one criminal  offence
         requires a "very strong" Article 8 claim.  Each case  does  however
         turn on its own facts  and  requires  a  fact  sensitive  balancing
         exercise between the factors involved in the appellant's family and
         private life, the extent  of  interference  with  that  family  and
         private life  on  all  concerned  and  the  effect  of  the  public
         interest.

     24. I have carefully considered all of the matters set out at  [19]  to
         [23] above. The Appellant left his home country at a very young age
         and has spent a number of his  formative  years  in  the  UK.   The
         country to which he would be deported is completely  unfamiliar  to
         him and integration there poses its own special  problems.   He  is
         socially and culturally well integrated in the  UK.   He  has  very
         strong family ties to the UK.  He has no family  ties  to  Somalia.
         He has a young wife and soon to  be  born  child  in  the  UK.   He
         committed one offence when he was a juvenile for reasons  which  no
         longer exist.  He has expressed genuine remorse for  that  offence.
         He has shown every indication that he intends to move on  and  turn
         his life round.   Taken  individually  those  factors  may  not  be
         sufficient  to  outweigh  the  very  strong  public   interest   in
         deportation of  those  who  commit  crimes  in  the  UK.   However,
         considered  cumulatively,  I  find  that  they  are  sufficient  to
         outweigh the public interest in this case.  I therefore  find  that
         his deportation would amount to a breach of the Appellant's Article
         8 rights.

DECISION

I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant
meets paragraph 399A of the Rules  and  that  there  exist  very  compelling
circumstances in this case.

Signed      [pic]      Date 20 November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
