

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01016/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Victoria Law Courts                |Decision & Directions sent   |
|On : 6th June 2013                            |11th June 2013               |
|Heard at : Manchester Crown Court             |Determination promulgated    |
|On : 19th August 2013                         |On : 29 August 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  K. H. L.
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Neville Smart and Mr Darren Regan, Senior
Presenting Officers
For the Respondent:    Ms Satbachan Kaur Bahia and Mr Shiva Misra of Crown
Solicitors


                                DETERMINATION


         This determination falls into two parts.   The  first  hearing,  in
    June 2013, dealt with the 'error of law' challenge  to  the  First-tier
    determination, but also set out much of the  background  to  the  case.
    The resulting 'Decision & Directions' is reproduced here in full.   The
    second hearing, in August 2013, was for the purpose  of  re-making  the
    decision  on  the  appeal,  and  forms  the   second   part   of   this
    determination.


                            DECISION & DIRECTIONS


1.   The respondent, Mr L (whom I shall call  'the  claimant'),  is  now  25
    years old, and has been in the United Kingdom since January 2005,  when
    he claimed asylum.  The basis of the claim was that Mr L, a  member  of
    the disadvantaged minority Jarer folk, had been brought up in Bossasso,
    the principal town of Puntland, by  his  aunt,  who  had  now  gone  to
    Ethiopia after providing for his passage  to  the  United  Kingdom.  He
    would now have nothing  to  go  back  to  in  Puntland,  where  he  had
    experienced one (or  perhaps  two)  incidents  of  discriminatory  ill-
    treatment at the hands of Darod clansmen.  By the end of  May  2005  Mr
    L's claim had been rejected, his appeal had been dismissed by the  AIT,
    and he had become  'appeal  rights  exhausted'.   At  this  point,  the
    'immigration decision' to remove Mr L as an illegal entrant could  have
    been enforced.  It was not, but because he was no  longer  entitled  to
    NASS support, Mr L was told to quit the accommodation  which  had  been
    provided for him in Manchester.  He took to sleeping rough, and felt so
    upset about the way he had been treated that he bought petrol and a toy
    gun, and tried to burn down the  premises  of  the  company  which  had
    provided the accommodation.

2.   In consequence, the claimant was charged with criminal  damage,  making
    a threat to kill, possession of an imitation firearm, and  arson  being
    reckless as to whether life would be endangered.  On 24th May  2006  he
    was sentenced to detention  for  public  safety  at  a  young  offender
    institution, and it was in a  psychiatric  report  and  a  pre-sentence
    report in connection with the trial that the claimant first brought  to
    the attention of the authorities that he and his aunt were  Christians.
    That assertion was made to the Home Secretary in August 2007, when Mr L
    was advised that he was being considered for deportation.  It  was  not
    believed, and when a  deportation  order  was  finally  signed  on  2nd
    November 2012, the  renewed  asylum  claim,  based  on  the  claimant's
    religion,  was  certified  under  section  72   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  When the appeal came before the First-
    tier Tribunal on 13th February 2013, a panel comprising Judge Forrester
    and Mr Bremmer agreed  that  the  claimant  had  been  convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime, but did not think  that  he  constituted  a
    danger to the community.  He was "not likely to pose a risk of harm  to
    others upon release."  The certificate was accordingly not upheld.

3.     Turning to the asylum claim, the panel did believe that the  claimant
    had been brought up as a Christian in Puntland and found that, even  if
    it  were  possible  to  effect  his  removal  thither  (which  appeared
    extremely unlikely), "it would be impossible for the Appellant  ...  to
    hide his Christian beliefs from those with  whom  he  would  come  into
    contact."  The panel referred to "HJ Iran v SSHD EWCA Civ  172  (sic)",
    but what they must have meant was HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC  31,  in  which
    Lord Rodger explained that a person should not be expected to conceal a
    fundamental part  of  his  identity  in  order  to  avoid  persecution,
    although if he wished to be discreet about it for other  reasons,  such
    as fear of ridicule  or  embarrassment,  that  would  not  give  him  a
    'Convention reason' for seeking refugee status.  In allowing the appeal
    on asylum grounds, the panel relied on "the BBC reports  to  which  the
    Rev Payne [the Anglican  chaplain  at  HMYOI  Swinfen  Hall,  who  gave
    evidence at the hearing] alluded  which  indicate  the  increasing  and
    malevolent presence of Al Shabaab in Puntland."

4.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  initially  refused  by
    Judge Saffer, but was granted on renewal by Judge Craig, both  sets  of
    grounds being drafted by Richard Hopkin of the Specialist Appeals Team.
     When the matter came before me, I gave my preliminary view  that  only
    one of the grounds appeared to have  merit,  but  Mr  Sharp  very  ably
    explained that this was not so.  I now think that  only  the  complaint
    about allowing the appeal in the alternative under Articles 2 and 3  of
    the ECHR is unjustified.  This alternative  was  only  included  on  an
    'even if' basis, i.e. even if  the  claimant  was  not  protected  from
    refoulement under the Refugee Convention, he would  still  be  at  real
    risk of serious harm interdicted by the European Convention.  There was
    no need for the panel to give any further reasons, in addition to those
    they had given in connexion with the asylum claim.

5.   In disagreeing with the Secretary of  State's  certificate,  the  panel
    relied on passages from the OASys Report of April 2012 showing that the
    claimant had made excellent progress since HHJ Thomas made very adverse
    sentencing remarks in 2006 and the Parole Board indicated in 2010  that
    the risk of harm remained "too high either for release or for  transfer
    to open conditions."  Mr Sharp took me  through  the  OASys  Report  of
    April 2012 and pointed out passages where the risk of serious  harm  to
    the public was assessed as still 'high', where  there  was  a  risk  of
    serious harm simply to 'others', and where  the  Supervisor's  comments
    were that the claimant "could be managed in the community  though  [he]
    would remain a High Risk of serious harm until he had spent  some  time
    in the community  proving  his  ability  to  manage  his  responses  to
    adversity under less restrictive  circumstances."   There  was  another
    passage which the panel had actually cited themselves  earlier  in  the
    determination :

             "The capacity for harm is identified but there appears  to  be
         less imminence.  The risk of serious harm is retained at  HIGH  but
         tending towards MEDIUM, in that more protective insights  are  seen
         as having been developed via O[ffending] B[ehaviour] engagement  in
         prison at long last!!"

6.   The more positive extracts from the OASys Report which were  relied  on
    by the panel needed to be balanced explicitly  against  the  much  more
    cautious tenor of the extracts highlighted by Mr Sharp.  It might still
    have been rationally open to the panel to prefer  the  more  optimistic
    prognosis in the passages quoted at paragraph 15 of the  determination,
    but their failure to take account expressly of  the  warning  that  the
    risk of serious harm  to  others  remained  high  renders  the  panel's
    rejection of the certificate open to the charge of legal error.

7.   Whether or not the asylum claim should be certified  under  section  72
    will be irrelevant if the claimant  can  actually  return  to  Puntland
    without a real risk of serious harm befalling him.  At paragraph 19  of
    the determination, the  panel  refer  to  BBC  reports  indicating  the
    increasing and malevolent presence of  Al  Shabaab  in  Puntland.   But
    having carefully gone through all the background material available  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, I can see no evidence of this at  all.   There
    are plenty of reports of Al Shabaab killing Christians in the parts  of
    Somalia which they used to, or still do, control,  such  as  Mogadishu,
    Gedo and Bakool, but none at all in Puntland.  Miss Bahia submits that,
    having been driven from their previous strongholds, Al Shabaab  may  be
    infiltrating into Puntland.  But without any  evidence,  that  is  pure
    speculation.  The only example I could find of a Christian being harmed
    in Puntland comes in Virginia Luling's expert report, where a  lady  in
    Galkayo was killed by  Muslims  not  belonging  to  Al  Shabaab.   That
    isolated killing would not be  enough  to  establish  a  real  risk  to
    Christians in Puntland, where their religion is officially tolerated by
    the authorities.

8.   Mr Sharp also made the valid submission that  Mr  L's  reticence  about
    his Christianity while living in Bossasso need not  have  been  through
    fear of persecution.  He did not mention it as  part  of  his  original
    asylum claim, and even when he was sent to prison in 2006, he gave  his
    religion as Moslem.   The  panel  should  have  considered  that,  when
    dealing with the HJ (Iran) point.

9.   There is another flaw in the determination at paragraph 16,  where  the
    panel say that they must uphold the decision to  deport  the  claimant,
    because he meets the definition of a 'foreign criminal' at  section  32
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Of course, if  he  requires  international
    protection, as the panel found, then he comes  within  Exception  1  at
    section 33.   Miss  Bahia  thinks  that  the  practical  difficulty  of
    removing her client to Puntland should play a part in the  appeal,  but
    an appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds must answer the  hypothetical
    question whether the claimant would be at risk if he were returned.

10.  For the above reasons, the First-tier determination must be  set  aside
    as flawed by legal error, and the decision on the appeal  will  be  re-
    made by the Upper Tribunal.  There has been no challenge,  however,  to
    the finding that the claimant is and always has been  a  Christian,  so
    the re-making of the decision will proceed on that basis.



                            RE-HEARING OF APPEAL


1.  The foregoing 'Decision & Directions' should be read  with,  and  indeed
forms part of, this Determination, in which the decision on  the  appeal  is
re-made by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that Mr H.  L.,  'the  claimant',
is and always has been a Christian.  His hearing today was attended  by  the
Rev. Robert Payne, who has rendered him a great deal of moral and  practical
support, while I was greatly assisted by the very able  submissions  of  the
two representatives, on this occasion Mr Misra and Mr  Regan.   Because  the
hearing proceeded by way of submissions only, there  was  no  need  to  hear
oral evidence from Mr L himself.

2.  It was agreed that there were three  questions  to  be  answered  today.
First, was the certificate under section 72 of the 2002 Act  to  be  upheld,
so that the claimant would not be eligible for asylum?  Secondly, would  the
claimant (even if not entitled  to  refugee  status)  be  at  real  risk  of
serious harm if returned to Puntland?  Thirdly, if the claimant  is  not  at
real risk on return, does he none the less have private  life  ties  to  the
United Kingdom, in terms of Article 8  of  the  European  Convention,  which
outweigh the public interest in deportation?

3.  As regards the first question, Mr Misra argued that neither  requirement
for certification under section 72 has been met in the  present  case,  i.e.
the claimant has not been "sentenced to  a  period  of  imprisonment  of  at
least two years", and does not "constitute a danger to the community of  the
United Kingdom."  His Honour Judge Thomas, in handing down  a  sentence  for
public protection, calculated that Mr L would have received four years on  a
guilty plea, but because the period had  to  be  specified  which  he  would
serve before the Parole Board considered his position, the judge  felt  that
he "must" halve the four-year sentence, thus coming to two years.  From  the
two-year period the judge then deducted the 158 days which Mr  L  had  spent
on remand, which meant that Mr L would have to spend another  one  year  and
207 days in custody before the Parole Board  would  consider  his  position.
That period in custody, said Mr Misra, was obviously less than two years.

3.  Mr Regan's rejoinder was that Judge Thomas actually specified  a  period
of two years, from which he deducted  the  time  already  spent  on  remand.
This was analogous to the  judge  passing  a  determinate  sentence  of  two
years, but deducting from the time to be served in custody the period  which
the prisoner had already spent on remand.  I find that  analogy  persuasive.
Mr Misra describes the period of one year and 207 days as the "tariff",  but
if that is the appropriate term, I do not think that it resolves the  issue.
 A judge passing a life sentence will specify the tariff which the  prisoner
must serve before he can be considered for release, but that does  not  make
the  sentence  passed  anything  but  a  life  sentence.   An  indeterminate
sentence, of course, is just that.  No period of time is specified  as  part
of the sentence.

4.  In the absence of any authority to the contrary, I think one would  have
to fall back on the normal rules of  statutory  construction.   The  statute
lays down that the asylum seeker must have been "sentenced to  a  period  of
imprisonment of at least two years", but Mr KHL has not  been  sentenced  to
any specific period of imprisonment at all.  If there was  nothing  else  to
go on, Mr Misra would succeed on this point.

5.  In any event, he also gets  home  on  the  alternative  point  that  the
claimant does not constitute a danger to  the  community.   While  Mr  Regan
pointed out that the OASys Report of April 2012 assesses the risk  posed  by
the claimant as still HIGH, Mr Misra handed up the print-out  of  an  e-mail
from the claimant's Probation Officer, Liz Wastell, who explains that  Mr  L
has only retained the designation of HIGH  risk  to  the  community  because
this is necessary in order to retain an  Approved  Premises  bed-place.   In
reality, he poses only a MEDIUM risk of harm.

6.  Of course, a medium risk, as Mr Regan emphasizes, is  not  a  low  risk.
But Mr Misra points to other indications that the claimant is not  a  danger
to the community.  He has been moved to open  conditions  as  a  Category  C
prisoner at HMP Kirkham, and will begin Release on  Temporary  Licence  (not
'Town Leave') from 27th October this year for 'town visits'  to  the  hostel
where he will have a bed if he is released by the  Parole  Board  after  the
next review in March 2014.   Then  there  is  the  updated  report  of  28th
February 2013 from a forensic psychologist, Sarah Pancholi,  who  says  this
at 5.3 :


              "Despite the immigration case being unresolved, I would  still
         support Mr [HL's] release into the community.  Mr [HL] has  matured
         from an adolescent into a remarkably well-balanced young man whilst
         in prison.  The  only  remaining  grounds  for  deportation,  as  I
         understand it, is if he is considered to be a danger to the public.
          I think that with a release plan that would enable him  to  engage
         positively with his faith group, and offer accommodation from which
         to springboard his community integration, there is no  evidence  to
         suggest that this would be the case.  He is keen to make links, and
         has a strong relationship with his Offender Manager  with  whom  he
         has engaged positively for some years."

7.  These more recent developments were  not  before  the  First-tier  panel
when they heard the appeal, and suffice to show,  I  think,  that  Mr  L  no
longer  constitutes  a  danger  to  the  community,  although  Dr   Jonathan
Hellewell, the psychiatrist whose report on the claimant was issued on  28th
March 2006, had concerns "about the  possibility  of  further  irresponsible
and impulsive behaviour."  So like the First-tier panel, but  in  the  light
of evidence which was not available to them, I  find  that  the  presumption
that the claimant represents a danger to the community has been rebutted.

8.  I have now noticed  something  which  was  overlooked  at  the  hearing,
namely section 72(11)(b)(iii) of the  2002  Act,  which  specifies  that  "a
reference to a person who is sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at
least two years -

         (iii) includes a  reference  to  a  person  who  is  sentenced  to
    imprisonment or detention, or ordered or directed to be  detained,  for
    an indeterminate period (provided that it may last for two years)."

9.  So there is after all a statutory definition  of  how  an  indeterminate
sentence can constitute a sentence of at least two years'  imprisonment.   I
am not quite sure, however, what is meant by an  indeterminate  period  that
"may" last for two years.  Perhaps it means  the  period  specified  by  the
judge that must elapse before the  Parole  Board  considers  the  prisoner's
position.  In that case, there could be an indeterminate period  that  lasts
for less than two years, which revamps the previous argument into one  about
whether the claimant's period in prison could be  said  to  "last"  for  two
years or for the "tariff" of one year and 207 days.  But there  is  no  need
to go into this further, as the claimant no longer constitutes a  danger  to
the public.

10.  The claimant will therefore be  entitled  to  international  protection
under the Refugee Convention, as well as under the European  Convention,  if
he will be at real risk of serious harm on return to Puntland by  reason  of
his religion.  Mr Misra relies on a letter e-mailed by the Rt Rev. Dr  Grant
LeMarquand, Area Bishop for the Horn of Africa, on 11th June 2013.  In  this
he asseverates that "anyone deported to any part of Somalia who is known  to
be a Christian will  be  in  danger  of  persecution."   That  was  not  the
experience of this claimant.  As  he  told  Clarke  Matthew,  the  Probation
Officer who compiled the Pre-Sentence Report on 28th  April  2006,  "he  and
his aunt were subject to some discrimination being a Christian in a  largely
Muslim country."  The claimant must have been "known to be a  Christian"  in
order to be discriminated against for that reason.  But he suffered  nothing
more than discrimination, and it was not bad enough to be  included  in  his
original asylum claim, which was about discriminatory ill-treatment  by  the
majority Darod clan against the minority Jarer.

11.  Bishop LeMarquand  has  very  little  evidence  to  back  up  his  bold
assertion.  He cites the very same incident in 2009 as appears  in  Virginia
Luling's report, about the lady in Galkayo (he misspells it  'Galmayo')  who
was reported by a Christian source to have been  killed  by  extremists  for
refusing to wear a veil.  His only other evidence is  a  third-hand  report.
The bishop met two Somalis who told him that a friend  of  theirs  had  gone
from Mogadishu to Puntland, hoping it would be safer up there, only to  find
that it was not, so he moved on to Somaliland.  No detail whatever has  been
provided as to what happened  to  this  person,  and  the  hearsay  in  this
instance can carry no evidential weight.  Mr Regan expresses  surprise  that
Bishop LeMarquand has divulged even this, given that in his e-mail  of  20th
November 2012 he said that "due to the nature of the persecuted  church  and
believers that face persecution, we are not able  to  give  you  details  of
anyone in this area."

12.  None of the other documents about Christians  in  Somalia  included  in
the  recent  bundle  from  Crown  Solicitors  have  anything  to  say  about
Christians in Puntland.  The only other recent document adduced for  today's
hearing is a response by the Country of  Origin  Information  Service  to  a
query about Christians in Puntland.  This makes it clear  that  Christianity
is officially tolerated, although  evangelisation  of  Muslims  is  strictly
forbidden.   There   is   societal   discrimination   based   on   religious
affiliation, belief and  practice,  while  non-Muslims  who  practise  their
religion openly may be harassed.  None of this goes to show that  Christians
in  Puntland  are  at  real  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment  amounting  to
persecution or breach of Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR.  There  has  been  one
reported incident in 2009 of a Christian lady being killed in  Galkayo,  but
that isolated incident does not indicate a general risk.  Given the  absence
of real risk to Christians, the HJ  (Iran)  argument  in  the  present  case
simply does not get off the ground.

13.  I come now to the third issue which  must  be  resolved  by  the  Upper
Tribunal, namely whether the claimant  can  resist  'automatic'  deportation
under one of  the  other  exceptions,  namely  Article  8  of  the  European
Convention.  Mr Misra emphasizes the stress and anxiety which  the  claimant
would have suffered after arriving in a strange country at the  age  of  17,
and then being thrown out of his accommodation and being left  to  fend  for
himself when he had lost his asylum appeal.  What he did  with  the  can  of
petrol was an act of desperation, a cry for help.  That may be so,  says  Mr
Regan, but what the claimant did  nonetheless  constitutes  a  very  serious
offence, and in that circumstance Article 8 will  only  rescue  a  man  from
deportation if, as Lord Justice Laws put it in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ
550, he has "a very strong claim indeed."

14.  Mr Misra insists that his client does indeed have such a claim,  having
lived in this country for over eight years and having no one to go  back  to
in Puntland.  His aunt, who had gone to Ethiopia, is now dead, whereas Mr  L
has a network of support in the United Kingdom, not least from the  Reverend
Bob Payne and other Christians who have befriended  him.   The  problem  for
the appellant, however, is that he  has  had  a  restricted  opportunity  to
build up the private life ties which eight years' residence  in  the  United
Kingdom will often establish.  That is because most  of  those  eight  years
have been spent in prison.   In  truth,  Mr  L  should  have  gone  back  to
Puntland after losing his asylum appeal.  He was  an  illegal  entrant,  and
had no other basis for staying in the United Kingdom.  He told Dr  Hellewell
that a man whom he met in the Piccadilly Gardens advised him that  the  only
way to get food and shelter was to commit a crime, as these  would  then  be
provided for him in prison.  These have now been provided for him  for  over
seven years, and he has still not  reached  the  end  of  his  indeterminate
sentence.

15.  Mr Misra is no doubt right in submitting that his  client  is  unlikely
to re-offend, but on the contrary is likely  -  having  learnt  English  and
undertaken various courses while in prison - to integrate well into  British
society if he is allowed to stay here.  But it  is  only  through  being  in
prison here that Mr L has  built  up  any  sort  of  private  life  for  the
purposes of Article 8.  In those circumstances, I simply do not see how  his
right to private life  can  outweigh  in  the  proportionality  balance  the
public interest considerations which the  Court  of  Appeal  has  repeatedly
emphasized, culminating in SS (Nigeria).

DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  having  been  set  aside,  the
decision  on  the  appeal  against  deportation  is  re-made  by  the  Upper
Tribunal.

The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            25th August 2013
