
                                                       [pic]




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01689/2013

                                                   DA/01690/2013









                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Field House                                       Decision
Promulgated:
On: 4 June 2014                                             On: 05 June
2014


                                                                    Before

                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                                                      and

                                                         Robert Edokpolor

                                                        Gladys Edokpolor

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Nkafu, instructed by Julliz Solicitors






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



For the purposes of this determination I refer to the Secretary of State  as
the respondent and Mr and Mrs Edokpolor as the appellants, reflecting  their
positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellants are nationals of Nigeria. Mr Edokpolor was born on 12  August
1940 and Mrs Edokpolor was born on 8 August 1946.

This is an appeal by the respondent against  the  determination  promulgated
on 19  February  2014  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Youngerwood  and  Ms
Endersby which allowed the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  respondent's
decision of 17 July 2013 to refuse to revoke deportation orders.

The relevant undisputed facts in relation to the matters  argued  before  me
were that deportation orders were signed against the appellants on 14  March
1978 and they were deported to Nigeria on 1 June  1984.  Mrs  Edokpolor  was
issued with entry clearance as visitors in 2006  and  returned  to  Nigeria.
Further applications in 2007 and 2010  for  visit  visas  were  refused.  Mr
Edokpolor was refused a visit visa  in  2007  and  his  appeal  against  the
refusal was not successful.

The First-tier Tribunal considered the  appeal  against  the  provisions  of
paragraphs 390, 391 and 391A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  These  state  as
follows:


    390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
    considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
    following:
        (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
        (ii) any representations made in support of revocation (iii) the
        interests of the community, including the maintenance of an
        effective immigration control;
        (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
        circumstances.


    391. In the case of a person who has been deported following conviction
    for a criminal offence, the continuation of a deportation order against
    that person will be the proper course:


         (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person
         was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years,
         unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the deportation
         order, or
         (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person
         was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years, at
         any time,
         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to
         the Status of Refugees, or there are other exceptional
         circumstances that mean the continuation is outweighed by
         compelling factors.


    391A. In other cases, revocation of the  order  will  not  normally  be
    authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either  by
    a change of circumstances  since  the  order  was  made,  or  by  fresh
    information  coming  to  light  which  was  not  before  the  appellate
    authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of  time  since  the
    person was deported may also in itself  amount  to  such  a  change  of
    circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.


The First-tier Tribunal panel noted that paragraph 391 stated  10  years  to
be the normal course for continuation of a deportation order in relation  to
these appellants whose criminal offences  were  relatively  minor  and  that
paragraph 391A allowed for the passage of time in itself  being  capable  of
amounting to a change of circumstances such that revocation  was  warranted.
As over 35 years had elapsed since the making  of  the  deportation  orders,
the panel found at [18] and [19]  that  the  deportation  orders  should  be
revoked.

The grounds of appeal argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  given
adequate reasons as to why  the  appellants'  circumstances  had  materially
altered. Mr Saunders did not take that point any further at the hearing  and
I can simply indicate that the passage of 35 years  was  clearly  sufficient
to amount to  a  material  change  on  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
entitled to place weight.

The second ground maintained that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  take
proper account of the appellants' "blatant disregard for immigration  laws",
referring, amongst other matters, to the allegation in  the  refusal  letter
that the second appellant overstayed her visa in 2007 and relied on a  false
boarding pass to conceal this when reapplying for entry clearance.

I did not find that ground had merit as the First-tier  Tribunal  took  into
account the appellants' immigration breaches at  [18]  and  [19]  but  found
that they were outweighed by the very long time that had  passed  since  the
deportation orders were made. Even had the panel failed to take  aspects  of
the immigration history into account I did  not  find,  given  the  extended
period since the deportation orders were made  and  the  provisions  of  the
Immigration Rules set out above that the failure could  have  been  material
here. I also note in passing that the  allegation  concerning  the  boarding
pass appears to have remained just that, there being no evidence adduced  by
the respondent on that matter in the materials before me.

I therefore did not find that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
disclosed an error on a  point  of  law.  As  indicated  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal  this decision does not afford the appellant's any  right  to  come
to the UK, merely the opportunity to apply for entry  clearance  when  their
history and current circumstances will again be subject to scrutiny  by  the
UK immigration authorities.


DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 4 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




