

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
DA/01297/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                     |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On: 3rd February 2016                    |     On: 12th February 2016       |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     HK
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Butterworth, Counsel, Mansfield Chambers
For the Respondent:          Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 12th  August  1978.




 2. On the 14th January 2015 his deportation appeal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought. On  the  18th  March  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal Scott-Baker considered whether the grounds  of  appeal  raised
    arguable errors  of  law.  The  resulting  order  contains  conflicting
    indications. Paragraph 7 of the decision reads "permission is refused".
     That outcome appears to be consistent with the tenor of the  foregoing
    paragraphs 1-6. The heading, however, reads "permission is granted".
 4. Before me Mr McVeety submitted that leave to appeal  had  clearly  been
    refused. Mr Butterworth was instructed to seek to  pursue  the  appeal.
    Given the ambiguity of Judge Scott-Baker's decision I give the  benefit
    of the doubt to the Appellant and proceed as if permission was granted.

    Background and Matters in Issue

 5. The Appellant is subject to a deportation order  because  on  the  18th
    September 2009 he was sentenced to eleven years in prison for  offences
    concerning the importation of heroin. In view of the length of sentence
    it is unnecessary to set out the details of the crime. It  was  by  any
    measure an extremely serious offence.


 6. When the matter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's
    representatives accepted that he had to do something  more  than  show,
    with reference to paragraphs 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules, that
    his removal would  be  an  interference  with  his  Article  8  rights.
    Because of the length of his sentence he had to show  that  there  were
    "very compelling circumstances over and above those  matters  described
    in 399 and 399A".  The  case  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    insofar as it is material to this appeal, was:

           a) That it would be unduly harsh for his British son to live  in
              the UK without him;


           b) That it would be unduly harsh for his British son to go  with
              him to live in Pakistan;

           c)  That  his  wife  would  face  insurmountable  obstacles   in
              relocating to Pakistan  with  her  husband  because  she  has
              caring responsibilities in the UK  inter alia for her British
              son;

           d) The Appellant's wife is a carer to her  mother  and  severely
              disabled sister,  and  if  she  were  to  leave  the  UK  the
              consequences for them would be so dire that it  would  amount
              to very compelling exceptional circumstances.

      The Determination

 7. Judge Brunnen begins by making the appropriate direction as to the law.
     No issue is taken with the legal framework as applied  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


 8. In respect of the matters in issue summarised above, Judge Brunnen  had
    regard to the evidence of independent social worker Mr Robert  Simpson.
    Mr Simpson had visited the family home and spoken with the  Appellant's
    son for approximately 35 minutes.  He had thereafter spent just over an
    hour interviewing the Appellant's wife. He had read all of the relevant
    documents about  the  case  that  had  been  supplied  to  him  by  the
    Appellant's representative. Judge Brunnen also heard evidence from  the
    Appellant's wife, and from the Appellant himself.

 9. It does not appear to have been a matter of dispute that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant's son to go to Pakistan  with  him.  The
    focus of enquiry, insofar as the child was concerned,  was  whether  it
    would be "unduly harsh' to expect the boy to live in the UK without his
    father.  Judge Brunnen considers this matter between paragraphs 39  and
    43.  At paragraphs 41-42 he summarises the views of Mr Simpson on  this
    matter and notes, inter alia that Mr Simpson did not direct his mind to
    whether the Appellant could be considered a poor  role  model  for  his
    son. At 43 the determination concludes:

         "Despite these misgivings, I accept that it would  probably  be  in
         [the child]'s best interests for the Appellant to remain in the UK.
         However this is not to say that it would be unduly harsh  for  [the
         child] to remain in the UK without  the  Appellant.  That  question
         involves wider matters than [the child]'s best interests"

10. In respect of the Appellant's wife and her caring responsibilities, the
    determination notes that  her  mother  is  68  and  is  suffering  from
    rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, hypertension and diabetes. She is
    dependent on her daughter for  most  aspects  of  daily  living.    The
    Appellant's wife is also carer to her sister, who  is  39  and  suffers
    from  Prader-Willi  syndrome,  learning   difficulties,   progressively
    deteriorating vision (she is registered  blind),  perforated  eardrums,
    vertigo, menorrhagia and incontinence of urine.  She  is  dependent  on
    others for all aspects of  daily  living  and  requires  24-hour  care.
    Judge Brunnen accepted that the principle burden of  caring  for  these
    women fell on the Appellant's wife [47].  However he noted that she has
    made visits to Pakistan and during those  trips  other  family  members
    provided the necessary care.  Her sister-in-law was looking  after  the
    women whilst she attended the hearing.


11. Having made these findings Judge Brunnen balances these factors against
    the public interest in deportation, which in view of the long sentence,
    is found to prevail.  It would not be unduly harsh for  either  son  or
    wife to remain in the UK without the Appellant. The baseline  tests  in
    399 and 399A are not established. He does not  find  there  to  be  any
    compelling circumstances.


    Error of Law

12. The grounds of appeal are:


    a) That in reaching its conclusions on the Appellant's son the Tribunal
       has misunderstood the evidence of Mr Simpson or alternatively failed
       to take it into account;


    b) It was irrational for the First-tier Tribunal to apparently supplant
       its own view on the "devastation" caused by  drug  importation  with
       the findings of the probation service that there was a low  risk  of
       reoffending;

    c) The Tribunal failed to engage with the medical  evidence  concerning
       the Appellant's sister-in-law, in particular the evidence  that  her
       condition had deteriorated since the last trip to Pakistan  and  the
       fact that the Appellant's wife receives carer's allowance in respect
       of her role looking after her sister;

13. Mr McVeety opposed the appeal on all grounds, whilst properly reminding
    me that as far as the Respondent is concerned, permission had not  been
    granted.


14. My findings are as follows.




    The Evidence of Mr Simpson


15. Issue is taken with the opening sentence of paragraph 42:  "Mr  Simpson
    has not considered the risk that the Appellant would prove to be a poor
    role model for [his son]". I was directed to  paragraphs  3.28-3.29  of
    the social worker report in which Mr Simpson records how much  the  boy
    misses his father (the Appellant being in custody at the  date  of  the
    meeting), how strong the relationship is, and how his son is aware that
    his "daddy did  a  bad  thing"  but  loves  him  nonetheless.    It  is
    submitted that properly construed, the report shows that Mr Simpson did
    in fact consider the question identified by Judge  Brunnen.  I  do  not
    accept that. Judge Brunnen was entitled to make that remark since it is
    not apparent from the face of the report whether Mr Simpson did  direct
    his mind to whether the Appellant  could  be  considered  a  poor  role
    model. Furthermore the point is is  entirely  irrelevant,  since  Judge
    Brunnen goes on to accept, at paragraph 43, the conclusions reached  by
    Mr Simpson, namely that it would be in the child's  best  interests  if
    his father stayed in the UK. There is no merit in this ground.




    The Risk of Reoffending


16.  At paragraph 42 the determination records the assessment made  in  the
    OASYS report that the appellant presented a low  risk  of  reoffending.
    It is argued that in the closing sentence of that that  same  paragraph
    the Judge appears to supplant  that  assessment  with  his  own:  "this
    analysis takes no account of the  widespread  devastation  of  people's
    lives caused by the importation of  massive  quantities  of  heroin,  a
    point emphasised in the judge's sentencing remarks".


17. This is an unsustainable reading of paragraph 42. Judge Brunnen is  not
    supplanting the OASYS assessment with his own, he is merely noting that
    probation services have to consider the risk of reoffending, whereas an
    immigration judge must consider a rather wider set  of  considerations,
    such as the fact that the previous offending is likely to  have  caused
    "widespread devastation". That was a  finding  that  was  open  to  the
    Judge, and was a matter that he was bound by law to  take  account  of.
    There was therefore no error of law.

    The Medical Evidence

18. The central point advanced on behalf of  the  Appellant  was  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in its analysis of the impact upon  the  Appellant's
    sister-in-law, for instance by omitting to consider the  evidence  that
    her conditions had worsened in the past couple of years, and  that  she
    only trusted her sister to look after her.


19. The medical evidence relating to this lady consisted of  three  letters
    dating from August 2014.  The content of those letters is reflected  in
    the body of the determination. Judge Brunnen has made a  full  note  of
    the conditions she suffers from, and  the  uncontested  fact  that  the
    Appellant's wife is her day to day carer. The evidence he is alleged to
    have omitted to consider  appears  to  be  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's wife, and the fact that she receives carer's allowance.  It
    is not clear what either of these could have added to  the  conclusions
    reached by Judge Brunnen. He  accepted  that  this  lady  suffers  from
    terrible and debilitating conditions and that her sister  is  her  main
    carer.   The fact that she receives carer's allowance goes  nowhere  to
    undermine Judge Brunnen's  conclusions  that  there  are  other  family
    members who could step in should the Appellant's wife wish  to  go  and
    visit her husband in Pakistan.   He does not dispute the assertion that
    the lady in question would prefer for her sister to be with  her  every
    day. It does not however amount to  an  insurmountable  obstacle,  must
    less a "very compelling exceptional circumstance". There is nothing  in
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal which disclose an error of law.



    Decisions

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and it is upheld.


21. I maintain the order for anonymity made in the First-tier Tribunal






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   2nd
                                February 2016
