
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01983/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 January 2016                       |On 4 April 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               AHMED DAHIR ALI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Fouladvand, Legal Rep, MAAS


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing  on  21  September
    2015 following which I decided that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
    in law in its decision, and set its decision aside.  That error of  law
    decision is attached as an annex to this decision.  It is convenient to
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. To reiterate, the appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on  4  October
    1990.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 16 October 2014 to make a  deportation
    order against him under the automatic deportation provisions of the  UK
    Borders  Act  2007  ("the  2007  Act").   That  decision  followed  the
    appellant's conviction for an offence of blackmail, for  which  he  was
    sentenced  to  twelve  months'  imprisonment  in  a  young   offenders'
    institute.

 3. The First-tier judge ("FtJ") dismissed the appeal on asylum  and  human
    rights grounds, and with reference to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  As
    I indicated in the error of law  decision,  there  has  been  no  cross
    appeal on behalf of the appellant in relation to those conclusions, and
    they are to stand.  The re-making of the decision is concerned with the
    extent to which an Exception to the  automatic  deportation  provisions
    applies, not only in terms of the appellant's purported reliance on  EU
    rights but also in relation to any other Exceptions  to  the  automatic
    deportation provisions, insofar as raised in the grounds of  appeal  to
    the FtT.

 4. After preliminary discussion in relation to the appellant's reliance on
    EU rights, Mr Fouladvand indicated  that  the  appellant's  aunt,  Suad
    Ismail, would give evidence.

    The oral evidence before the Upper Tribunal

 5. In examination-in-chief Ms Ismail adopted  her  most  recent  statement
    prepared for the hearing on 21 January 2016, albeit  that  the  witness
    statement was undated.

 6. In cross-examination she was asked about what evidence she had  of  her
    Dutch citizenship prior to 2004.  She said that her passport, issued on
    15 May 2014, (produced at the hearing before me) was a renewal  of  her
    passport.  Her first passport was issued to her in the  Netherlands  in
    1998.

 7. In re-examination she said that when the appellant's mother  was  alive
    she (the witness) was in the Netherlands and she sent money to her.

 8. When the appellant came to the UK in 2004, she herself was homeless  in
    Cardiff, living in a hostel.  The appellant was living in London.  When
    the council gave her accommodation she brought the  appellant  to  live
    with her because he had difficulties with the other  aunt.   He  was  a
    teenager and would come back late, for example.  She looked  after  him
    when he came to her house.

 9. Since coming to  live  with  her  he  has  never  lived  independently,
    although he did go to  prison,  and  he  was  in  hospital  for  a  hip
    replacement.

10. In re-cross-examination Ms Ismail said  that  when  the  appellant  was
    first living with his other aunt he was dependent on her because he was
    living with her.  As to whether he was dependent  on  her,  Ms  Ismail,
    when he was in prison, she used to send him money to be  put  into  his
    account so that he could buy toiletries and have money to phone them.

11. As to the evidence before the FtT in terms of other relatives providing
    financial support for him when he was in Somalia,  she  said  that  she
    only knows that she was the one who sent him money. She then said  that
    there was also her brother in Canada who sent him  money.   As  to  the
    money that she sent, the appellant's mother was always trying  to  come
    out of Mogadishu but her husband wanted to stay there.  On one occasion
    she sent $2,000, in 1995.  Her brother in Canada was sending  too  much
    money, on several occasions.  Once he sent $4,000 for  the  appellant's
    mother and children to leave Mogadishu.

12. In further re-examination she repeated that she became a Dutch  citizen
    in 1998.  She said that since then she had been the main  provider  for
    the appellant, his sister and the appellant's mother.  She was  sending
    money to them for their living expenses.  From 1998 until today he  had
    not been supported by anyone else.

13. In answer to a question from me she said that as regards the  financial
    support from her brother in Canada, they all supported  them  together.
    Her brother in Canada went there before the civil war started.  In 1996
    he got married so financial support was difficult for him.

    Submissions

14. Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant is not able to rely on Exception
    3 under s.33 of the 2007 Act (breach  of  rights  under  EU  treaties),
    having regard to  Recital  6  of  the  Citizens'  Directive  (Directive
    2004/38/EC) and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Rose  (Automatic
    deportation - Exception 3) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00276  (IAC),  at  [15]-
    [17].  It was submitted that the appellant is not entitled to  rely  on
    regulations 19 and 21  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") because he  is  not  a  family
    member and the Directive expressly distinguishes between family members
    and other family members.  This is reflected in regs  7  and  19.   The
    appellant needs to be a family member for those  provisions  to  apply.
    In order to be regarded as a family member he would need to  be  issued
    with a family permit and meet reg 8(5).  In order to meet reg  8(5)  or
    8(2) he needs to satisfy reg 17(4).

15. Furthermore,  the  appellant  needs  to  be  able  to  establish  prior
    dependency or membership of a  household,  and  present  dependency  or
    membership of the household.  I was referred to the decision in  Dauhoo
    (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC). The appellant  would
    need to show a continued connection between him and the sponsor.

16. In any event, he did not join the sponsor until 2005.  Prior to that he
    had been dependent on the aunt  that  he  lived  with.   Following  the
    decision in Lim (EEA - dependency) [2013] UKUT 00437 (IAC) at [20], the
    dependency needs to be for a person's essential needs.  Given that  the
    appellant was serving a term of imprisonment, it is  difficult  to  see
    how the support she provided was for his essential needs.

17. Furthermore, the evidence on the issue was confusing.  It was not clear
    that the other brother in Canada ceased  providing  financial  support.
    The evidence before  the  FtT  was  that  there  were  other  relatives
    providing support.  There is no clear evidence of the financial support
    provided to the appellant.

18. Under reg 8(2)(c)  the  appellant  would  need  to  establish  that  he
    continues to be dependent.  (Dauhoo at [12]).

19. In relation to an argument raised at the start of the  hearing  (before
    me) in terms of the appellant having an  outstanding  application  from
    April 2007 for leave to remain, it was submitted that  that  matter  is
    dealt with  in  the  decision  letter.   Furthermore,  because  of  the
    deportation decision, any leave is invalidated.

20. As regards the Immigration Rules, the appellant is not able to rely  on
    paragraph 399A because he has not been lawfully resident in the UK  for
    most of his life.  Furthermore,  he  is  not  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the UK, taking into account his criminal offending.

21. Additionally, there would not be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Somalia having regard to the decision  in  MOJ  &  Ors
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), in particular
    at [349].

22. So far as the appellant's health is  concerned,  the  latest  piece  of
    medical evidence dates back to  2009.   The  appellant  would  need  to
    demonstrate that he would not be able to integrate in Somalia.

23. Under paragraph 398(c) the appellant would  need  to  demonstrate  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A.  No such circumstances are apparent.

24. The public interest  needs  to  be  taken  into  account,  that  public
    interest being expressed through primary legislation in the UK  Borders
    Act 2007 and through the Immigration Rules.

25. Mr Fouladvand relied on his skeleton argument.  It was  submitted  that
    the appellant had made an application for further leave to remain on 30
    April 2007, that application remaining outstanding.

26. So far as EU rights are concerned, there  was  circumstantial  evidence
    that proved that the appellant's aunt was already a Dutch citizen  when
    the appellant came to the UK.  There was evidence  that  they  used  to
    live as a family unit previously, and that she used to send  money  for
    the children's upkeep.  HMRC records  show  that  the  appellant  is  a
    member of her household.  There is ample evidence to show  that  he  is
    the family member of an EEA national.  His aunt is a  qualified  person
    exercising Treaty rights.  There is circumstantial evidence to  confirm
    that her nationality was  obtained  in  1998,  coming  to  the  UK  for
    employment.

27. As to the evidence of the exercise of her  Treaty  rights,  she  is  in
    receipt of Employment Support Allowance ("ESA"), which is  provided  to
    someone who has retained the right to reside.   She  was  previously  a
    worker and a jobseeker.  Employment Support Allowance is for those  who
    are seeking employment.

28. I was also referred to reg 6(2)(a) of the EEA Regulations in  terms  of
    the appellant's aunt's inability to work through illness  or  accident.
    As to the evidence in support of that contention, it was accepted  that
    there was no direct medical evidence.  It  was  repeated  that  it  was
    relevant that she was in receipt of ESA.  It was  thus  submitted  that
    the appellant's  aunt  has  a  permanent  right  of  residence,  having
    exercised Treaty rights for five years.  In that context I was referred
    to documents in the appellant's  bundle,  and  her  oral  evidence  was
    relied on.

29. It was further submitted that the appellant had established that he has
    been dependent on his aunt since 1998 and since he arrived in  the  UK.
    Thus, the evidence shows he is a family member of an EEA national.

30. In terms of whether there is any distinction to be made  between  other
    family members and family members for these purposes, I was referred to
    the Immigration Directorates'  Instructions  ("IDI's")  an  extract  of
    which is at page 9 of the skeleton argument, the suggestion  on  behalf
    of the appellant being that there is no distinction between them.

31. Furthermore, the respondent must establish that  the  appellant  is  at
    risk of reoffending.  If the appellant's aunt is an EEA national and if
    it is accepted that the appellant is a member  of  her  household,  the
    appellant's deportation is not  in  accordance  with  the  respondent's
    policy (as in the IDI's).

32. Generally, it was submitted that it was relevant to take  into  account
    that the appellant came to the UK when he was 13 or 14  years  of  age.
    He has become integrated into UK society,  and  is  more  English  than
    Somali.  His appearance is also more English than Somali.  There is  no
    risk of him reoffending.  He has shown remorse  and  is  aware  of  the
    problems his offending has created for his family.

    My assessment

33. I do not consider that there is any merit in the  contention  that  the
    appellant has outstanding an application for further leave  to  remain.
    This is a matter that is  referred  to  at  [37]  of  the  respondent's
    decision dated 16 October 2014.  In that paragraph  it  refers  to  the
    application for further leave to remain  on  30  April  2007,  and  the
    assertion in that application that the country situation in Somalia  is
    such that the appellant would be persecuted if  returned,  particularly
    as he is an orphan.  The decision goes on to deal with the  appellant's
    claim to be at risk of persecution on return  and  rejects  it.   Thus,
    although the decision is on the face of it a deportation  decision,  it
    does deal with the application made in 2007.

34. Furthermore, s.5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  provides  that  a
    deportation order made against a person invalidates any leave to  enter
    or remain in the UK given to him before the order is made or  while  it
    is in force.  On that basis, an application for further leave to remain
    is unable to survive the invalidation of the leave itself; there  would
    be no leave to be varied.

35. In either case, I am not satisfied that  there  is  any  merit  in  the
    contention that the  appellant  has  an  application  outstanding  that
    requires a decision from the respondent.

36. The appellant relies on Exception 3 to s.33 of  the  2007  Act,  namely
    that his removal would breach his rights under  the  EU  treaties.   In
    this respect the appellant relies  on  the  EEA  Regulations,  and  his
    relationship to his aunt Ms Suad Ismail.

37. In that regard it is not asserted that the appellant is a family member
    within the meaning of reg 7  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   He  does  not
    qualify as such.  The appellant's case in this respect is  put  on  the
    basis that he is an extended family member within the  meaning  of  reg
    8(2).  This in turn depends on the appellant establishing that  he  was
    dependent on his aunt, Ms Suad, when she was a Dutch national and  when
    he was in Somalia, and that he continues to be dependent on her or is a
    member of her household.

38. In the error of law decision I found that the FtJ erred in law  in  his
    assessment of the issue of dependency, and also in terms of the  extent
    to which the appellant's aunt was exercising Treaty rights at the  date
    of the hearing before the FtT (see [20]).

39. Furthermore, as was pointed at [15] of the error of law  decision,  the
    evidence before the FtT  did  not  reveal  when  the  appellant's  aunt
    obtained her Dutch citizenship.  I stated at  [16]  that  the  date  on
    which the appellant's aunt obtained  Dutch  citizenship  is  a  crucial
    factor to be determined on the issue of dependence when  the  appellant
    was in Somalia.  In that same paragraph I concluded that  where  it  is
    reasonable to expect documentary evidence of a fact to be provided, and
    where such evidence could  reasonably  be  obtained,  it  ought  to  be
    produced.

40. The evidence before me did not advance this aspect of  the  appellant's
    appeal at all.  Putting aside the  fact  that  no  further  documentary
    evidence in that regard was filed and served in advance of the  resumed
    hearing, all that was provided in  documentary  terms  at  the  resumed
    hearing was Ms Ismail's Dutch passport showing a date of  issue  of  15
    May 2014.  Although she said in evidence that that was a renewal of her
    passport, and that she obtained her citizenship in 1998  when  she  was
    issued with her first passport, there was no evidence to  support  that
    assertion.

41. This is a matter which was clearly flagged up  as  an  important  issue
    prior to the resumed hearing.  I do not accept the submissions made  on
    behalf of the appellant to the effect that  there  was  "circumstantial
    evidence" to confirm that Ms Ismail obtained her Dutch  citizenship  in
    1998.  This is a matter that can  and  should  have  been  resolved  by
    concrete evidence.  I am not satisfied that the evidence does establish
    that Ms Ismail obtained her Dutch citizenship in 1998.

42. That conclusion alone is sufficient to dispose of the  contention  that
    the respondent's decision amounts to a breach  of  the  appellant's  EU
    rights.  As  explained  in  Dauhoo,  in  order  for  the  appellant  to
    establish that he is an extended family member he would have  to  prove
    prior dependency and present  dependency,  or  prior  membership  of  a
    household and present membership of a household,  or  prior  dependency
    and present membership  of  a  household,  or  prior  membership  of  a
    household and present dependency.  He does not assert  that  he  was  a
    member of Ms Ismail's household prior to arrival in the UK, and in  the
    light of my conclusions to the effect that it has not been  established
    when Ms Ismail obtained her  Dutch  citizenship,  he  is  not  able  to
    establish prior dependency on an EEA national.

43. In any event, the evidence in support of the suggestion that there  was
    dependency on Ms Ismail whilst the appellant was  in  Somalia  was  not
    credible as to dependency.  Ms Ismail said in evidence that she used to
    send money to the appellant's family, for  the  appellant  and  others,
    when he was in Somalia.  She said that it was only  her  who  sent  him
    money, then stating that there was a brother in Canada who used  to  do
    the same, sending too much  money  on  several  occasions  and  on  one
    occasion sending $4,000.  In answer to a question  that  I  asked,  she
    said that the brother in Canada and she were supporting  him  together.
    In re-examination she then said that her brother in Canada  married  in
    1996 and therefore providing financial support was difficult for him.

44. Aside from the difficulty in reconciling those features of the evidence
    in terms of financial support, it is also to  be  remembered  that  the
    evidence from the appellant before the FtT was that he was supported by
    his aunt as well as relatives in the United Arab Emirates.  This was  a
    matter referred to in submissions on behalf of  the  respondent  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, as recorded at [49] of  that  decision.   Lest
    there be any doubt about the appellant's evidence in  this  respect  in
    terms of financial support being provided by others as well as his aunt
    whilst he was in Somalia, it is to be noted that the FtJ repeated  that
    evidence at [56], stating that the appellant's evidence was that he was
    supported by his aunt and by relatives in the UAE.

45. The significance  of  that  evidence  given  to  the  FtT  is  that  it
    reinforces what in my judgement is the inconsistency over the extent of
    which the appellant's aunt was  providing  financial  support  for  the
    appellant.

46. There is furthermore, another obstacle in the way  of  the  appellant's
    reliance on EU rights.  Mr Clarke submitted that as an extended  family
    member, if the appellant is such, he is not able to resist  deportation
    under the EEA Regulations on  that  basis,  regs  19  and  21  and  the
    Citizens' Directive distinguishing between family members and  extended
    family  members.   The  respondent's  submission  in  this  regard   is
    supported by reference to the decision in Rose  which  makes  it  clear
    that the scope of the safeguards against expulsion which the  Citizens'
    Directive affords to family members  does  not  include  "other  family
    members" (that is extended family members).  Thus, Exception 3  to  the
    automatic deportation provisions cannot be relied  on  by  an  extended
    family member.

47. Whilst I am not bound by the decision in Rose,  I  find  its  reasoning
    persuasive and I too conclude that the appellant is not able to rely on
    Exception 3, for the same reasons.

48. There is no merit in the argument on behalf of the  appellant  advanced
    with reference to the  IDI's,  a  very  limited  extract  of  which  is
    reproduced at  page  9  of  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument.   The
    argument on behalf of the appellant in this respect is  to  the  effect
    that the IDI's make no distinction between  family  members  and  other
    family members.  However, the  extract  that  has  been  copied  is  at
    paragraph 7.4 of the IDI's, consisting of some six lines.  The rest  of
    the IDI's have not been  provided.   Furthermore,  the  basis  for  the
    argument seems to be reliant on the  section  heading,  which  is  "EEA
    nationals & their family members".  The subheading is  "Deportation  of
    EEA nationals and family members".  That is hardly any basis from which
    to advance the argument made on behalf of the appellant, aside from the
    fact that the IDI's are not always a reliable guide  to  what  the  law
    actually is (see Mahad v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16).

49. In order to resist  deportation  therefore,  the  appellant  must  come
    within the Immigration Rules at 398-399A.  These provide as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
                Human Rights Convention, and
                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;
                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law,
                    the Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                    consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if
                    it does not, the public  interest  in  deportation  will
                    only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
                if -
                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and
                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or
                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case
                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and
                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported; or
                (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                    with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen
                    or settled in the UK, and
                    (i)    the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
                        person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their
                        immigration status was not precarious; and
                    (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live
                        in the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                        deported, because of compelling circumstances  over
                        and above those described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                        Appendix FM; and
                    (iii)  it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                        remain in the UK without the person who  is  to  be
                        deported.
         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -
                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                    most of his life; and
                (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                    and
                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                    integration into the country to which it is proposed  he
                    is deported."

50. So far as paragraph 399 is concerned, it  is  not  suggested  that  the
    appellant has a partner  or  children  in  the  UK.   Accordingly,  the
    appellant is not able to rely on paragraph 399.

51. It was eventually conceded on behalf of the appellant before me that he
    is not able to meet the requirements of paragraph 399A(a) in  terms  of
    having been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life.  That  is
    sufficient to mean that the appellant is not able to rely on  paragraph
    399A as a whole either.

52. I do not detect from the appellant's skeleton argument  any  suggestion
    that the appellant  is  in  fact  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399A in any other respect.  Even if he were able to establish
    that he had been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life,  he
    would also have  to  establish  that  he  is  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the UK and that there would be very significant obstacles
    to his integration into the country to  which  it  is  proposed  he  is
    deported.

53. In terms of social and cultural integration, the appellant is  said  to
    have arrived in the UK in 2004.  However, he started his  offending  in
    2006 and has been repeatedly offending since that date up to 2013.  His
    offences have included offences of dishonesty,  handling  stolen  goods
    and theft from a  vehicle  in  2006,  various  offences  of  possessing
    controlled drugs, both class A and class B,  robbery,  a  public  order
    offence, obstructing police, and various offences of  breach  of  court
    orders, and failure to surrender to bail.

54. It is said on behalf of the appellant in the skeleton argument that  he
    has achieved various qualifications, being B-TEC and NVQ qualifications
    in business, travel, tourism and IT and has hopes  of  obtaining  other
    qualifications.  He is said to have been employed as  a  caretaker  for
    nine months previously.  He has sought other employment.   It  is  also
    said that since July 2013 he has been a  participating  member  of  the
    Horn of Africa Youth Association in West London and has  been  involved
    in the youth sporting activities within that organisation.  He is  said
    to have had positive reports from that organisation.

55. However, notwithstanding what is said about the appellant's expressions
    of remorse for his offending, I cannot see that it is established  that
    he can be said to be socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK  in
    the light of his offending,  which  is  the  opposite  of  integration,
    putting himself outside society's norms.   He  has  been  convicted  on
    thirteen occasions of a total of 25 offences.  The evidence before  the
    FtT recorded at [26] was that the appellant had done some volunteering.
     He had however, never worked as such in the UK, at least according  to
    the evidence before the FtT, although I note again what is asserted  in
    the skeleton argument about his having worked  for  nine  months  as  a
    caretaker.

56. In terms of very significant obstacles to integration in  Somalia,  the
    findings of the FtJ which are not infected by the error of law  are  to
    the following effect.  The appellant has no family members in Mogadishu
    and the evidence established that the appellant's parents had died, and
    at best his father is presumed dead.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant would be returning to Somalia alone, having left  at  a  very
    young age.  He would not have any network of people available  that  he
    could call upon on his return.

57. However, the appellant does have family members in the UK who are  able
    to support him. Putting aside the judge's findings  about  the  support
    the appellant received when he was in Somalia, it is at least the  case
    that he has his aunt in the UK who has been supporting him here.  There
    is no reason to believe that she would not be able to provide at  least
    some support for him were he to return to Somalia.

58. The appellant's asylum appeal was dismissed by  the  FtT,  as  was  his
    appeal on human rights grounds with reference to Articles 2 and 3.   In
    MOJ it was found as follows:
              "344.  The economic revival of Mogadishu can be described only
                  as remarkable, considering what is known about conditions
                  in the city since the civil war began in  1991.  Each  of
                  the expert witnesses has addressed this in their evidence
                  that  we  have  considered  above.  It  is  perhaps  well
                  described by a report of the  New  York  Times  of  April
                  2012:


                  "But people here are sensing the moment and  seizing  it.
                  More than 300,000 residents have come back to the city in
                  the last six months..... The economic boom, fuelled by an
                  infusion of tens of millions of dollars, much of it  from
                  Somalis  flocking  home  from   overseas,   is   spawning
                  thousands of jobs that  are  beginning  to  absorb  young
                  militiamen eager to get out of the killing business..."


                  An international agency referred to in Dr Mullen's report
                  is recorded as saying:


                  "Mogadishu is now  a  'buzz',  people  are  going  around
                  minding their own business and  there  is  an  increasing
                  freedom of movement for everyone."

                  ...

                349. ...The evidence is of substantial inward investment in
                  construction projects and of entrepreneurs  returning  to
                  Mogadishu to invest in business activity.  In  particular
                  we heard evidence about  hotels  and  restaurants  and  a
                  resurgence of the hospitality industry as  well  as  taxi
                  businesses, bus services, drycleaners, electronics stores
                  and so on. The evidence speaks of  construction  projects
                  and improvements in the city's infrastructure such as the
                  installation of some solar powered  street  lighting.  It
                  does not,  perhaps,  need  much  in  the  way  of  direct
                  evidence  to  conclude  that  jobs  such  as  working  as
                  building labourers, waiters or drivers or  assistants  in
                  retail outlets are unlikely to  be  filled  by  the  tiny
                  minority that represents "the elite"."

59. There is no reason to believe that the appellant would not be  able  to
    take advantage of the "economic boom" referred to in MOJ.  It  is  also
    to be borne in mind that  the  appellant  is  accepted  to  be  from  a
    majority clan, which is relevant to the  potential  for  mechanisms  of
    support on return.

60. Although the appellant's evidence before the FtT was that he broke  his
    hip in 2007 and could not walk for several months, it is not  suggested
    that any health issues are relevant to the extent  to  which  he  could
    integrate on return.

61. The appellant lived in Somalia until he was almost 14 years of age, and
    will be familiar with the language and customs of Somalia.   I  am  not
    satisfied that the  evidence  establishes  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Somalia.

62. Given that the appellant is  not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs  399  or  399A,  he  must  establish  that  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in  those
    paragraphs in order to resist deportation under the Rules.

63. Whilst not specifically directed to this  issue,  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the appellant were in terms of the suggestion that there  was
    no risk of reoffending, and that the appellant had  shown  remorse  for
    his offences.  The skeleton argument on behalf of the  appellant  again
    does not make specific submissions in terms of the requirement of  very
    compelling circumstances.  A number of factors are relied on  in  other
    respects, including that the appellant has spent his formative years in
    the UK, and that his only remaining family, being his sister,  paternal
    and maternal aunts and uncle, are also in the UK.  It is said  that  he
    has built connections with the UK and formed strong ties and a  network
    of  friends.   It  is  said  that  his  offences  were  "Due  to  youth
    indiscretion and naivety".

64. It is also highlighted that the appellant has been living with his aunt
    and sister in the UK for a number of years  and  that  the  appellant's
    sister particularly relies on  him  for  support.   His  removal  would
    affect his family in the UK in an emotional sense.  I note that  it  is
    said in the skeleton argument at [19d.]  in  the  penultimate  sentence
    that the appellant's family rely on him as the only male in the  family
    "to provide essential care and support as his mother is blind". That is
    a surprising suggestion since the evidence before the FtT, accepted  by
    the judge, was that his parents are dead. Indeed, the skeleton argument
    also refers at [18], and again at [19] more than once to his mother and
    other family being dependent on him and his intention to care  for  his
    mother, yet also, at [9] for example, refers to his  having  lost  both
    his parents.

65. All that aside, I cannot see how his family in the UK could rely on him
    in any sense at all given his repeated offending.

66. In summary, I am not satisfied that there is anything in  the  evidence
    which demonstrates the very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    paragraphs 399 and 399A which would suggest that the appellant's appeal
    under the Immigration Rules should be allowed.

67. In the circumstances of this appeal, the Immigration Rules are a
    complete code (see MF v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192).

68. Nothing in the evidence reveals any  basis  from  which  to  go  on  to
    consider  Article  8  in   a   freestanding   assessment.    In   those
    circumstances, it is not necessary to consider the factors set  out  in
    s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  which  in
    any event mirrors the Immigration Rules on deportation.

69. In all the circumstances, I am not satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established that any Exception to the automatic deportation  provisions
    of the UK Borders Act 2007  applies.   The  appeal  must  therefore  be
    dismissed.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision is set aside. I re-make the  decision,
    dismissing the appeal.

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      16/03/16



ANNEX



                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01983/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice           |Decision & Directions Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2015                       |                                 |
|                                           |.................................|
|                                           |......                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               AHMED DAHIR ALI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Fouladvand, Legal Representative from MAAS


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 4 October 1990.  He
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent dated 16 October 2014 to make a deportation order under  the
    automatic deportation provisions of the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   That
    decision  followed  the  appellant's  conviction  for  an  offence   of
    blackmail, for which he was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment in
    a young offenders' institute.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio, after a hearing on  23  February  2015,
    allowed the appellant's appeal on the basis that an  exception  to  the
    automatic deportation provisions applied, that exception being in terms
    of Section 33(4) namely that the appellant's removal would  breach  his
    rights under the EU treaties.  That  conclusion  followed  the  judge's
    assessment of evidence which he found established that the appellant is
    an extended family member of an EEA national namely his aunt,  said  to
    be a Dutch citizen.

 4. According to the determination, an application was made  to  amend  the
    grounds of appeal to include reliance on Community Law.  The First-tier
    Judge allowed the grounds to be amended, notwithstanding  the  lateness
    of the application and the objection on behalf of the respondent to the
    late amendment.

 5. The judge concluded, in summary, that the  appellant  had  established,
    through the evidence of his aunt Ms Suad Ismail, that he was  dependent
    on her when he was in Somalia and that he is presently a member of  her
    household and still dependent on her.  He found that she obtained Dutch
    citizenship in 1998, before the appellant left Somalia.

 6. The respondent's grounds of appeal complain about the late  application
    to  amend  the  grounds,  arguing  that  it  is  not  clear  from   the
    determination whether the Presenting Officer was given any  opportunity
    to cross-examine the witness on the issue  of  dependence,  the  matter
    having been raised during the course of submissions.  It is argued that
    the respondent has, or may have been, deprived of a fair opportunity to
    test evidence directly material to the decision to allow the appeal and
    that the judge's  handling  of  proceedings  was  so  unfair  that  the
    decision with reference to the EEA Regulations cannot stand.

 7. During the course of submissions before me, Mr Fouladvand said that  he
    had raised the issue of the appellant's reliance on  Community  Law  at
    the start of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   However,  he
    was not able to produce any contemporaneous notes of evidence that were
    actually taken during the course of the hearing, as distinct from  what
    he described as a "sketchy" manuscript note of what seems to have  been
    preparation for the hearing.  Mr Walker referred to a 'minute' from the
    Presenting Officer at the time which indicated that the matter  was  in
    fact raised during the course of submissions.

 8. I do not consider it necessary to resolve the issue of when the  matter
    was  raised,  although  it  must  be  observed  that  at  [43]  of  the
    determination it seems plain that the matter was  not  in  fact  raised
    until submissions on behalf of the appellant, on any view being  almost
    at as late a stage of the proceedings as is possible to contemplate.

 9. However, it is equally plain from the determination at  [44]  that  the
    Presenting Officer was given the opportunity further  to  cross-examine
    any witness but indicated that he was content to rely on submissions on
    the point only.  Those further submissions are recorded at [49].

10. There is nothing to indicate that any application  for  an  adjournment
    was made on behalf of the respondent in order  to  deal  with  the  new
    issue.  Indeed, in  fact  nothing  in  the  determination  supports  Mr
    Fouladvand's contention that he had also asked for  an  adjournment  to
    produce further evidence in relation to the EU point.

11. Judge Adio did allow the grounds to be amended.   I  am  not  satisfied
    that there is any procedural unfairness in his having  done  so.   That
    was  a  decision  which  was  within  his  discretion  subject  to  the
    requirements of procedural fairness.   The  respondent  was  given  the
    opportunity further to cross-examine any witnesses and  no  application
    for an adjournment was made.  The respondent was able to, and did, make
    submissions on  the  point.   In  this  respect  therefore,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the First-tier Judge erred in law.

12. The respondent's grounds raise an issue in terms  of  inconsistency  in
    oral evidence between the appellant's aunt and his  uncle,  Mr  Mohamed
    Ismail.  The inconsistency is in terms of whether they  both  have  the
    same parents.  Both his aunt and his uncle said that they are  siblings
    of the appellant's mother.  His aunt said that she and the  appellant's
    mother share the same mother but not the same father.  The  appellant's
    uncle initially said that the appellant's aunt and he  share  the  same
    mother and father, although changed  his  evidence  in  response  to  a
    question from the judge to state that they do not  in  fact  share  the
    same father.

13. At [57] it is stated that:

         "I am prepared to find the Appellant's aunt credible more than  the
         Appellant's uncle as she was the one who was very honest about  the
         relationship between herself and the Appellant.... I therefore find
         that the Appellant's aunt has shown that she is a credible  witness
         and someone who can be believed when she was prepared to  be  frank
         and honest on an issue concerning the clan membership."

14. It is not entirely clear what the relevance  of  the  inconsistency  in
    their parentage is, the point not having been explained in the  grounds
    or in submissions by either party.  It  may  be,  although  it  is  not
    clear,  that  at  [57]  where  the  judge  stated  that  he  found  the
    appellant's aunt more credible than the appellant's  uncle,  there  was
    some inconsistency in terms of the provision of  financial  support  to
    the appellant when he was in Somalia, although as I say, the matter  is
    obscure.  More pertinent however, is the complaint in the grounds about
    the judge's assessment of firstly, the date when the  appellant's  aunt
    acquired Dutch citizenship and secondly, in  terms  of  the  extent  to
    which she provided financial support amounting to  dependency  when  he
    was living in Somalia.

15. The grounds at [8] refer to the  appellant's  aunt  having  produced  a
    Dutch residence card issued in 2014 as the only documentary evidence of
    her status as an EEA national.  However, at [47] of  the  determination
    the judge stated that the  appellant's  aunt  had  provided  her  Dutch
    citizenship card.  In any case, it does not appear  that  the  document
    that was produced revealed when she obtained her citizenship, or indeed
    if it was a residence  card  that  it  actually  provided  evidence  of
    citizenship.

16. Although in answer to a question from the judge  recorded  at  [48]  Ms
    Ismail said that she became a Dutch citizen in 1998, there does not  in
    fact appear to have been any documentary evidence in  support  of  that
    answer.  It seems to me that there is merit in the argument advanced on
    behalf of the respondent in the grounds to the effect that where it  is
    reasonable to expect documentary evidence of a  fact  to  be  provided,
    where such evidence could  reasonably  be  obtained,  it  ought  to  be
    produced.   I  consider  that  this  has  particular   force   in   the
    circumstances of this appeal where there was a late  amendment  to  the
    grounds, raising  an  entirely  new  point.   The  date  on  which  the
    appellant's aunt  obtained  citizenship  is  a  crucial  factor  to  be
    determined on the  issue  of  dependence  when  the  appellant  was  in
    Somalia.

17. Furthermore, although the judge heard evidence  of  money  having  been
    sent by Ms Ismail to the  appellant,  there  was  evidence  that  other
    relatives also provided financial support  to  him  whilst  he  was  in
    Somalia.  At [56] the judge recognised that dependency did not need  to
    be of necessity and does not need to be whole or main  but  had  to  be
    economic dependency in fact.  As the grounds suggest however, there was
    no detailed consideration of the extent to which the appellant's aunt's
    support was necessary, given other  financial  support  that  had  been
    provided.  In other words, there was no analysis of the extent to which
    he was dependent on her in terms  of  her  support  providing  for  his
    essential needs.  Again, in circumstances where this matter arose  very
    late in the proceedings, it was in my judgement incumbent on the  judge
    to adopt a cautious approach to the analysis of this evidence.

18. Furthermore, although  not  specifically  raised  in  the  respondent's
    grounds, is the question of the extent to which the appellant's aunt is
    exercising Treaty rights.  Mr Fouladvand accepted that in order for the
    appellant to qualify as an extended family member, the appellant's aunt
    does need to be a 'qualified person'.  Mr Fouladvand said that this was
    a matter that was canvassed  at  the  hearing,  although  there  is  no
    indication of that whatsoever on the face of the determination.  It  is
    not suggested that there was  any  evidence  produced  to  support  the
    contention that the appellant's aunt is exercising  Treaty  rights,  or
    was at the time of the hearing, or that she was asked any questions  on
    the point, or that any submissions were made on that issue.

19. The general point is raised in the respondent's grounds to  the  effect
    that the evidence before  the  First-tier  Judge  was  insufficient  to
    establish that the appellant is an extended family  member  of  an  EEA
    national.  Consideration of that  issue  would  necessarily  include  a
    consideration of the extent to which she was exercising Treaty  rights.
    Although Mr Fouladvand said that prior  to  the  hearing  he  had  seen
    payslips of the appellant's aunt, no such documents appear to have been
    produced to the First-tier Judge.

20. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that this experienced judge did on
    this occasion err in law in his assessment of the issue of  dependency,
    but also in his having failed to consider the issue of  the  extent  to
    which the appellant's aunt was exercising Treaty rights at the time  of
    the hearing.  Those errors of law are such as to require  the  decision
    to be set aside.

21. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal on asylum and on human rights
    grounds with reference to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  There has been
    no cross-appeal on  behalf  of  the  appellant  in  relation  to  those
    conclusions and his findings in that respect are to stand.

22. I do not consider it appropriate in the circumstances for the matter to
    be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  further  hearing  on  the
    outstanding issues.  Accordingly, the decision will be re-made  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  That re-making will of course be  concerned  with  the
    extent to which an exception to the  automatic  deportation  provisions
    applies in terms of the appellant's reliance on EU rights but will also
    consider the extent to which the appellant is able to rely on any other
    exceptions to the automatic deportation provisions, in so far as raised
    in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  other  words,
    aside from the question  of  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  and
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, the re-making of the decision will be  at
    large on all outstanding issues.

23. The parties are to take careful note of the directions set  out  below,
    in particular with reference to  any  witness  statements  that  it  is
    proposed are to be relied on at the resumed hearing.

                               DIRECTIONS

 1) In relation to any witness whom it is proposed to  call  to  give  oral
    evidence, there must be a witness statement drawn in sufficient  detail
    to stand as evidence-in-chief such  that  there  is  no  need  for  any
    further examination-in-chief.

 2) The appellant is to file and serve a skeleton argument which identifies
    all grounds of appeal relied on.

 3) In respect of (1) and  (2)  above,  and  in  relation  to  any  further
    evidence relied on by either party, the same must be filed  and  served
    no later than 14 days before the next date of hearing.

 4) No interpreter will be arranged for the hearing, unless within 14  days
    of these directions being sent, a request for an  interpreter  is  made
    with an explanation as to why an interpreter is needed.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            23/10/15




