
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01848/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 February 2014                           |On 27 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal judge N POOLE

                                   Between

                           michael everton hibbert
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Oliver Manley instructed by Gloucester Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this document I shall refer to the parties in  the  style  in  which
    they appeared before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Jamaica born 11 May 1991.  On 29 August 2013 the  respondent
    made a decision to make a deportation order by virtue of the UK Borders
    Act 2007 and  Section  3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   This
    decision followed the appellant's conviction at Gloucester Crown  Court
    for possessing controlled drugs with intent to supply.   The  appellant
    was sentenced to a total of three years and three months' imprisonment.
     The appellant claimed that his removal to Jamaica will be a breach  of
    his, and his family's, rights protected  by  Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention and  that  therefore  he  is  exempt  from  automatic
    deportation.

2.   The appellant's appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davidge and Ms V S Street  ("the  panel")  sitting  at  Newport  on  23
    October 2013.  Mr  Manley  again  represented  the  appellant  and  the
    respondent was represented by a Presenting Officer.   An  oral  hearing
    was conducted wherein the panel  heard  evidence  and  noted  documents
    submitted by the parties.  In a written determination  prepared  on  24
    October the panel allowed the appellant's appeal on Article 8  grounds.
    In reaching its conclusions the panel made findings with regard to  the
    effect of the appellant's deportation on his daughter.

3.   The respondent sought leave to appeal.  Only one  ground  is  suggested
    but that ground contains five paragraphs.  It  is  suggested  that  the
    panel made a "material misdirection of law".  The  allegation  is  that
    they reached a conclusion without giving adequate consideration of  the
    public interest in removal.  Reference is made to the case SS (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and it is suggested that that case provided that  a
    very strong claim was  necessary  in  respect  of  a  child  given  the
    pressing public interest in removal of a foreign criminal.  Paragraph 3
    of the grounds suggests that the appellant's mother could  continue  to
    care for the child as she is currently doing and that the appellant had
    not shown any concern in the past for his  daughter's  best  interests,
    given allegations of violence and the supply of drugs.

4.   It was submitted that had the panel  taken  full  account  of  all  the
    issues they would have found that deportation was proportionate.

5.   The application came before another Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was refused.  I consider it appropriate to set out
    the reasons given for that decision.


         "1.  Permission is sought to appeal against the determination of  a
             Panel consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davidge  and  a
             Non-legal Member, issued on 5th November  2013,  allowing  the
             Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent made
             on 29th August 2013 to make a deportation  order  pursuant  to
             Section 32(4) and (5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and s.3(5) of
             the Immigration Act.


         2.   It is submitted in the grounds of application that  the  Panel
             misdirected  itself  in  law  in   its   assessment   of   the
             proportionality of removal  of  the  Appellant  in  that  they
             failed to give adequate consideration to the  public  interest
             in the removal of criminals.  It is submitted that they failed
             to give proper consideration to the decision in  SS  (Nigeria)
             [2013] EWCA Civ 550 when considering the effect of removal  of
             the Appellant's young  daughter  and  failed  to  take  proper
             account of all the circumstances which include the  fact  that
             the child is looked after by her grandmother.


         3.   The  Panel  clearly  thoroughly  considered  all  the  factors
             relevant to  this  appeal.   They  correctly  found  that  the
             Appellant could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
             Having determined that it is in  the  best  interests  of  the
             child that the Appellant be allowed to remain in the  UK,  and
             having given adequate reasons for this, including the evidence
             of child professionals that the removal of the Appellant would
             in all the circumstances have a very  serious  effect  on  the
             child, they went on to find that the Appellant had committed a
             serious crime and that the public interest in his  deportation
             weighed heavily against him in the balancing  exercise.   They
             placed little weight on the length of time the  Appellant  has
             been in the UK.  They considered all the evidence before  them
             relative to the Appellant's rehabilitation and to the risk  of
             re-offending.  They concluded that  'in  the  very  particular
             facts of the case',  deportation  is  not  proportionate.   It
             seems to me that although there is some merit in the  grounds,
             the decision of the Panel that the best interests of the child
             in this case outweigh the public  interest  in  deporting  the
             Appellant was open to them on the evidence before them for the
             reasons given.


         4.   The grounds disclose no arguable material error of law."

6.   The respondent renewed that application to the Upper Tribunal.

7.   In a notice of  decision  dated  11  December  2013  a  Judge  of  this
    Tribunal granted permission to appeal and gave the following reasons.


         "This appellant faced automatic deportation, following  a  sentence
         of 3 years 3 months for possession of class 'A' drugs  with  intent
         to supply; according to the sentencing judge, this had been reduced
         from a tariff of 6 years, because of his  youth  and  guilty  plea.
         However, despite the date of the hearing, the panel considered  the
         case on the basis of MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT
         393 (IAC), rather than MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, which had
         come out just over a fortnight before.  Arguably  consideration  of
         the Court of Appeal decision, and of SS (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ
         550, even though the presenting  officer  does  not  seem  to  have
         referred them to  either,  might  have  led  them  to  a  different
         result."

8.   Hence the matter comes before me.

9.   At the start of the hearing I raised with Mr Manley the question  of  a
    Rule 24 submission.  None was on file.  Mr Manley indicated that he had
    prepared one and then gave me a copy of a letter from those instructing
    him to the Upper Tribunal dated 23 December 2013.

10.  Mr Richards indicated that he relied upon the grounds and  referred  to
    the case of SS (Nigeria) although he did indicate  that  a  failure  to
    mention that case was not in itself an error.  He referred to paragraph
    54 of that case and that public interest was  paramount.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that the panel had failed in considering the public  interest
    in the balancing  exercise.   I  raised  with  Mr  Richards  the  point
    mentioned in the grant of leave regarding the case of MF.  Mr  Richards
    indicated that he was not relying on that case or the  point  mentioned
    in the grant of leave.

11.  Mr Manley relied upon the Rule 24  response.   The  panel  had  clearly
    fully noted public interest and the appropriate weight that had  to  be
    attached.  Particularly he referred to  paragraphs  37  to  39  of  the
    determination together with paragraph 28.  The evidence of  the  social
    worker was paramount and Mr Manley said that it was rare to have such a
    strongly worded response from a social worker.   Any  improvement  with
    regard to the daughter's situation was "down to Mr Hibbert".

12.  Mr Manley submitted that if paragraph 54 of  SS  had  been  taken  into
    account the panel would have reached the same conclusion so  any  error
    would not be material.  With regard to the possible history of violence
    on the part of the appellant there is no suggestion that the child  was
    present during those incidents.

13.  Mr Richards made no reply.

14.  Having considered the matter I  indicated  that  for  the  reasons  now
    given the respondent's appeal was dismissed as I had found no  material
    error of law contained within the determination.

15.  Dealing firstly with the reasons given for the grant of  permission  to
    appeal.  The respondent did not seek  to  rely  upon  the  "MF  point",
    either in the grounds seeking leave or at the hearing  before  me.   Mr
    Richards specifically chose not to rely upon it.  In any event I cannot
    see that the difference between the Upper Tribunal decision in  MF  and
    the Court of Appeal  decision  in  MF  would  have  made  any  material
    difference to the outcome of this appeal before the original panel.   I
    therefore find that that panel did not err in law in any  material  way
    in reaching the decision that they did by not referring to  MF  in  the
    Court of Appeal.

16.  The Respondent does however rely upon the case of SS  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 550 and in particular  paragraph  54  of  that  judgment.   Mr
    Manley quite properly makes reference to paragraphs 28, 29, 30, 37,  38
    and 39 of the panel's  determination.   Quite  clearly  the  panel  had
    consideration for the public interest and indeed paragraph 28  includes
    the words, "we attach significant weight to the strong public  interest
    ...".  It is the case that the panel did not refer specifically to  the
    case of SS (Nigeria).  However, paragraph 27 of their determination  is
    an indication that they were satisfied that this  particular  case  was
    sufficiently strong to outweigh the significant weight  that  would  be
    attributable  to  public  interest.   They  clearly  carried  out   the
    appropriate balancing act.  Indeed, the panel went  to  the  extent  of
    setting out very clear areas of  consideration  in  the  way  that  the
    determination was separated into various sections.

17.  The panel had before them a report  from  the  social  worker  and  the
    panel quite properly drew from that report.  Mr Manley  is  correct  in
    saying that such strongly-worded reports are rare.  In  this  case  the
    report was firmly in favour of the appellant's position.

18.  It is also correct to say that at paragraph 35  of  the  determination,
    and having  weighed up the evidence before it, the panel were satisfied
    that the appellant's claim to be rehabilitated had been made  out.   At
    paragraphs 37 to 39 under the heading "The Public Interest", the  panel
    clearly had in mind the balancing  act  that  they  had  to  undertake.
    Their conclusion at paragraph 40 made  clear  reference  to  the  "very
    particular facts" of the appellant's case.

19.  As Mr Richards conceded merely by not mentioning SS  (Nigeria)  is  not
    in itself an error of law.  It is not possible to say  whether  or  not
    the panel had that case  in  mind  but  it  is  quite  clear  from  the
    determination that they properly directed themselves on the law and  if
    they had considered SS (Nigeria) their decision  would  not  have  been
    different.

20.  Accordingly there is no error of law and  the  decision  of  the  panel
    must stand.

21.  No anonymity direction had been made and no  application  for  one  was
    made before me.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge N Poole


