
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01637/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2016                            |On 7 March 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     SBH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sweden  and  his  date  of  birth  is  24
    August 1944.  He appealed against a decision of the Secretary of  State
    to deport him pursuant to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 as a result of his conviction at Reading  Crown  Court
    of 15 October 2013 of sexual assault on a female child under the age of
    13.  His appeal was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  B
    Lloyd following a hearing on 11 March  2015  in  a  decision  that  was
    promulgated on 18 March 2015.

2.   The period of the appellant's residence in the UK  was  not  agreed  by
    the respondent.  However, the judge found that the appellant  had  been
    in the UK in accordance with the Regulations from 1997 to January  2014
    (see paragraph 32) and following this he could show a continuous period
    of at least ten years.

3.   The judge applied the test of imperative  grounds  of  public  security
    and concluded that concluded that, albeit that the appellant could show
    a continuous period of residence of  at  least  ten  years,  there  are
    imperative grounds of public security which  justify  his  deportation.
    However, there is an absence of adequate reasons  for  this  conclusion
    which is a material error; particularly in the light of the  assessment
    of risk conducted by the Probation Service  which  concluded  that  the
    appellant was at low risk of  reoffending  (see  paragraph  27  of  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal).  The  judge  did  not  properly
    consider the issue with regard to Regulation 21(5) (c).

4.   The judge further fell into error because he did not properly  consider
    the issue of integration and the level of protection.  The appellant in
    this  case  had  spent  a  period  of  ten  years  here  prior  to  his
    incarceration.  However, case  law  including  MG  and  Warsame  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 16 makes  it
    clear that the ten year period of residence must be continuous  and  be
    calculated by counting back from the date of the decision ordering  the
    expulsion of the person concerned.  In this case there is  a  break  in
    the period and a period of imprisonment is, in  principle,  capable  of
    interrupting the continuity of the period of residence and of affecting
    the decision regarding the grant of the enhanced protection even  where
    the person concerned has resided in the host member state for  the  ten
    years prior to imprisonment.

5.   For the above reasons the judge materially erred and I  set  aside  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal under the  2006  Regulations.  It  is  a
    matter for the judge determining the appeal to consider the  impact  of
    the ten years' residence prior to imprisonment as part of  the  overall
    assessment required in order to determine whether the integrating links
    previously forged with the host member state have been broken.

6.   The judge made a number  of  findings  which  were  challenged  in  the
    grounds and  it  is  asserted  that  the  judge  relied  on  irrelevant
    considerations and particular reference is made to  paragraphs  36  and
    39.  These findings were open to the judge.  However, it the  judge  in
    this case failed to focus on the issues  which  are  narrower  for  the
    purposes of the 2006 Regulations than a deportation  order  made  under
    Section 32 of the 2007 Act.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and  the  matter  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date  25.02.16


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



