
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01118/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination and Reasons Promulgated|
|On Monday 4 July 2016                 |On Wednesday 3 August 2016           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MS SANELA OSMANOVIC
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chirico, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. This matter comes before me for the re-making of a decision  on  the
       Appellant's appeal in relation to certain specified issues (which  I
       set out below).  This follows the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  (UTJ
       Storey and Smith) setting aside in part the decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judges Vaudin D'Imecourt and SJ Clarke  promulgated  on  18
       May 2015.  That decision  is  preserved  save  in  relation  to  the
       discrete issues in relation to which an error of law  was  found  to
       exist (see [11] below).  Before turning to the issues  which  remain
       to be determined I set out briefly the factual  background  to  this
       case so far as necessary for the determination of those issues.
    2. The Appellant is of Roma  ethnicity.   Her  country  of  origin  and
       nationality are unclear and, in respect  of  nationality  at  least,
       that is one of the issues which I will have to consider.   She  came
       to the UK with her sister, Barbara, in January 2000,  the  remainder
       of her family (father, mother and  seven  siblings)  having  arrived
       some months earlier.  The family claimed asylum in the  UK  but  the
       Appellant did not remain part of that asylum application because her
       parents disapproved of her lifestyle and  choice  of  partners  (who
       were non Roma).
    3. The Appellant is (or was) a drug user of heroin and  crack  cocaine.
       It is unclear whether she remains a user.  She speaks  in  her  most
       recent statement (unsigned and undated but made  in  about  November
       2015) of having taken drugs "in the past" but  there  is  no  direct
       evidence that she has ceased to use drugs and even  if  she  is  not
       using Class A drugs, she is  almost  certainly  still  addicted  and
       receiving methadone.  I say that because on previous occasions  when
       she has ceased to use drugs, for example  during  her  imprisonment,
       she  has  been  undergoing  rehabilitation  involving  a   methadone
       programme.
    4. One of the difficulties in this case  is  establishing  the  current
       factual position as the Appellant has all but  disengaged  from  the
       appeal.  Mr Chirico  who  appeared  before  me  explained  that  his
       solicitors have encountered difficulties in  obtaining  instructions
       from the Appellant since  the  beginning  of  this  year.   She  has
       however contacted them on a few occasions by telephone and from  the
       exchanges on those occasions they are satisfied  that  they  and  Mr
       Chirico are still instructed to pursue this appeal.
    5. Some of the other relevant facts appear from the previous  decisions
       of the Tribunal(s) and from earlier statements of the Appellant  and
       what she has told medical professionals on the few occasions she has
       been examined for the purposes of reports before the Tribunal.
    6. The Appellant has been in a number of relationships in the past.  It
       appears that she was contracted into an arranged marriage at a  very
       young age and bore a child before she came  to  the  UK.   There  is
       mention of that and of the child being in Germany.   She  no  longer
       has contact with that partner or child.  She  then  became  involved
       with an older man of Serbian origin who it  seems  first  introduced
       her to drugs.  She had  a  daughter  from  that  relationship.   The
       daughter is now adopted.  The Appellant  has  very  limited  contact
       which is not on a face to face  basis.   She  then  entered  into  a
       relationship with another man who it appears may have used her as  a
       way of obtaining a right to remain in  the  UK.   They  too  have  a
       child.  The child lives with his father.  It does  not  appear  that
       the Appellant has contact with that child.  Finally,  the  Appellant
       has another child by a partner who also did not have  the  right  to
       remain in the UK and has returned  or  been  returned  to  his  home
       country.  That child too is adopted.  It does not  appear  that  the
       Appellant has contact with that child; any contact in that  case  is
       also likely to be very limited indirect contact (if any) in light of
       the adoption. That background is relevant to the issue  of  how  the
       Appellant copes with traumatic events in her past and  also  to  the
       question of what support (if any) she has in the UK presently.
    7. The Appellant has also experienced other traumatic  episodes  namely
       the death of one brother before she came to the UK.  It appears that
       he died or was killed during the war in Kosovo.  Another brother was
       killed in the UK in a car crash.
    8. The Appellant has committed multiple offences since being in the  UK
       which have led  to  deportation  action.   On  23  April  2004,  the
       Appellant was convicted of four counts of theft and sentenced to two
       years' in prison  for  each  to  run  concurrently.   Following  the
       conviction, the Appellant was issued with  notice  of  liability  to
       deportation.  Her appeal was dismissed by the Tribunal in 2007 and a
       deportation order was signed on 12 March 2008.
    9. Submissions were then made that  the  deportation  order  should  be
       revoked.  Those were rejected  on  13  January  2011  leading  to  a
       further appeal.   This appeal was allowed to a limited extent on the
       basis that  the  Respondent  should  consider  section  55  Borders,
       Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 because of her contact at  that
       time with at least one of her children.  That led  to  the  decision
       which is challenged in this appeal.  That appeal was dismissed as  I
       have already noted in a decision promulgated on 18 May 2015.
   10. It is noted in that decision that the Appellant received twenty-five
       convictions for fifty-one offences  resulting  in  twelve  custodial
       sentences, the first conviction being on 1 February  2001.  Although
       the Appellant did contest some of the details of the offending, that
       finding (which is not  contested)  shows  a  continuing  pattern  of
       offending.  According to the Respondent, she has  committed  further
       offences since her release from immigration  detention.   I  do  not
       need to deal with those.  Suffice it to say, and it is not disputed,
       she is a long term offender who continues  to  offend.   Mr  Chirico
       submitted and I accept that most if not  all  of  her  offences  are
       connected with her substance abuse and the  need  for  money.   That
       though does not excuse them.


Issues to be determined

   11. The issues in relation to which an error of law  was  found  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal's decision were set out in the Tribunal's  error
       of law decision as follows:-


             "[15]       Mr  Chirico  indicated  that  the  respondent  was
           prepared to concede that there was an error of law  in  relation
           to  grounds  3  and  4  concerning  the        approach  to  the
           appellant's mental health and risk  to  the  appellant  in  this
           regard on the basis of  discriminatory  exclusion  from  medical
           care (if returned to Kosovo).  These grounds are also linked  to
           ground  5  which  challenges  the  approach   to   risk       of
           discrimination if the  appellant  is  returned  to  Serbia.   Mr
           Chirico indicated      that the respondent  also  conceded  that
           this element  of  the  alleged  risk  in  Serbia  needed  to  be
           revisited if grounds 3 and 4 were also made out.
             [16]  Mr  Jarvis  indicated  that  the  respondent  made  this
       concession on the     basis  that  the  Tribunal  stopped  short  of
       considering the entirety of the risk on return     by  hypothesising
       that the risks would arise at the point of return      and not later
       and  on this basis could be avoided by the fact that  the  appellant
       would be handed      over to the authorities  in  whichever  country
       she would be    returned to so that  she      would  have  immediate
       access to the medical services and would not have to   seek help  on
       her own.   The appellant's case is that     she would  be  destitute
       and  therefore unable to access services and that this, coupled with
       the risk of     discriminatory access to services  would  mean  that
       her mental  health  issues  would    remain  untreated.   Mr  Jarvis
       accepted therefore that the error of law which    was  conceded  was
       also material.
            [17] Having considered the parties' submissions, we agree  that
       there is an     error of law in relation to grounds 3, 4 and  5  (to
       the  extent  that  the  latter        relates   to         risk   of
       discrimination in access to services in Serbia).  We do not consider
       that      there is an error of law in  the  Tribunal's  findings  in
       relation to risk of violence on  return to Serbia.
            ........
           [22]  We are satisfied therefore that the Decision involved  the
    making of               errors of  law  in  the  consideration  of  the
    effect on  the  appellant's  mental  health,                   risk  of
    suicide and self-harm in consequence of her deportation.  We set  aside
           the Decision in relation to that  issue.   That  issue  will  be
    reconsidered at a resumed          hearing before this Tribunal.   That
    issue      will      entail      a      consideration      of       the
    appellant's human rights and there will therefore be a rehearing of the
                       appellant's human rights claims.  The  issue  of  to
    where the appellant is returned                and the  risks  in  that
    destination in  relation  to  access  to  medical  services  will  also
      need to be reconsidered."


   12. As a result of efforts, particularly on the part of  the  Respondent
       (to which I refer below),  it  has  been  possible  to  confine  the
       country of destination to Serbia.  As was accepted by both  parties,
       that is now the hypothetical destination  of  removal.   However,  I
       still need to deal with the  evidence  of  nationality  as  that  is
       relevant to what is likely to  happen  to  the  Appellant  following
       removal.
   13. Mr Chirico indicated during the hearing  that  a  number  of  issues
       raised in his skeleton argument were no longer pursued.  He  firstly
       conceded that he could not say anything about Article 8  ECHR.   The
       lack of evidence from the Appellant would, I accept, make this  very
       difficult to argue. There is no evidence that she is in contact with
       any of her children other than on a very limited basis which is  not
       face to face in any event.  Nor is she currently in a  relationship.
       Although she has  apparently  made  some  contact  with  her  family
       members in the UK, there is no evidence of any resumed  relationship
       with them.  I will also need to deal with the position  of  some  of
       those family members in what follows. I note  also  that  given  the
       Appellant's past offending and current  risk  of  reoffending  there
       would be a significant public interest to be weighed in the balance.


   14. There is a suggestion in Mr Chirico's  skeleton  argument  that  the
       Appellant was seeking to reopen the question of whether she would be
       at risk of violence on return, particularly in light  of  a  further
       letter from Professor Acton, a specialist in Roma groups,  who  says
       that the Appellant is  in  fact  of  Chergashe  Roma  ethnicity  and
       therefore in effect a minority of a minority.  However,  Mr  Chirico
       accepted that the Tribunal's error of law decision of 29  July  2015
       had found there to be no error of law in relation to the  First-tier
       Tribunal's findings about the risk of violence in Serbia (see [9] of
       the Upper Tribunal's decision).  He  did  not  seek  to  reopen  the
       Tribunal's finding.
   15. Mr Chirico's skeleton argument also raised an issue  concerning  the
       risk of trafficking which is raised as a  possibility  by  Professor
       Acton in his letter.  However, Mr Chirico  accepted  that  Professor
       Acton is an expert in relation to Roma groups and not in relation to
       trafficking.  He also accepted that the Appellant  has  not  claimed
       nor has it been claimed on her behalf that she will be  at  risk  of
       being forced into prostitution  as  a  result  of  her  position  if
       returned to Serbia.  She has, as Mr Jarvis  put  it,  lived  on  the
       fringes of society in the UK and it is not suggested  that  she  has
       been forced into prostitution here.  Indeed, I note that Dr  Maloney
       on whose report reliance is placed expressly asked  her  about  this
       and was told by the Appellant that although she had friends who  had
       turned to prostitution to fund their drug habit she had  never  done
       so.
   16. I turn then to consider the issues which arise for determination.


Nationality

   17. Although it appeared from  Mr  Chirico's  and  Mr  Jarvis'  skeleton
       arguments that there  was  a  dispute  surrounding  the  burden  and
       standard of proof in relation to this issue, that dispute fell  away
       in the course of the hearing.  Mr Chirico accepted that the standard
       of proof in relation to whether the Appellant  is  of  a  particular
       nationality is balance of probabilities.  He also accepted that  the
       Respondent's evidence as  to  the  Appellant's  nationality,  whilst
       suffering from a number of defects, does meet the evidential  burden
       of showing that the Appellant is a  national  of  Serbia.   He  also
       accepted that the burden then shifts to the Appellant if she asserts
       that she would not be recognised as a national of  Serbia  following
       return to show that to the  standard  of  a  real  risk.   That  was
       accepted by Mr Jarvis.
   18. There are therefore two distinct issues to be considered.  The first
       concerns whether, on a balance of probabilities,  the  Appellant  is
       Serbian or at least that the authorities would accept  her  as  such
       for the purposes of return.  The second  is  whether,  if  she  were
       returned there, there is a real risk that the authorities in  Serbia
       would not accept her as such, or that there would be a time delay in
       her obtaining the appropriate recognition.  Mr Chirico submits  that
       it is this inability to show  that  she  is  Serbian  which  is  the
       foundation of the Appellant's claim that  she  would  be  unable  to
       access services and/or support for her mental  health  problems  and
       any self-harm/suicide risk which might  be  caused  by  removal  and
       would therefore lead to an Article 3 breach.
   19. The Respondent's evidence that the Appellant or her family  is  from
       Serbia derives from enquiries which the Respondent was  directed  to
       make of the Appellant's family to attempt to narrow  the  number  of
       destination countries at issue.  The  Appellant's  family  with  the
       exception  of  the  Appellant  had  apparently  all   been   granted
       indefinite leave, it appears as part of  the  Family  ILR  exercise.
       However, as a result of those enquiries, it appears that a number of
       the Appellant's siblings are now facing deportation as a  result  of
       criminal convictions in the UK and  the  Respondent  is  considering
       action to deprive the Appellant's father of his ILR as a  result  of
       criminal convictions abroad.   That  in  turn  has  led  to  further
       information coming to light about what  nationality  authorities  of
       various countries consider the Appellant's father to be and what has
       been said by family members in their deportation proceedings.
   20. That evidence is set out in two statements from Andy Tyrer who is  a
       team  leader  at  the  Criminal  Casework  Investigations  Team   in
       Liverpool.  I do not need to set his evidence out in full.  In short
       summary, the Appellant's father's fingerprints have been matched  by
       the Croatian authorities  as  belonging  to  an  individual  with  a
       different name who was deported from Croatia to Serbia in 1978.   He
       was also convicted by the Italian authorities and in  Belgium  as  a
       Serb, it appears in that same identity.  Mr Tyrer  also  noted  that
       the Appellant's family members in their  various  appeals  have  not
       disputed that they are Serbian.
   21. Mr Chirico made clear that he did not challenge the veracity  of  Mr
       Tyrer's statements.  He pointed however to the  limitation  of  that
       evidence.  It was first said that since, in 1978, Serbia was part of
       the Federal People's Republic of  Yugoslavia  ("FRY")  removal  from
       Croatia to Serbia did not make any sense.   He  accepted  though  in
       light of what was said  in  Mr  Tyrer's  second  statement  and  the
       statement of Mr Serrao (also of  Criminal  Casework  Investigations)
       based on  information  from  staff  at  the  Croatian  embassy  that
       deportation between republics  might  well  have  taken  place.   He
       submitted though that this did not show that the Appellant's  father
       was deported from Croatia to Serbia based on an acceptance by either
       republic that he is a national of that republic.  Deportation  is  a
       loose term. I pointed out also that it is sometimes wrongly used  to
       denote what is in fact extradition so that  the  Appellant's  father
       might have been removed to Serbia on the basis of a crime  committed
       there rather than nationality. Mr Chirico also submitted that little
       weight can be placed on conviction in other European states who  are
       unlikely to have investigated nationality unless they  were  seeking
       to remove.  There is no evidence that this was the case.
   22.  I also accept, as does Mr Tyrer, in his second statement that  what
       the Appellant's family members and even her father say  about  their
       nationality is not conclusive.  They may see themselves as nationals
       of a particular place having lived there or  come  to  the  UK  from
       there but that does not  mean  that  they  would  be  recognised  as
       nationals.  I note however that, albeit giving a different  identity
       and place of birth, the Appellant's father has always contended that
       he is Serbian. It is not simply a statement that he is Serbian but a
       specific statement that he was born  in  Goricki  Venac,  Smederevo.
       The Croatian authorities informed the  Respondent  not  simply  that
       they had deported the Appellant's father to Serbia but that they had
       his name and date of birth and, more importantly, his place of birth
       being Malo Crnice, Pozarevac.  The Appellant has not  disputed  that
       both Smederevo and Pozarevac are in Serbia.
   23. I therefore find that, on the basis of  the  Respondent's  evidence,
       and on the balance of probabilities, the Appellant's father is  from
       Serbia.   The Respondent's decision dated 6 June 2014 considered the
       position in relation to the Appellant's nationality  if  her  father
       was born in Serbia (see [60] of that letter). The  Respondent  noted
       that citizenship would be acquired by descent if the child was  born
       in Serbia and one of the child's parents is Serbian.   Her  father's
       nationality is therefore not necessarily conclusive of the issue.  I
       note also that efforts by the Respondent  to  document  one  of  the
       Appellant's sisters for deportation to Serbia have  so  far  failed.
       However, since the Appellant has not been able to offer any evidence
       which contradicts that produced by the Respondent (on the basis that
       she says she does not know where she was born and did  not  live  in
       one place during her childhood), I accept that  the  Respondent  has
       established on the balance of probabilities that she can be deported
       to Serbia.
   24. The second issue is the more contentious.  That is whether there  is
       a real risk  that  the  Serbian  authorities  will  not  accept  the
       Appellant as Serbian following return and whether, as a result,  she
       will be denied access to services.  That requires me to consider how
       services are accessed and  what  documents  are  required  to  prove
       eligibility for those services.
   25. As a prior issue,  though,  there  was  some  discussion  about  the
       process which would lead up to  deportation.   Mr  Chirico  accepted
       that, since the Appellant does not have a passport or  other  travel
       document, she would be deported  on  an  emergency  travel  document
       ("ETD").  He accepted that this would be prima facie  evidence  that
       the Serbian authorities accept that the Appellant is Serbian  or  at
       the very least  is  entitled  to  live  in  Serbia.   As  Mr  Jarvis
       submitted and I accept, it would make little sense for  the  Serbian
       authorities to permit a person to return  to  that  country  in  the
       expectation  that  after  arrival,  the  person  would  have  to  go
       underground due to a lack of entitlement to live openly as a citizen
       of that country.  That is the more so where the background  evidence
       shows that the Serbian authorities are seeking to  resolve  problems
       caused by the lack of documentation and not exacerbate them.
   26. True it is that the Respondent has not made any efforts  as  yet  to
       document the Appellant as Serbian or obtain  an  ETD  for  her.   Mr
       Chirico made some  limited  criticism  of  her  failure  to  do  so.
       However, in circumstances where the Appellant has been  involved  in
       an appellate process and given the time limited nature of ETDs, I do
       not criticise the Respondent for not starting that process.  I  also
       observe that the Appellant herself could make efforts  to  establish
       her  entitlement.   Given  her  lack  of   engagement   with   other
       authorities, as well as her unwillingness to return, her failure  to
       do so is perhaps unsurprising.
   27. I note that the Appellant's solicitor, Ms Al-Ghabra, has  made  some
       enquiries of an informal nature of the Serbian embassy.  Her enquiry
       and the response of the official to whom she spoke is set out in her
       statement dated 13 April 2015 as follows:-
           "[4]  I enquired how we could go  about  confirming  whether  Ms
           Osmanovic is a Serbian national.
           [5] I was informed that the embassy does not hold any  registers
           and that the  embassy  would  need  to  speak  to  the  Interior
           Ministry.  She explained that there are no central registers.
            [6]  She further informed me that  to  evidence  citizenship  a
           person will need to show their birth certificate or at least  to
           be able to state clearly  where  they  were  born  so  that  the
           municipality in Serbia would be  contacted  and  issue  a  birth
           certificate.
            [7]  She explained that if this information  is  not  available
           then they would not be able to help and the person will  not  be
           able to apply for a passport as a Serbian national."
   28.  It is not entirely clear what status the official had (she is  said
       to be a person in the Consular Section).  The response is also  very
       general and it is not clear whether the same process would apply  to
       the obtaining of an ETD as opposed to a passport.  If the  Appellant
       is required to give her place and date of birth in order  to  obtain
       an ETD, the Respondent may well face an uphill struggle to have  the
       Appellant documented as the Appellant says she does not  know  those
       things.  However, if that is the process for  the  obtaining  of  an
       ETD, then if  the  Appellant  were  able  to  persuade  the  Serbian
       authorities that she is Serbian it would be only on the  basis  that
       the authorities, prior to removal, accept that she  was  born  there
       and the relevant municipality would provide a birth certificate.  On
       that basis, the Appellant would not be undocumented on  arrival  and
       would be able to access services following her return.  In case  the
       process is not the same for an  ETD  though,  I  also  consider  the
       position on  the  basis  that  she  would  return  without  a  birth
       certificate in the section below dealing with access to services and
       discrimination in access.


The Appellant's mental health, risk of suicide and self harm

   29. I turn then to consider the Appellant's mental health and the impact
       on that of deportation as well as on the risk of suicide  and  self-
       harm.  As noted at [11] above, this is the  crux  of  the  issue  in
       relation to which the error of law was found.  Before turning to the
       facts of the Appellant's case in this regard, I deal with a  dispute
       in relation to the law applicable to this sort of case.
   30. It was common ground between Mr  Chirico  and  Mr  Jarvis  that  the
       considerations relevant to the risk of suicide are those  laid  down
       in J v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
       629.   That  case  laid  out  the   test   by   reference   to   six
       considerations.  Ultimately, though, the question to be resolved  is
       that set out in Soering namely whether the removal will give rise to
       a real risk of a breach of Article 3 ECHR, here a real risk that the
       Appellant will commit suicide.
   31. In relation to the impact on  the  Appellant's  mental  health  more
       generally, Mr Jarvis contended that  the  now  well-known  case  law
       culminating in the case of GS and others v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 applies.   In  that  context,
       the availability and potential cost of treatment  in  the  receiving
       country is of limited relevance, the threshold  for  impact  on  the
       medical condition is extremely high and it is only in extreme  cases
       such as D v UK that a breach will likely be found.
   32. Mr Chirico contends that the case of EM  (Eritrea)  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department  [2014] UKSC 12 is  the  relevant  one
       where the harm feared is a combination of lack of adequate reception
       mechanisms  in  the  reception  country   combined   with   personal
       vulnerability.  Mr Jarvis says that  this  is  not  applicable.   EM
       (Eritrea) and the cases leading up to that  judgment  are  concerned
       with returns under the Dublin Regulation and also have  as  part  of
       their context the Reception Directive which has no  relevance  to  a
       non EU country.
   33. The divergence between the case law  of  "pure"  medical  cases  and
       cases such as Sufi and Elmi v United Kingdom 54 EHRR 209 and  MSS  v
       Belgium and Greece  53 EHRR 28 is dealt with by Laws LJ  in  GS   at
       [53] to [61] and explained at [62].  He described those latter cases
       as a departure from the paradigm case which  is  justified  by  some
       exceptional factor.  He went on to say that:-
            "The circumstances in which a  departure  from  the  Article  3
       paradigm is justified are  variable; the common factor is that there
       exist  very  pressing  reasons  to  hold  the       impugned   State
       responsible for the claimant's plight."
       The distinction between the two lines of case law is also considered
       by Burnett LJ in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Said
       [2016] EWCA Civ 442 who, having considered MSS  and  Sufi  and  Elmi
       said at [18]:-
            "These cases demonstrate that to succeed in  resisting  removal
       on article 3 grounds       on the  basis  of  suggested  poverty  or
       deprivation on return which are not the      responsibility  of  the
       receiving country or others in the sense described in  para  282  of
       Sufi and Elmi, whether or not the feared deprivation is  contributed
       to by a medical      condition, the  person  liable  to  deportation
       must show circumstances which bring   him within the approach of the
       Strasbourg Court in the D and N cases."
            [my emphasis]
   34. Applying that to the instant case, Mr Chirico may be  right  in  his
       submission  that,  if  the  Appellant's  inability  to  access   the
       treatment she needs is due to action of the  receiving  state  (here
       Serbia), then the EM (Eritrea) line of case law applies so  that  it
       is not necessary  for  the  Appellant  to  evidence  the  very  high
       threshold in D and N.  That submission though has to  be  considered
       in the context of the facts  of  the  case.   I  therefore  turn  to
       consider the evidence as to the Appellant's  current  mental  health
       condition and the impact of  deportation  both  on  that  and  as  a
       trigger for a risk of suicide and self-harm.
   35. Both Mr Chirico and Mr Jarvis submitted that the relevant report for
       me to consider is that of Dr Maloney dated 17  March  2015.   As  Mr
       Chirico noted, it had been hoped  that  an  updated  medical  report
       would be produced for this hearing.  However, due  to  the  lack  of
       engagement by the Appellant this  was  not  possible.   He  accepted
       therefore that the report of Dr Maloney is somewhat dated. Mr Jarvis
       also submitted that it is somewhat limited as it appears to be based
       on one interview. However, both parties accepted  that  this  report
       provides a balanced view of the Appellant's mental health condition.
        I do not need to set out the content of that report  in  detail  as
       the main elements are set out at [48]  to  [53]  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's decision.  I do though  need  to  set  out  some  of  the
       conclusions which Dr Maloney reaches in order to consider  what  the
       impact of deportation is likely to be on the Appellant.
   36. Dr Maloney notes that the Appellant is  clearly  drug-addicted.   At
       the time of his report,  he  noted  that  she  was  on  a  methadone
       programme.  He noted  the  Appellant's  concern  at  [5.9]  that  if
       returned to  another  country  she  would  not  be  able  to  access
       methadone and would have to carry out a robbery in order to buy  it.


   37. Dr Maloney  does  not  consider  that  the  Appellant  suffers  from
       depression.  He considers that she has a personality disorder rather
       than a mood disorder.  He categorises it as an "Emotionally Unstable
       Personality Disorder" or "Borderline Personality Disorder".  He also
       offers an alternative way of describing her difficulties as "complex
       PTSD" which he assesses has been present since she was  a  teenager.
       He considers it possible that intellectual impairment may be playing
       a significant part in her difficulties  but  says  that  this  would
       require more investigation and that there was no  evidence  that  it
       was impacting on her mental capacity at that time [11.22].
   38. In terms of treatment, this is not a typical case of prescription of
       medication.  Indeed, Dr Maloney does not advocate drug treatment  in
       light of the Appellant's drug dependency.  He  also  notes  that  in
       order to benefit  from  treatment  she  will  need  to  address  her
       substance dependence and that she was not motivated to abstain  from
       drug use.  He noted that she will tend to relapse into substance use
       at "times of stress and  adversity".   In  terms  of  treatment,  Dr
       Maloney notes that treatment of those with the Appellant's condition
       is "demanding and problematic" for health services and would require
       team working.  He does not consider that the Appellant would benefit
       from individual counselling sessions as she would be unable to  cope
       with her feelings between sessions. He notes that the Appellant does
       not appear to have had contact with  such  services.   I  note  that
       there is no evidence that she has had such treatment since.
   39. Dr Maloney advocates the need during treatment of  a  "safe,  secure
       social support network with supportive intimate  relationships"  and
       says that in the absence of that support network a person  would  be
       more vulnerable to their own emotional instability.
   40. Dr Maloney notes the scarring from what he describes  as  long  term
       self-cutting (see also [8.20-8.24] of the report).   He  also  notes
       that the Appellant "reports past and  on-going  suicidal  ideation".
       That appears to be based on what is said at [5.5-5.6] of the  report
       as follows:-
             "[5.5]      Asked  if  she  ever  wanted  to  die  she   said:
       'Sometimes, it depends what mood      I'm in'. She acknowledged that
       her mood changes rapidly: 'Sometimes happy,       sometimes sad...'.
       She gets angry or upset easily.
            [5.6]      Asked  if  she  had  ever  actually  tried  to  kill
       herself, she said: 'Outside by a      train, my  boyfriend  took  me
       away...here when I caught the TB I cut my hand, they   used  to  see
       me  every  five  minutes'  [presumably  referring  to  an  ACDT-type
       observation regime]. She complained matter-of-factly about not being
       allowed to      have sharp things, so  she  could  not  cut  herself
       deeply.  She then said 'I wish I was  dead.  I wish  I  didn't  have
       this pain. I have a really horrible time. My child  is  gone.   They
       keep me in a cage like an animal'. She complained again about having
       been      told that she had not family in the UK, although she had a
       lot of family, and her     children were here, and  she  would  like
       the chance to see them, which she would not       have if  she  were
       removed.  She said: 'This is a slow death. Maybe I deserve  this,  I
       don't know'"
   41. I note also from the report of Dr Pourgourides which I have read but
       to which I do not need to have regard in light of  the  submissions,
       that there is reference  to  an  overdose  in  the  past.   However,
       although this followed the loss of her daughter who is adopted, this
       is described as "accidental" and arising from her use of  heroin  to
       deal with her distress.  There is also reference  to  the  Appellant
       refusing food and fluid during one period of imprisonment but  there
       is some doubt expressed about whether  the  Appellant  was  in  fact
       eating secretly.
   42. Dr Maloney deals with the risk of suicide in more detail at [12]  of
       his report.  As Mr Jarvis  observed,  the  report  is  cautious  and
       contains a number of caveats about the inability to precisely assess
       risk.  At Appendix 4 of the report, Dr  Maloney  lists  twenty-eight
       factors which are risk factors.  He  also  lists  four  "protective"
       factors and eight "precipitating factors". At  [12.7]  he  considers
       that the Appellant has the following risk factors:-
               . Previous suicide attempts/threats
               . Consideration of an immediately  lethal  method  -  jumping
                 under a train
               . Anxiety/agitation
               . Anger
               . Impulsivity
               . Rigid thinking
               . Poor problem skills
               . Substance misuse
               . Loss and separations
               . Social isolation and lack of support
               . History of physical abuse
               . Chronic medical illness (chronic back pain, severe  obesity
                 and its complications)
               . Age 15-35
               . Unemployment"
   43. Dr Maloney goes on to consider the protection factor present at  the
       time of his report namely concern for her children.  At the time  of
       his report, the Appellant was seeking to prevent the adoption of her
       youngest child.  He notes though that if  her  youngest  child  were
       nonetheless to be adopted  "this  might  equally  provide  a  potent
       precipitating factor for self-harm or suicide attempts, rather  than
       the existence of the child being in any way protective".
   44. Having noted again the Appellant's long  history  of  self-harm  and
       noting that those who self-harm are fifty to one hundred times  more
       likely to die by suicide in the twelve month period after an episode
       than those who do not self-harm, Dr Maloney concludes as follows:
            "[12.11]Ms Osmanovic thus has many cumulative risk factors  for
       suicide.        She continues to report some suicidal  ideation  and
       also a wish to cut herself.  She      complains that  she  does  not
       have the opportunity to do this whilst in prison.  Her       risk is
       thus chronically moderate to high, in the absence  of  any  specific
       precipitation factors.  Should precipitating factors come into play,
       her risk will be     high.
            [12.12]    Thus, if removal to one of the countries of the FDRY
       was to appear   inevitable and/or processes of  removal  began,  her
       risk will be high, and she would       need  close  supervision  and
       monitoring."
   45. At [13] of his report, Dr Maloney considers the possible effects  of
       enforced return.  Mr Jarvis accepted that, although suicide and self-
       harm are not mentioned in that section separately, those  risks  are
       incorporated at [13.1] by reference back to [12.12]  (cited  above).
       Dr Maloney goes on however to note that if left unsupported  in  the
       country of return  without  "considerable  specialist  support"  she
       would  be  likely  to  relapse  into  drug  addiction  and  criminal
       behaviour.  He suggests that she would manage her  feelings  but  in
       "well-established dysfunctional ways,  using  drugs,  stealing,  and
       being dangerously self-destructive".   He  points  to  the  lack  of
       ability to reunite with her family  who  would  be  in  the  UK  and
       inability to maintain  contact  with  her  children.   However,  the
       Appellant does not have contact  with  her  children  now  and  only
       intermittent contact with her family (who might also be deported  at
       some stage from the UK; although I accept  Mr  Chirico's  submission
       that the position presently is too  speculative  to  be  taken  into
       account and in any event her family are  unlikely  to  assist  given
       previous history).
   46. Dr Maloney concludes at [13.6]:-
            "She is likely to react to distress with habitual dysfunctional
       disturbed and self-  destructive behaviours: it is  highly  unlikely
       that she  would  have  the  presence  of    mind  and  stability  of
       circumstances to make her way effectively.  She is unlikely to    be
       able to form non-abusive and supportive relationships  with  others.
       She is    unlikely to find or keep gainful employment  and  thus  be
       able to support and care   for herself.  She is unlikely to be  able
       to  proactively  access  treatment  of  the  required     level   of
       expertise, even should it be available."
   47. I asked Mr Chirico during the hearing what relevance the Appellant's
       reluctance to access treatment and support in the UK should have  on
       my consideration of the impact on return.   He submitted that  there
       is limited evidence whether the Appellant does or  does  not  access
       treatment.  For  example,  apparently  following  her  release  from
       immigration detention on bail, she was supported by  the  Red  Cross
       and Healthcare services.  She has also had some support certainly in
       relation to her deportation matter from her solicitors who appear to
       have worked tirelessly on her behalf notwithstanding her own lack of
       interest.
   48. However, Mr Chirico did accept that the evidence I have is that  the
       Appellant is surviving, that there is no evidence  of  self-harm  in
       the last six months and no evidence that the Appellant has  received
       support in the last six months.  He frankly  accepted  that  if  the
       Appellant's position were equivalent in Serbia to that in the UK, he
       could not show that there would be a real risk sufficient to  breach
       Article 3.  However, he submitted that I have  to  consider  whether
       the risk is increased by deportation both in the context of need for
       support which on her case she would be  unable  to  access  and  the
       impact of the deportation itself, particularly in the context of the
       increased risk of suicide.
   49. I give weight to Dr Maloney's report.   It  is  fair  and  balanced.
       Although he had limited dealings with the Appellant and appears  not
       to have had access to all her medical records, it  is  a  very  full
       report.
   50. Dr Maloney's prognosis for what would happen to the Appellant if she
       remains in the UK, though, is not optimistic. In terms of treatment,
       he notes that until her substance dependence is addressed, treatment
       for her personality disorder "will be difficult, if not impossible".
        As he notes, treatment for substance dependence requires motivation
       of the Appellant to abstain from drug use.  He notes that, at  least
       at the time of  her  report,  she  does  not  appear  to  have  that
       motivation.  It appears from the Appellant's latest  statement  that
       she may still be on a methadone programme but there  is  no  updated
       medical evidence to show that she has  recovered  sufficiently  from
       her drug habit to  engage  with  treatment  for  her  mental  health
       condition.  As such, it appears likely from what  Dr  Maloney  says,
       that if she were permitted to remain in the UK,  she  would  not  be
       able to be treated for her disorder.
   51. Even if she were free of her addiction, Dr Maloney makes clear  that
       treatment depends on the Appellant having  a  "safe,  secure  social
       support network" and engagement on the part of the Appellant with  a
       continuous therapy programme.  He  says  that  her  best  chance  of
       success would  be  with  support  from  her  family.   However,  the
       Appellant's record on engagement  is  not  good,  as  shown  by  her
       withdrawal from participation in this  appeal.   Furthermore,  there
       appears to be an unwillingness on both sides by  the  Appellant  and
       her family to resume contact.  She is therefore very unlikely to get
       the support she needs to engage with treatment.
   52. I turn then to the risk of suicide.  Although it is the case that Dr
       Maloney sets the risk of suicide to be  high  if  the  Appellant  is
       threatened with return to Serbia, that  opinion  is,  as  Mr  Jarvis
       submitted, "cautious".  Dr Maloney makes the point that it  is  very
       difficult to assess risk of suicide and the most that can be done is
       to consider the risk by the application of various factors which  is
       what he does.  There are however two points to  be  made  about  his
       assessment of risk.
   53. The first is that Dr Maloney considers that the risk of suicide  may
       increase with precipitative factors which included at that stage the
       possibility that the Appellant would be deprived of contact with her
       youngest child.  That  has  now  occurred.   However,  there  is  no
       evidence that this led to any attempt at suicide.  Furthermore,  the
       evidence is that on previous occasions when the Appellant has had to
       deal with traumatic events, her more usual response is to resort  to
       drugs.  This occurred for example after  the  2011  hearing  of  her
       appeal (see [3] of her statement for the hearing in 2015).  That  is
       not inconsistent with Dr Maloney's evidence at [13.3] that the  more
       likely outcome if the Appellant is returned to Serbia  is  that  she
       will  return  to  coping  by  "using  drugs,  stealing   and   being
       dangerously self-destructive.  That is no different to  the  way  in
       which she has reacted to traumatic events whilst in the UK.   As  Mr
       Jarvis points out, the Appellant has had more than her fair share of
       traumatic events in her life, including the  death  of  two  of  her
       siblings and the taking away of  all  her  children.   There  is  no
       evidence that she has attempted suicide on any of  those  occasions.
       There is evidence that she copes by returning to her drug  addiction
       and may also self-harm.  Whilst there is evidence that the Appellant
       self-harms by cutting herself, the evidence is that  this  has  left
       her with scarring but there is no evidence that the problem has been
       dealt with by medical intervention whilst she has been in the UK.
   54. The second point to consider is what Dr Maloney actually says  about
       the risk of suicide and when that might occur.  Although  at  [13.1]
       he incorporates what is said previously about the  risk  of  suicide
       into his analysis of the possible effects  of  enforced  return,  he
       does so by reference to the risk on the "prospect" of  that  return.
       That is consistent with what is said at [12.12] that it  is  at  the
       stage when removal appeared inevitable or the processes  of  removal
       began that the risk would be high.  That  is  also  consistent  both
       with his comment about the need for close supervision and monitoring
       and with what is said  at  [13.2]  onwards  about  the  more  likely
       outcome of the removal itself and post removal consequences being  a
       return to the Appellant's past (and possibly also current) lifestyle
       of taking drugs and offending.
   55. Return to Serbia therefore would not place the  Appellant  into  any
       different position than she is now in relation to treatment for  her
       mental health problems.  Unless and until she ceases to be  addicted
       to drugs and engages with a continuous course of  therapy  which  it
       appears is not widely available even in the  UK,  her  prognosis  is
       poor.
   56. The Appellant's position on return to Serbia in terms  of  treatment
       for her mental health issues is therefore largely equivalent to that
       in the UK unless it can be said that removal will deprive her of the
       opportunity for treatment in Serbia which I therefore  now  turn  to
       consider.


Access to services in Serbia

   57. In my consideration of the availability of treatment in  Serbia  and
       the Appellant's access  to  that,  I  have  regard  to  all  of  the
       background material contained in the  Appellant's  and  Respondent's
       bundles and in particular to that to which I  was  referred  in  the
       skeleton arguments and in the course of the hearing.
   58. I start by considering the position of the Appellant as  a  Roma  in
       Serbia but also as a woman with her  additional  vulnerabilities  as
       evidenced by the medical report to  which  I  have  referred  above.
       There is one additional point to which I also need to make reference
       and that is the evidence that  the  Appellant  is  in  fact  from  a
       minority ethnicity within Roma, known as the Serbaya  Kalderasha  or
       Chergashe Roma.   This  evidence  is  contained  in  the  report  of
       Professor Acton dated 27 April 2011 and his recent "report" dated 14
       June 2016.  Professor Acton  is  a  retired  Emeritus  Professor  of
       Romani Studies at  the  University  of  Greenwich.   He  formed  the
       opinion that the Appellant is from this group in  his  2011  report.
       At that time, he was asked to consider a Sprakab report relied  upon
       by the Respondent which was said to show that the Appellant is  from
       Bosnia.  As such, that earlier report dealt with  the  risk  to  the
       Appellant on that account if she were  to  be  returned  to  Bosnia.
       That report is now therefore largely irrelevant except  in  relation
       to Professor Acton's reasoning that the Appellant  belongs  to  this
       particular "minority within a minority".
   59. Mr Jarvis criticised the more recent report which is in the form  of
       a letter on the basis that  the  Professor  has  not  recognised  or
       recorded his obligations as an expert witness.  However, I note that
       Professor Acton has referred back to his report from 2011 and it  is
       there noted that he recognises his obligations to the Tribunal.   Mr
       Chirico also makes the  point  that  Professor  Acton  prepared  the
       report on a pro-bono basis and should not  therefore  be  criticised
       for the fact that it is  short  and  unsourced.  I  have  regard  to
       Professor Acton's report and  more  recent  letter  and  give  those
       documents the weight due to them  given  Professor  Acton's  obvious
       expertise.
   60. Professor Acton recognises in the 2016 document that  the  Appellant
       will be safer in Serbia than in Bosnia.  He accepts that  Serbia  is
       not a country of mass Roma emigration and that it  has  one  of  the
       better records of Balkan countries  on  Roma  rights.   His  concern
       appears to be that the Appellant as a Chergashe Roma  would  not  be
       accepted as a Serbian  Roma  and  would  be  unwelcome  within  that
       community.  However, I bear in mind  that  the  Appellant  does  not
       appear to associate with the Roma community or be supported by  them
       in the UK - indeed part of the reason why her family appear to  have
       ostracised her is due to her relationships with non  Roma  men.   As
       such, the fact that the Appellant is from this sub-group (if  indeed
       she is) does not add to the risk to her on return as a Romani woman.
        I do not understand Professor Acton to be saying that the Chergashe
       Roma are recognised as a distinct  group  other  than  by  the  Roma
       community and certainly  the  other  background  evidence  which  is
       before me does not single them out as being a separate group.
   61. Mr Chirico did not seek to rely on what Professor Acton  says  about
       the risk of trafficking to the Appellant as I have already noted  at
       [15] above.   I also cannot give weight to what Professor Acton says
       at [6] of the latest report about the reputation of the  Appellant's
       family.  That is said to be based on  "rumours"  and  is  unsourced.
       Furthermore, the same point arises.  Professor Acton's view is based
       on the Appellant being recognised as a  member  of  this  particular
       family by the Roma community itself and not by  those  outside  that
       community.
   62. I have noted  at  [28]  above,  that  the  likelihood  is  that  the
       Appellant will have  some  form  of  documentation  if  the  Serbian
       authorities are prepared to issue her with an  ETD.   As  such,  she
       will not fall into the category of undocumented  Roma  who  find  it
       difficult for that reason to access services.  In case  I  am  wrong
       about  that  though,  I  deal  with  the  evidence  about  obtaining
       documentation and the efforts made by  the  Serbian  authorities  to
       deal with the problems of a lack of documentation.
   63. A report dated December 2015 prepared by  Praxis  (a  NGO  based  in
       Belgrade)  in  conjunction   with   UNHCR   points   to   continuing
       difficulties in access to services for those  without  documents  in
       Serbia but also notes  improvements  in  the  system  for  obtaining
       documents.  Although there continue to be  delays  and  inconsistent
       implementation of the applicable legislation, I note that Praxis  is
       able to assist  those  seeking  to  register  their  birth,  acquire
       citizenship and/or register permanent residence.  It does  so  on  a
       non-paying basis.  I note also that the  report  suggests  that  the
       procedures can be begun  whilst  the  person  concerned  is  outside
       Serbia and there appears to  be  no  reason  in  principle  why  the
       Appellant could not approach Praxis from the UK  prior  to  removal.
       I note also that it is possible for a person to  register  permanent
       or temporary residence in Serbia including by using the address of a
       social welfare centre.  The background information  in  relation  to
       the efforts of the Serbian authorities to document  those  who  were
       previously "legally invisible" overall shows that the  efforts  have
       been largely successful.
   64. A report of the World Health Organisation Regional Office for Europe
       published in September 2014 points to changes in the  administrative
       and legislative hurdles introduced by  the  Serbian  authorities  in
       order that Roma could obtain health insurance to ensure their rights
       to healthcare.  It is noted also in the European Roma Rights  Centre
       ("ERRC") Serbia Country  Profile  2011-12  that  amendments  to  the
       regulations allowing Roma without registered residence and  "legally
       invisible"  persons  to  obtain  health  cards  had  been  effective
       although it is also noted by reference to a Praxis report  that  the
       problem recurred in 2012.   It is noted in the same report  that  in
       2011 and 2012 seventy-five Roma Health Mediators coordinated by  the
       Ministry  of  Health  continued  to   work   within   local   health
       institutions in fifty-nine cities and towns throughout Serbia.
   65. Even if the Appellant does  not  have  the  necessary  documents  to
       access medical services immediately as a result of being  documented
       by the Serbian authorities in the course of  arranging  her  return,
       therefore, there is evidence to support the likelihood that she will
       be able to access healthcare via other mechanisms, if necessary with
       the assistance of NGOs such as Praxis.  As I have also noted at [63]
       above, there is no reason  in  principle  why  she  could  not  make
       contact with those groups before  she  is  returned  to  attempt  to
       regularise her status in advance if that is necessary.
   66. I  deal  finally  with  the  Appellant's  case  that  she  would  be
       discriminated against in access to services as  a  Roma  and  doubly
       disadvantaged in that access as a Romani woman.
   67. Roma in Serbia are officially recognised  as  a  national  minority.
       The protection of ethnic minority  rights  is  described  as  a  key
       principle in the Serbian Constitution.  Serbia has also ratified the
       Council  of  Europe  Framework  Convention  for  the  Protection  of
       National Minorities and  adopted  laws  to  protect  the  rights  of
       national minorities and to prohibit discrimination.  It has specific
       laws on gender equality and prevention of discrimination as well  as
       anti-discrimination provisions  in  education,  labour,  health  and
       social security laws [ERRC Country Profile  2011-12].   However,  as
       noted in that report there remains a problem as to the effectiveness
       of the law.  In 2009, Serbia adopted a strategy for  improvement  of
       Roma status and a three year national plan for  its  implementation.
       A three year action plan was adopted in 2013 but is reported to have
       failed to identify priorities and suffered  from  lack  of  funding.
       Various bodies have been  set  up  to  deal  specifically  with  the
       problems faced by  Roma  but  complaints  are  made  about  lack  of
       activity or mandate of those bodies.  Although there are some  areas
       of  "affirmative  action"  identified  those  are  said  not  to  be
       sufficiently implemented.
   68. The overall picture painted by that evidence is that there has  been
       and continues to be discrimination against Roma  in  Serbia  in  the
       areas of  employment,  education,  healthcare  and  housing.   There
       continue to be  sporadic  incidents  of  hate  speech,  threats  and
       attacks against Roma.  Although there are  laws  prohibiting  direct
       and indirect discrimination in employment on the basis  of  sex  and
       race, it is noted that the  government  enforced  these  laws  "with
       varying degrees of success" [USDS Serbia 2014].  I accept also  that
       there is  evidence  within  the  background  material  showing  some
       discrimination in particular against Romani women.   The  2010  ERRC
       report notes  at  [3.1]  that  Romani  women  suffer  from  multiple
       discrimination on the  basis  of  their  gender  and  ethnicity  and
       experience  barriers  in  accessing  equal  education,   healthcare,
       adequate housing and employment.
   69. The European Commission's Serbia 2015  report  notes  that  "Further
       sustained  efforts  are  needed  to   improve   the   situation   of
       Roma..."[1.2].  It notes at [2.4] that:
           "The legislation and institutions needed to uphold international
           human  rights  law  are  in  place.   Legislation   to   protect
           minorities  and  cultural  rights  is  also  broadly  in  place.
           However, sustained efforts are needed to  ensure  effective  and
           consistent  implementation  across  the  country.   Shortcomings
           particularly affect the following areas:
            ....
           Promotion and protection of the rights of  the  most  vulnerable
           and discriminated groups... has yet to be fully ensured.   Hate-
           motivated offences need to be properly investigated,  prosecuted
           and sanctioned.
           Efforts to improve the difficult living conditions of  Roma  and
           to combat discrimination need  to  be  strengthened.  Government
           coordination and leadership of Roma integration policy needs  to
           be further improved."
       That same report notes also that Roma participation  in  the  formal
       labour market remains low [5.19].
   70. On the other hand, motivated no doubt by Serbia's desire to join the
       EU, efforts are being made by the central government authorities  to
       deal with these issues.  At [5.19] the  report  notes  that  "...the
       Office of the Commissioner for Protection of Equality  continued  to
       raise  awareness  and  promote  mechanisms  for  protection  against
       discrimination".  And at [p54] of the Report,  credit  is  given  to
       various state bodies which "continued to  promote  awareness-raising
       on human rights, tolerance and non-discrimination" (although  it  is
       also noted that the role of the Office for Human and Minority Rights
       needs to be strengthened).  Generally,  Serbia's  non-discrimination
       legislation is said to be in line with European  standards  although
       some  further  alignment  is  needed  [p.56].   Racial  hatred   and
       intolerance is prohibited in the criminal code  [p.56].   The  legal
       framework is in  place  for  the  protection  of  minorities  [p.57]
       although it is noted that implementation across Serbia needs  to  be
       more consistent.
   71. Specifically in relation to progress on Roma issues the report notes
       at [p.58]:
           "The adoption of a new Roma strategy  and  action  plan  remains
           outstanding.  The third Roma seminar, held  in  June,  concluded
           that  good  progress  had  been  made  with  regard   to   civil
           registration but in  all  other  areas  progress  was  slow  and
           uneven.  The subsequent registration  of  undocumented  citizens
           led to a fall in the  number  of  'legally  invisible  persons'.
           Systemic  solutions  have   been   found   to   prevent   future
           reoccurrence of  such  cases.....  the  Roma  continue  to  face
           difficult living conditions  and  discrimination  in  access  to
           social protection,  health,  employment  and  adequate  housing.
           Compliance with international standards on forced  eviction  and
           relocation still needs to be ensured.  Legalisation of  informal
           Roma settlements should be considered as a way of enabling  them
           to be regulated  and  covered  by  urban  planning.   Additional
           teaching assistants and health mediators are needed  to  address
           the high school drop-out  rate  among  Roma  children  and  poor
           access to healthcare... "
   72. The background evidence shows that the  settlements  in  which  Roma
       tend to live lack basic services  such  as  water,  electricity  and
       sewage facilities.  A report prepared by the University of Education
       Freiburg dated June 2015 and entitled  "Discrimination  of  Roma  in
       Serbia" ("Freiburg report) states at 2.5 that:
           "...living conditions of Roma  community  are  still  difficult.
           Those living in the numerous informal settlements are subject to
           a high degree of discrimination  in  accessing  welfare,  health
           care, employment  and  adequate  housing,  including  the  basic
           hygienic living conditions,  water  and  electricity....  Social
           housing is still at an early stage and,  in  the  absence  of  a
           comprehensive legal framework and the slow implementation of the
           activities envisaged by the National Social Housing Strategy, it
           does  not  provide  a  satisfactory  response  to  Roma  housing
           problems.  The previous experience in Belgrade shows  that  only
           about 10 per cent of social apartments are allocated to  persons
           of Roma ethnicity.  In addition, the NGO Praxis alerted  to  the
           problems of the beneficiaries of  social  housing  in  Belgrade,
           whose lease contracts were cancelled or not renewed because they
           were unable to pay the high rents  and  utility  fees.   Namely,
           they  cannot  exercise  legal  protection  in  the  event  their
           contracts are cancelled.  The  costs  of  social  housing  often
           exceed the  total  incomes  of  the  entire  household  and  the
           beneficiaries were not offered subsidies ie housing  allowances.
           Furthermore,  the  beneficiaries  do  not  have  the  status  of
           protected energy customers and have to pay persona property  tax
           on the apartments although they do merely use them  and  do  not
           own them."
       It is noted that the EU is providing funding for  housing  solutions
       for Roma families but it appeared that the provision would  be  less
       than that envisaged which would in any event  only  provide  housing
       for a limited number of Roma families.
   73. In the area of housing, the ERRC 2011-12 country profile notes  that
       in 2009, Parliament passed a law  on  social  housing.   The  report
       notes that those entitled to social housing are those without a home
       or  one  of  adequate  standard  who  cannot  afford  one.   Persons
       belonging to vulnerable groups  including  Roma  are  said  to  have
       priority in the allocation of social housing.   Again,  though,  the
       report points to problems with implementation.
   74.  As noted in the Freiburg report, although Roma are entitled to free
       healthcare,  implementation  is  not  always  consistent  and   some
       healthcare professionals seek documentation where none is  required.
       That same report refers to the problem of unemployment amongst  Roma
       who tend to be low-skilled or unskilled.  It notes that only a third
       of women are legally employed.  Discrimination is a problem in terms
       of opportunities and the issue of documentation also reduces access.
        It notes that the black economy and collection and resale of  waste
       continue to be the basis  of  existence  of  the  majority  of  Roma
       families.   The report does note however efforts by  the  Office  of
       the Commissioner for the  Protection  of  Equality  to  prevent  and
       protect against discrimination.
   75.  Roma  have  been  designated  as  a  priority  category  for  self-
       employment.  This allows an unemployed person to receive  a  subsidy
       of 1600 euros.  As with  other  initiatives  however,  it  has  been
       inadequately funded and inconsistently implemented [Freiburg  report
       p23].
   76. The picture painted by  the  background  evidence  is  that  central
       government attempts to improve Roma integration  are  inconsistently
       applied at a local level.  Some positive  examples  emerge  such  as
       that of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina which  has  established
       the Office  for  Inclusion  of  Roma  in  2006.   That  handles  the
       implementation  and  monitoring  of  the   national   strategy   for
       integration  of  Roma  and  implements  action  plans,   coordinates
       projects for integration and liaises with other  bodies  and  local,
       national and international level to deal with integration.  Its main
       objective is to assure inclusion of Roma.  The Freiburg report  sets
       out at page 24 the achievements which have been made in  that  area.
       Other provinces operate reasonably well but have  a  less  proactive
       approach and as a result Roma continue to experience difficulties at
       local level.
   77. The conclusion of the Freiburg report is:-
           "...the state authorities have not properly agreed  on  who  has
           responsibility for managing the integration  and  implementation
           of the Government Strategy for improving the situation of  Roma.
           Some successes, such as  the  work  of  health  mediators,  work
           management integration in Vojvodina, or models of integration in
           individual local self-governments and, finally, systematic  work
           on significant issues of recognition of personal status,  cannot
           replace the need for solving problems of  Roma  citizens.   They
           remain poor, often illiterate and unable to stand up  for  their
           rights and equal status."


   78. It is clear from the background evidence overall  that  the  Serbian
       authorities at both central and in most provinces at a  local  level
       are making determined efforts to promote the integration of Roma  in
       the community.  I noted at [32] Mr Chirico's submission that I  need
       to consider whether there would be a breach of Article 3  occasioned
       by the Appellant's return based on the case law of MSS  and  EM  and
       whether "reception conditions" in Serbia would breach Article 3.  Mr
       Jarvis contends for the "pure  medical  case"  approach  in  GS  and
       others. I noted that I might accept Mr Chirico's  submission  if  it
       could be shown that the Serbian authorities were responsible for the
       Appellant's inability to access healthcare and other services.
   79. However, that is not what the evidence shows.  Whilst implementation
       of the law surrounding access to healthcare may be inconsistent at a
       local level, the evidence is  as  I  have  noted  that  there  is  a
       commitment to providing healthcare to Roma and ensuring access to it
       in spite of difficulties  with,  for  example,  documentation.   The
       examples where that is not happening locally are the  exception  and
       not the rule.  Furthermore, if the Appellant  is  wrongfully  denied
       access to services, there are organisations which can assist her  to
       gain access to services to which she is entitled.  The  evidence  of
       access to employment and housing similarly shows local difficulties.
        Such  services  may  also  be  under-resourced  and  therefore  not
       readily available to all those who need them.
   80. However the evidence does not show a real risk  that  the  Appellant
       will in general be denied access to  services  on  a  discriminatory
       basis.  The Appellant may well find herself faced with  difficulties
       in finding employment  and  housing.   However,  social  housing  is
       available and there is a system in  place  to  find  employment  for
       those who seek it insofar as it is available.  The evidence does not
       show that the Appellant faces a real risk  of  treatment  on  return
       which would breach her Article 3 rights.


Conclusions

   81. The Appellant is a person who can be removed to  Serbia  subject  to
       the ability of the Respondent to have her documented by the  Serbian
       authorities.  If the Serbian authorities  accept  her  as  a  person
       entitled to return to Serbia, it is likely that she  will  be  given
       some form of documentation to establish that.  She could even  apply
       for a passport if she so wished.  In either event, it is likely that
       she will have a form of document which will show her entitlement  to
       access services.  Even if that does not occur, she is likely  to  be
       able to access services particularly health services by other means,
       such as registering for temporary residence using a  social  welfare
       office as her address, and will have  available  to  her  assistance
       from organisations such as the NGO Praxis.  They are also likely  to
       be able to assist her with access to other services.
   82. The evidence does not therefore establish that the Appellant will be
       at a real risk that she will face  destitution  or  other  treatment
       which could amount to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.  A case  based  on
       her Article 8 rights is not pursued and could  not  succeed  in  any
       event for the reasons I have given.
   83. My conclusions in relation to the Appellant's mental health and risk
       of suicide/self harm are dealt with at [54]  to  [56]  above.    The
       risk of suicide may be exacerbated by the prospect  of  deportation.
       However, there is limited  evidence  that  the  Appellant  considers
       suicide at times of trauma; it appears more  likely  that  she  will
       resort to drug use.  As  Dr  Maloney  observes  in  any  event,  any
       elevated risk at that stage can be managed by monitoring  and  close
       supervision.  Following return, Dr Maloney's evidence  is  that  the
       Appellant is likely to resort to her usual behaviour of taking drugs
       and offending in order  to  cope.   He  speaks  of  self-destructive
       behaviour but evidence of past behaviour is  that  this  amounts  to
       self-harming.  Although it  is  possible  that  she  will  self-harm
       following return  in  order  to  cope,  the  evidence  of  her  past
       behaviours suggests that this will amount to self-cutting and  there
       is no evidence that this has been so serious as to  require  medical
       intervention.  The Appellant's mental health condition is likely  to
       remain much the same in Serbia as in the UK - treatment in the UK is
       not widely available and in any event is  unlikely  to  be  possible
       unless the Appellant is motivated to abstain from drug use.
   84. For the above reasons and the reasons which are preserved  from  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judges  Vaudin  D'Imecourt  and  SJ
       Clarke, this appeal is dismissed.



DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed      [pic]Date        12 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith







