
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01572/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2014                           |On 20 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                               MR JUSTICE JAY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MATHEUS PEREIRA DA ROSA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal sitting as a panel, Judge  Lloyd  and  Sir  Jeffrey
    James, promulgated on 4 October  2013  whereby  the  claimant's  appeal
    against his deportation was allowed.
 2. We can take the background for this case from the First-tier Tribunal's
    determination.  The claimant is a Brazilian national.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor in 2009, aged 16.   The  claimant  and  his
    mother applied for an EU residence card as members of the family of  Mr
    John Whittaker, her partner.  After  an  appeal  residence  cards  were
    granted valid until 17 December 2015.  Paragraph 2 of the determination
    appears to contain a typographical error as to that date.

 3. On 18 October 2011 the claimant, then aged 19,  was  convicted  at  the
    Crown Court on four counts of robbery  and  one  count  of  assault  by
    beating.  He was sentenced to three years and three  months'  detention
    in a young offenders' institution.  We have been told that  during  the
    currency of his sentence of imprisonment he received  one  adjudication
    of violence against a fellow prisoner.

 4. On 4 March 2013 the Secretary of State issued a notice of intention  to
    deport the claimant  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    European Economic Area Regulations  2006.   The  claimant  successfully
    appealed that decision and on 30 May 2013 the Secretary of State gave a
    further decision to make a deportation order.   In  the  absence  of  a
    timely appeal a deportation order was signed by the Secretary of  State
    on 2 July 2013.  On 1 August 2013,  and  therefore  out  of  time,  the
    claimant made an application  to  appeal  the  deportation  order  from
    within the United Kingdom.  This  appeal  was  accepted  and  time  was
    extended.

 5. The Secretary of State's position at all material times has  been  that
    the claimant has not accumulated five years' lawful residence  in  this
    country and that having regard to the matters set out under  Regulation
    21, sub-Section 5 of the 2006 Regulations it would be proportionate  to
    deport the claimant.  Although a person's  criminal  convictions  alone
    could not justify the  decision,  here  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    estimation the claimant's conduct was such as to represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.  Furthermore, in the context  of  the
    claimant's Article 8 rights, it was and is  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position that the claimant could re-adjust to life in Brazil  and  that
    removal would not be disproportionate in all the circumstances of  this
    case.

 6. The evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  be  summarised  as
    follows.  In the pre-sentence report which was before the  Crown  Court
    and available to the Tribunal the assessment by  the  offender  manager
    was that the claimant posed a low risk of  re-offending,  but  if  that
    risk resulted there was a  medium  risk  of  harm  to  the  public  and
    teenagers.  The identified risk factors were binge  drinking,  cannabis
    use, feeling under attack and association with a negative  peer  group.
    There was a risk of violence and harm which could  possibly  be  caused
    through the use of a weapon.

 7. It should be recorded that the Secretary of State's position before the
    First-tier Tribunal was that the claimant in fact  represented  a  high
    risk of re-offending.  Overall,  said  the  Secretary  of  State,  "the
    claimant represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious risk to
    the public to justify his deportation on the grounds of public policy".
     As to the position under Article 8, the  claimant's  evidence  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal was that he was genuinely sorry  for  what  he  had
    done.  He had fallen under the influence of others; he would not do  it
    again.  The claimant's mother gave emotional evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal as to  the  very  real  difficulties  he  would  face  if
    deported to Brazil.  In essence he would have nowhere to go and no  one
    to look after him.  Moreover the claimant does not speak Portuguese.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the claimant "is on any analysis
    a young man who is very vulnerable in a strange country".  We  set  out
    paragraphs 44 to 47 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination in full:

         "44. Having listened carefully to the appellant at this hearing and
             weighed carefully in our minds the bulk of evidence before  us
             of his conviction, his  imprisonment  and  what  has  happened
             since, we find ourselves unable to conclude that  his  conduct
             represents a 'genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society'

         45.  The cornerstone issue for us is that of whether the  Secretary
             of State has  correctly  concluded  that  his  deportation  to
             Brazil is warranted on the grounds of public policy or  public
             security.  Having regard to the  relevant  standard  of  proof
             which we must observe  we  concluded  that  this  young  man's
             deportation in the context of the Regulations is not warranted
             on such grounds.

         46.  It would be far too simplistic for  us  to  conclude  that  he
             deserves 'the benefit of the doubt'.  However, it is just  and
             equitable for us to conclude on the evidence that the risk  of
             this appellant re-offending is on the evidence very low and in
             turn, therefore, the risk to the public must in turn be low.

         47.  For all the reasons we have identified in  this  determination
             we conclude that there are grounds to revoke  the  deportation
             order made under the 2006 Regulations and we intend  therefore
             to allow the appellant's appeal on immigration grounds."

 9. As for the claim under Article 8  the  First-tier  Tribunal  recognised
    that the claimant could not avail himself of Appendix FM and HC 194  of
    the Rules.  However in the First-tier Tribunal's words "we believe that
    quite a robust case has been set out on the appellant's  behalf"  under
    Article 8.  He had clearly established a private and family  life  here
    and deportation to Brazil would create "immense and gravely disturbing"
    consequences.

10. We set out paragraph 50 of the determination in full:

         "50. In truth however because of this - we  think  -  isolated  but
             massive mistake on his part the effect of the deportation will
             be an equally massive interference with his private and family
             life rights and we are satisfied will have a truly devastating
             effect upon those who he  leaves  behind;  in  particular  his
             mother but also his siblings and the man whom he has known  as
             his stepfather since about 2006.  We  believe  that  Chikwamba
             must be applied positively in these circumstances."

11. We should add that in Chikwamna there was reference to the consequences
    of removal being "harsh and unpalatable".

12. The Secretary of State appeals on the sole ground that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that   the
    claimant's record does not meet the requirements of the EEA Regulations
    namely Regulation 21(5).  Reliance is placed on  paragraph  26  of  the
    case of Essa v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration)  Netherlands  [2013]  UKUT  316  (IAC),   a
    decision of  this Tribunal  presided  over  by  Mr  Justice  Blake  and
    decided on 3 June 2013.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  in  the
    instant case on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to follow the principles of Essa and failed  to  attach
    proper weight to the fact that the  claimant  did  not  have  permanent
    residence.

13. Although in the section  of  its  demonstration  headed  "Findings  and
    Conclusion" the First-tier Tribunal did not make express  reference  to
    the fact that the claimant did not  have  permanent  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, that point was not seriously in issue.  Furthermore, at
    paragraph 13 of its determination the First-tier Tribunal set  out  the
    Secretary of State's view that the  claimant  did  not  have  permanent
    residence and that the appellant did not advance a positive  case  that
    he did.  The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was  as  to  how  the
    Regulation 21(5) assessment fell to be carried  out  in  this  case  on
    ordinary principles of proportionality - see paragraph 14 of the First-
    tier Tribunal's determination  and  the  approach  which  the  Tribunal
    adopted under paragraphs 44 and 45 in particular.  This was not a  case
    where serious grounds of public policy or public  security  had  to  be
    established.  In our view there is nothing in the point that the First-
    tier Tribunal did not have proper regard to the fact that the  claimant
    did not have permanent residence in the United Kingdom.  That is patent
    from the decision.

14. Further the decision in Essa does not really  avail  the  Secretary  of
    State's argument in any event: this was not  the  sort  of  case  where
    issues as to rehabilitation or re-integration arose.  The  claimant  is
    not removable to a country within  the  EU.   The  Secretary  of  State
    proposes to remove him to Brazil.

15. The Secretary of State's  real  complaint,  although  it  was  not  put
    forward to us in that way, is that this was a perverse decision by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  These were undoubtedly serious criminal offences,
    four counts of robbery, and the Secretary of State  believes  that  the
    claimant constitutes a serious risk to the public.

16. We would have to  think  long  and  hard  before  concluding  that  the
    decision of an experienced panel such as this was  perverse.   We  note
    that the sentencing judge accepted  that  the  claimant  had  played  a
    lesser  part  in  the  robbery  and  also  that  he  had  no   previous
    convictions.  It was for the First-tier Tribunal to weigh  up  all  the
    available evidence and to reach an assessment within the  framework  of
    Regulation 21(5).  The one aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    which gives  us  some  minor  cause  for  concern  is  that  the  panel
    apparently concluded on the evidence that the risk of the claimant  re-
    offending was "very low" and "the risk to the public must  in  turn  be
    low".  As previously observed, the pre-sentence report  was  not  quite
    into those terms.  However the Secretary of  State  does  not  raise  a
    challenge to the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on  that  basis  and
    overall we do not believe that it would have been sufficient to  impugn
    the whole decision under the 2006 Regulations.

17. In any event the Secretary of State does not challenge  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  determination  under  Article   8   which   constitutes   a
    freestanding basis for allowing the appeal below - see paragraph 53  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination which links with paragraphs  49
    and 50.  For all these reasons this appeal is dismissed.

18. However we should add this that if this appellant were to re-offend  in
    any serious manner in the future it is probable that the  Secretary  of
    State would serve on him a further notice of intention to  deport.   At
    that stage the public interest considerations under the Regulations may
    well be different.  This appellant should not regard this  decision  on
    appeal as safeguarding his right to remain in the  United  Kingdom  for
    all time and for all purposes. He should therefore pay close regard  to
    the need to abide by the law for the foreseeable future.

19. As I have said, this appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Jay
















