
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01398/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2014                            |On 20 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     IZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms White, instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    dated 5 November 2013 of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Robertson  and  Mr
    Sandall which allowed the respondent's appeal against deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this determination, I refer to IZ as the  appellant
    and to the Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  I
    make an order for non-disclosure of the identity of  the  appellant  in
    light of his disability in order to avoid  the  likelihood  of  serious
    harm to him arising from the contents of this determination.

Background

 4. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the  UK  at
    the age of 8 and has remained here ever since. He  is  profoundly  deaf
    and he communicates in British Sign Language. He was granted indefinite
    leave to remain in 2004. He is now aged 22. On 22 November 2012 he  was
    convicted of violent disorder and sentenced to  2  years  imprisonment.
    The offence occurred in the context of a gang-related crime in which  a
    young man was murdered.  As a result of his offending, on 26 June  2013
    the respondent issued the appellant with a notice  that  the  automatic
    deportation provisions applied to him.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. It was not disputed before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant
    met the requirements of paragraph 399A (a) as he was under 25  and  had
    spent over half of his life  in  the  UK.  It  was  not  accepted  that
    paragraph 399A (b) was met, however, as the respondent considered  that
    the fact of living the first 8 years of his life in Nigeria and  having
    relatives there, in particular three maternal uncles,  meant  that  the
    appellant had family, social or cultural ties to Nigeria.

 6. As  regards  the  alternative  Article  8  assessment,  the  respondent
    maintained that although very serious reasons are required  to  justify
    expulsion of a settled migrant who has spent the major part of his life
    in the host country, the public interest in  deportation  should  weigh
    more  given  the   seriousness   of   the   offence   and   surrounding
    circumstances.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant did not  have  family,
    social or cultural ties to Nigeria, that paragraph 399A (b) was met and
    that the appeal therefore fell to  be  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 8. The panel addressed the question of ties to Nigeria in some details  at
    [38] to [41]. It was not disputed that  he  had  not  returned  to  the
    country other than for 2 weeks in 2005; [38], [41]. It was  also  found
    that the evidence as to family ties there had been played down and  was
    not entirely reliable; [39], [40], [41]. It was found that he had three
    maternal uncles there  as  well  as  a  maternal  grandfather  and  his
    siblings; [41].

 9. The First-tier Tribunal went on  at  [41]  to  refer  to  the  case  of
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060  (IAC).  The
    head note of that case states:


        "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties'  in  paragraph
        399A of the Immigration Rules imports a concept involving something
        more than merely  remote  or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of
        proposed  deportation  or  removal.  It  involves  there  being   a
        connection to life in that  country.  Consideration  of  whether  a
        person has 'no ties' to such  a  country  must  involve  a  rounded
        assessment of all of the relevant circumstances and is  not  to  be
        limited to 'social, cultural and family' circumstances."

    and at [123], following similar wording, the Upper Tribunal added that:


        "If this were not the case then it would  appear  that  a  person's
        nationality of the country of proposed deportation could of  itself
        lead to a failure to meet the requirements of the rule. This  would
        render the application of the rule, given the context within  which
        it operates, entirely meaningless."

10. The First-tier Tribunal here found that the appellant had no  continued
    or meaningful ties to Nigeria. He had come to the UK aged 8, not  lived
    there for 13 years, had only been back for only 2 weeks on a visit  and
    additionally could not have retained meaningful  ties  because  of  his
    disability.

11. In the alternative, the First-tier Tribunal went on to  assess  whether
    there   were   compelling   reasons   that   might   make   deportation
    disproportionate and found that there were because of  the  appellant's
    very long residence during his formative years, difficulties in life as
    a result of his deafness which had, in  part,  led  to  his  offending,
    ongoing lack of independent living for the same reason, his very active
    steps to avoid reoffending which included moving away  from  London  to
    stay with a relative in Birmingham, low risk of re-offending  and  harm
    to the public and his lack of ties to Nigeria.

Error of Law

12. The main ground of appeal was that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    finding paragraph 399A (b) of the Immigration Rules  was  met.  It  was
    submitted that the appellant should have been found to have  sufficient
    ties where he had three maternal uncles in Nigeria and  must  have  had
    some education there as he learned some sign language before coming  to
    the UK. Although  accepting  that  the  ties  had  to  be  "meaningful"
    following the guidance in Ogundimu, Mr Mills maintained that where  the
    appellant had relatives who could be expected to assist him  on  return
    and had experienced life and some education in Nigeria up until the age
    of  8,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning  on  this   matter   was
    inadequate.

13. It appeared to me that the  arguments  made  regarding  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings on ties  to  Nigeria  amounted  to  a  disagreement
    rather than founding a challenge on error of  law.  The  Tribunal  took
    into account at [41] that the evidence given on family members had been
    unreliable and found that the appellant did have relatives there.  This
    did not oblige the panel to find that he had retained ties to  Nigeria,
    however. It was clearly open to the Tribunal to find that there were no
    real or meaningful ties to those  relatives,  there  being  nothing  to
    indicate any ongoing contact, the long period of residence  in  the  UK
    during which any ties the appellant to Nigeria had weakened, that being
    additionally so given his disability which prevented communication with
    any relatives there. I did not find that the reasoning of the panel was
    inadequate, that they had failed to address  any  material  matters  or
    relied on immaterial matters and did not  find  that  their  conclusion
    could be characterised as perverse.

14. I therefore found that the  decision  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    requirements of paragraph 399A was sound and should stand.

15. Mr Mills did not seek to pursue the second substantive ground of appeal
    concerning the finding that appellant was at low risk  of  reoffending.
    He accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had good evidence on  this  at
    the hearing from the appellant's Probation Officer and their conclusion
    at [35] that the appellant's risk of reoffending and  risk  of  serious
    harm to the public was low had been open to them.

16. There remained only a matter which arose at the hearing concerning  the
    alternative "exceptional" Article 8  assessment.  Mr  Mills  maintained
    that the grounds should be read as challenging both the decision  under
    paragraph 399A  and  the  alternative  Article  8  decision.  Ms  White
    resisted that argument. Even if  the  respondent's  case  on  this  was
    accepted, any challenge to the alternative Article 8  assessment  could
    only relate to the issues of ties to Nigeria and  risk  assessment.  As
    indicated above, the First-tier Tribunal  did not err in either  regard
    so this matter did not appear to me to merit being taken any further.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 16 January 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
