

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01650/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 March 2015                     |On 23 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                              HAYATULLAH HAUMI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. T Wilding, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1995.
    His appeal against the respondent's decision dated 8 August 2014 to
    make a deportation order against him was dismissed by FtTJ Page on
    Article 8 grounds.

2.   The appellant appealed the judge's decision.  Ground 1 argued that the
    judge erred in law in deciding the appeal on Article 8 grounds only and
    not including the asylum grounds raised in the grounds of appeal.  The
    respondent in the Rule 24 response did not oppose the appellant's
    application and invited the Tribunal to remit the matter to the FTT to
    consider the asylum claim which was in fact not outstanding and had
    been decided on 2 October 2014.  The respondent requested that the
    remittal to the FTT should be confined to asylum and Article 3 as there
    had been no challenge to the dismissed Article 8 appeal.

2.   From what Ms Chapman said the asylum decision dated 2 October 2014 had
    not been served on the appellant.  The FtTJ was not aware that there
    was this decision.  Indeed it appeared that the parties below were not
    aware of this decision and the appeal had proceeded on the basis that
    the decision to deport the appellant would breach his rights under
    Article 8.

4.   In the light of the fact that the appellant's asylum claim had been
    considered and refused prior to the hearing on 19 November 2014, it was
    not outstanding and therefore the judge's failure to determine the
    appellant's asylum grounds that were raised in the notice of appeal and
    argued at the hearing was an error of law.

5.   As to Article 8, even though there was no direct challenge to the
    judge's findings on the Article 8 appeal, I find that ground 2 touches
    on the physical and moral integrity of the appellant' removal and his
    ability to relocate as a consequence of his medical condition.
    Therefore ground 2 also raises an arguable error of law.

6.   For the above reasons, I find that the judge erred in law and his
    decision cannot stand.  I set it aside in order that the decision is
    remade on all issues by a judge other than FtTJ Page.



Signed        Date 20 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



Directions
 1. The appeal is listed for hearing on 8 September 2015
 2. An interpreter in the Afghan Pashto dialect is required
 3. Time Estimate - 3 hours
 4. Witnesses - 3 including appellant
 5. All documentary evidence to be relied on at the hearing to be submitted
    to the court 7 days before the hearing
