
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01744/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 October 2015                   |Judgment given orally on 22 October  |
|                                     |2015                                 |
|                                     |Sent out on 6 November 2015          |


                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE HOLGATE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                hamza zeyadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins, Counsel instructed by Wilsons
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Hamza Abdalla Zeyadi is a citizen of Libya.  He was born in 1978 and so
    now he is 37 years old.  He spent the first seventeen years of his life
    in Libya until 1995 and then he came to the United Kingdom.  Before  he
    left Libya his father had previously arrived in the UK on 24  September
    1994.  He made an application for asylum  which  was  successful.   The
    circumstances which led to the grant of asylum are  summarised  in  the
    judgment of the First-tier Tribunal  at  paragraph  42.   There  is  no
    dispute that the reason why asylum was granted in the father's case was
    because of his membership of the Muslim Brotherhood combined  with  the
    persecution of members of that organisation by the Gaddafi regime.

 2. The Appellant, his mother and siblings joined the father in the  UK  in
    June 1995.  On 3 June 2000 the Appellant and his  family  were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  refugees.   It  is
    common ground that that was based upon the grant of refugee  status  to
    the father.

 3. Since his arrival in the United Kingdom the Appellant has amassed  some
    36 convictions for 93 offences between 31 August 2001 and 7 March 2013.
     The catalogue of offending was summarised by the judge at paragraph 58
    of his decision.  The judge also carefully set out the  seriousness  of
    the criminality by referring  to  the  sentencing  remarks  of  several
    judges in the Crown Court between paragraphs  60  and  61.   He  placed
    considerable weight on the fact that the  Appellant  had  continued  to
    commit offences over the last few years  despite  the  use  of  various
    sentencing options and involvement by both the Prison Service  and  the
    Probation Service. The Appellant had had significant  opportunities  to
    curtail his drug and  crime  problems.   The  judge  concluded:  "quite
    clearly the Appellant has become a criminal menace and appears to  have
    done little to effectively address his continuing criminal  offending".
    He went on in paragraph 63 to find that the nature and frequency of the
    offending are  important  considerations  together  with  the  need  to
    protect the public.  He judged the repeated breaches of this  country's
    laws by a person subject to  immigration  control  as  being  extremely
    serious and demonstrating that the Appellant has no regard for the laws
    of the United Kingdom.

 4. Various attempts have been made to take deportation action against  the
    Appellant.  These were summarised by the judge in paragraphs 51  to  54
    of his decision.  Notwithstanding the formal steps taken to deport  him
    the Appellant persisted in his criminal  activities.  Ultimately  on  4
    September 2014 the Respondent made the deportation order which resulted
    in the appeal before the First Tier Tribunal. A  full  explanation  for
    the making of that order was set out in a 26 page decision notice dated
    8 September 2014.

 5. In addition on  25  March  2014  the  Respondent  gave  notice  to  the
    Appellant of a proposed cessation of his refugee status  under  Article
    1C(5) of the Refugee Convention of 1951.  The decision letter  on  this
    matter was issued on 5 September 2014.  In  summary,  it  reminded  the
    Appellant of the basis upon which refugee status had been  granted  and
    explained  why  there  had  been  a   fundamental   change   in   those
    circumstances, in short they had ceased to exist.

 6. In paragraph 3 of his decision the  judge  summarised  the  grounds  of
    appeal relied upon by the Appellant.  He challenged the deportation  on
    the basis that it would breach the Refugee Convention  and  Articles  3
    and 8 of the ECHR.  He said that he would be at risk  of  ill-treatment
    due to the current situation in Libya.  He said that he  had  lived  in
    the UK for over twenty years and had  established  family  and  private
    life and claimed that deportation  would  disproportionately  interfere
    with his family and private life.  He also argued that the decision was
    not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

 7. We have carefully reviewed the judgment. It is plain to us that it  was
    a carefully structured and reasoned  decision.   At  paragraph  18  the
    judge set out the four stage approach which he took in order to address
    the issues raised before the Tribunal. That approach has not  been  the
    subject of any criticism.

 8. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Wilkins has sought to argue three grounds
    of appeal.  The arguments were set out in her skeleton  argument  dated
    15 October 2015 supplied to the Tribunal in advance of the hearing, for
    which we are grateful.  We note that Ms Wilkins did not appear  at  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Scope of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. An initial issue with which we  have  to  deal  is  the  scope  of  the
    permission to appeal from the First Tier Tribunal granted by the  judge
    of the Upper Tribunal, permission having previously been refused by the
    First-tier Tribunal. Relying upon Ferrer [2012] UKUT 304 (IAC), it  was
    submitted for the Appellant that paragraph 2 of the judge's reasons did
    not constitute a refusal to grant permission in  respect  of  ground  1
    (dealing with the article 1C(5) issue) and that, taking the order as  a
    whole, we should not treat the grant of permission to appeal  as  being
    limited to grounds 2 and 3.  We reject that submission.  When the order
    is read as a whole, the judge made it plain that he was persuaded  that
    only grounds 2 and 3 were arguable and that he considered ground  1  to
    be unarguable for the reasons clearly stated in paragraph 2.

10. The next issue was whether nonetheless this Tribunal  should  entertain
    the challenge under ground 1.  This was not something which Ms  Wilkins
    had anticipated  dealing  with  and  no  authority  was  cited  on  the
    Tribunal's power to entertain a ground of appeal for  which  permission
    has not been  granted.   We  have  looked  at  the  matter  from  first
    principles and also by  reference  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

11. As a matter of first principle when an appeal court receives an  appeal
    for which permission to appeal has been granted on certain grounds  but
    not on others, the ambit of the appeal is limited to  the  matters  for
    which permission to appeal has been granted.  Whether or  not  that  is
    strictly a  jurisdictional  matter,  it  certainly  gives  rise  to  an
    expectation on the part of other parties, as well as the  appeal  court
    itself, as to which matters they will have to address and  which  other
    matters in the decision appealed are not  being  challenged.   In  some
    jurisdictions it is possible to apply to the appellate court to  extend
    the ambit of an appeal, but where that  is  so  it  will  generally  be
    necessary for an application to be made, not only  to  ensure  fairness
    for other parties, but also for the proper management of the appeal  by
    the appellate court.

12. In this instance the Applicant made no attempt to make any  application
    to the Tribunal to widen the scope of the appeal, assuming that such an
    application is possible, or even to notify the Respondent that such  an
    application would be made.  Ground 1 was covered in  the  skeleton  for
    the Appellant, but in our judgment that was no substitute for making an
    application to broaden the scope of the permission to appeal which  had
    been granted.

13. We have not been shown anything in the 2008 Rules which would enable us
    to entertain an application to pursue ground 1.  The  Appellant  relied
    upon Rule 5 which is concerned with general case management powers. But
    rule 5 has to be read alongside Rule 22. Where the Upper Tribunal makes
    a decision "on the papers" to refuse permission to appeal or  to  grant
    permission on limited grounds, Rule 22(3) and (4) enable  an  Appellant
    to apply for the reconsideration of permission to appeal at  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal. This provision only applies to appeals  from
    the Tribunals listed in sub-paragraph (3), which  do  not  include  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber.  The clear  implication  is  that  this
    Chamber in the Upper Tribunal does not have the power to  reconsider  a
    paper decision refusing or limiting permission to appeal made  at  that
    level.

Ground 1

14. Nonetheless, bearing in mind the importance to  the  Appellant  of  the
    decision taken under article 1C(5), we  did  in  any  event  hear  oral
    submissions on this  ground  and  carefully  considered  the  arguments
    advanced in the Appellant's skeleton argument. Even if ground 1 were to
    be treated as falling within the ambit of this appeal, or  even  if  an
    application could be made to widen the permission to appeal,  we  would
    in  any  event  have  rejected  the  arguments  and  refused  any  such
    application.  We are in firm agreement with the judges  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal who dealt with the application for
    permission to appeal, that ground 1 is unarguable.

15. Ground 1 as now put forward involves only two  points.  First,  it  was
    said that the judge failed  to  apply  the  correct  legal  test  under
    Article 1C(5), namely whether a  fundamental  and  durable  change  has
    taken place in the circumstances which formed the basis for  the  grant
    of refugee status.  It is clear to us that this experienced  member  of
    the First-tier Tribunal did apply the correct test as is apparent,  for
    example, from the careful attention he  paid  to  the  views  of  UNHCR
    (paragraphs 78 to 82 of the  judgment)  and  the  test  he  applied  in
    paragraph 94  using  the  words  "fundamental  change  in  the  country
    situation since the Appellant and his family left Libya".

16. The second part of ground 1 sought to attack the judge's application of
    Article 1C(5).  We record that during the  course  of  the  Appellant's
    oral submissions this argument fell away because the Appellant does not
    dispute that the basis upon which refugee status was conferred  was  as
    set out in paragraphs 1 and 2 above and those circumstances have ceased
    to exist.  There is therefore no scope for  arguing  that  the  judge's
    decision on Article 1C(5) was wrong in  law.   However,  the  Appellant
    sought to raise under Ground 1 additional points falling wholly outside
    the basis upon which refugee status had been granted. Counsel  for  the
    Appellant accepted that they should be dealt  with  instead  under  the
    second ground of challenge, which is concerned with  Article  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive.

Ground 2

17. The application of Article 15(c) to citizens of  Libya  was  considered
    comprehensively by the Upper Tribunal in AT &  Others  (Article  15(c);
    risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC).  Following a five  day
    hearing the Tribunal concluded that:

         "There is not such a high level of indiscriminate violence in Libya
         within the meaning of Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive
         so as to mean that substantial grounds exist for believing that  an
         individual would solely by being present there  face  a  real  risk
         which threatens his or her life or person".

    It is common ground that that formulation captures the legal test which
    the Tribunal was bound to apply  in  order  for  Article  15(c)  to  be
    engaged.

18. The main complaint under ground 2, as clarified in the oral submissions
    made by Ms Wilkins, is that a collection of  materials  postdating  the
    evidence considered by the Tribunal in AT should lead to the conclusion
    that Article 15(c) does now apply  in  Libya.   It  needs  to  be  said
    straightaway that this ground of attack on the judge's decision is  not
    a challenge specific to this Appellant alone. Although this was not set
    out in terms in the skeleton, Ms Wilkins accepts that the effect  would
    be to require the country guidance case to  be  re-determined  and  the
    argument, if  accepted,  would  be  applicable  in  general  to  Libyan
    citizens being returned to Libya.  This argument goes much further than
    the challenge raised  in  relation  to  the  specific  profile  of  the
    Appellant, which we deal with first.

19. At paragraph 115 the judge recorded the submissions of Mr Ficklin,  who
    then appeared on behalf of the Appellant, that his client would  be  at
    risk on return for two reasons: first, his  ethnicity  and  second  his
    imputed political opinion through family and tribal links.   The  judge
    said:

         "I find that the Appellant's evidence has not  been  sufficient  to
         establish either alleged risk.  I find on the  evidence  before  me
         that the Appellant has not established that on his return to  Libya
         that he would suffer persecution due to his tribal background."

    The tribal background issue  was  carefully  considered  by  the  judge
    between paragraphs 107 and 114 and there has been no challenge  to  the
    legality of the conclusions which he reached in that respect.

20. As to the second matter, imputed political opinion the Appellant's oral
    submissions suggested, albeit faintly,  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    grapple with material relevant to the Appellant's profile when applying
    AT. His profile is said to be a link with the  Muslim  Brotherhood  and
    then in turn with militia groups connected with that  organisation,  in
    particular Libya Dawn.  However, Ms  Wilkins  accepted  that  when  the
    decision is read  as  a  whole  the  Tribunal  took  into  account  the
    following circumstances:

       . First, the  Appellant  has  never  been  a  member  of  the  Muslim
         Brotherhood.

       . Second, his father has been a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.

       . Third, both the Appellant and his father have  been  outside  Libya
         for some twenty years.

       . Fourth, neither the father nor the Appellant  have  taken  part  in
         political activity during that twenty year period

    Not surprisingly the judge concluded in paragraph 94 as follows:

         "Nor has he provided anything to suggest that his  or  any  of  his
         family activities whilst in the UK are such that he would likely to
         come to the adverse attention of the authorities on his  return  to
         Libya".

    None of the material which we have been shown could possibly  undermine
    that conclusion. Therefore we reject the suggestion that  the  Tribunal
    has erred in law in some way by failing to address material relevant to
    the Appellant's profile and hence the risk categories set  out  in  the
    country guidance case.  Accordingly, it follows that no legal criticism
    can be made of the judge's conclusion that this Appellant did not  fall
    within any of the risk categories identified in the AT  decision.   The
    remaining part of the argument  under  ground  2  is  confined  to  the
    application of Article 15(c). We should also  record  that  Ms  Wilkins
    accepted that ground 3 is only concerned with Article 15(1)(c) and  the
    subject of indiscriminate violence.

21. The Appellant submitted that the judge was presented with material upon
    which he should have concluded that the situation in Libya has  changed
    materially as regards the application of Article 15(c)  so  that  there
    should have been a departure from the country  guidance  in  this  case
    and, moreover, that that guidance should be reconsidered.

22. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the Respondent referred us to paragraph 47  of
    the decision in SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940 in which it  was  held  that  makers  and  Tribunal
    judges are  required  to  take  country  guidance  determinations  into
    account and to follow them unless  very  strong  grounds  supported  by
    cogent evidence are adduced to justify their not doing so.  Ms  Wilkins
    agreed that the Tribunal should apply that test to the arguments  being
    presented under grounds 2 and 3, not only as to whether the judge would
    have been entitled to depart from the country guidance but also whether
    there is any justification for that guidance to be reconsidered.

23. In summary, the Appellant relied upon material of a relatively  general
    nature which is said to show a deterioration of  the  circumstances  in
    Libya such that Article 15(c) is now engaged. In relation  to  material
    of this kind, we consider that the Appellant in  this  case  should  at
    least have compared the  relevant  material  put  before  the  Tribunal
    dealing with the country guidance case and the new material  post  that
    decision in order to justify the drawing of different conclusions.   We
    should record that there was no attempt in the grounds of appeal or  in
    the skeleton argument or in oral submissions  to  carry  out  any  such
    exercise.  Instead we have been asked simply to examine at  face  value
    the material upon which the Appellant has relied.  In order to  present
    this submission Ms Wilkins focused on three pieces of evidence as being
    the best examples upon which the Appellant could rely.

24. She first relied upon advice from the Foreign  Office  on  Tourism  and
    Travel to Libya addressed to  UK  citizens  which  was  updated  on  17
    December 2014.  In particular she stresses the passage which appears at
    the foot of the first page as follows:

         "Since September 2014 there has been intense fighting and  shelling
         between militias in the Warshafarna  and  surrounding  areas  south
         west of Tripoli.  Intense fighting has also continued in  Benghazi.
         There is a very high risk of being caught in indiscriminate gunfire
         or shelling in all those areas to which the  fighting  has  spread.
         Violent clashes between armed groups are possible across the entire
         country including in Tripoli, particularly at night,  fighting  can
         break out in many places  and  at  short  notice.   It  can  become
         serious quickly putting those in the area at risk".

    It was the specific reference to  indiscriminate  gunfire  or  shelling
    that Counsel sought to rely upon.

25. Unfortunately the Appellant has not sought  to  show  us  whether  this
    guidance departed materially in this  respect  from  previous  guidance
    from the Foreign Office,  including  material  which  would  have  been
    before the Tribunal in AT.  Moreover, we note  that  this  is  guidance
    addressed to UK citizens.  It is guidance  on  voluntary  decisions  to
    travel to a country.  It is not directed  at  returns  of  citizens  of
    Libya to that country and thirdly the  guidance  does  not  purport  to
    apply and there is no reason to think that it had in mind the tests for
    the application of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and the
    test to be applied.

26. The second item relied upon is a report by  the  UNHCR  dated  November
    2014.  As with the first source, the Appellant  has  not  attempted  to
    show to the Tribunal how the matters set out in  this  material  differ
    significantly from those previously published by UNHCR or in any  event
    the circumstances  taken  into  account  by  the  Tribunal  in  AT  and
    reflected in its judgment at paragraphs 104 to 128, together  with  the
    relevant  sources  upon  which  the  Tribunal  relied  as  set  out  in
    appendices to that judgment.

27. The third source relied upon is a single sheet from Human Rights  Watch
    dated 5 December 2014.  In this  document  the  authors  express  their
    opinion that:

         "The armed conflicts and lawlessness in Libya are  giving  rise  to
         indiscriminate violence and widespread human rights abuses.   As  a
         result anyone forcibly returned to  any  part  of  Libya  would  be
         exposed to a real risk of serious harm which would constitute  what
         is known as refoulement under international law."

    The authors also give  their  view  that  all  countries  should  allow
    civilians fleeing Libya access to their territories and should  suspend
    forcible returns of civilians  to  any  location  in  Libya  until  the
    security and human rights situation has improved sufficiently to  allow
    for a safe and dignified return.

28. One difficulty for an Appellant relying on material of this abbreviated
    nature in order to depart from a country guidance case where the issues
    have already been considered at  great  length,  is  that  it  provides
    little more than an opinion.  Ms  Wilkins  accepted  that  what  is  of
    significance when looking at such a document is the material upon which
    the opinion has been based.  The paper we have  been  shown  says  very
    little about the source material or the extent to which  that  material
    or the opinions to which it has given rise  differ  significantly  from
    opinions  expressed  by  the   same   organisation   previously.    One
    generalised indication of sources is set out as follows: "international
    organisations and most foreign diplomatic nations have suspended  their
    activities in Libya, withdrew from the country  at  the  onset  of  the
    armed conflicts in Tripoli in July 2014".  No  further  detail  on  the
    sources or the content of the information is given. Ms Wilkins accepted
    that that statement is referring  to  the  attitude  taken  by  various
    governments  with  regard  to  their  responsibility  for   their   own
    diplomatic staff, their own nationals.

29. We are asked to have regard also to the other documents relied upon  by
    the Appellant and we have read all of that material but we  agree  with
    Ms Wilkins that the three sources to which we have  just  referred  put
    the Appellant's case at its  highest.   Having  reviewed  all  of  this
    material we do not consider  that  it  called  for  any  more  explicit
    reasoning than the judge in fact gave.

30. In paragraph 102 he said this:

         "This is the current country guidance from the Upper  Tribunal  and
         although there continue to be reports  of  conflict  between  armed
         militias  and  by  them  with  the  forces  loyal  to  the  elected
         government I find that this  Appellant  has  not  established  that
         substantial grounds exist for believing that he  would,  solely  by
         being present there face a real risk that threatens  his  life  and
         person."

31. In paragraph 123 the judge said:

         "I find that the Appellant has not  established  that  the  current
         security situation in Libya is such that he would be at risk merely
         by being present there.  I find that he has failed to show that the
         current  situation  has  deteriorated  to  such  an  extent  as  to
         challenge the findings of the Upper Tribunal in the case  of  AT  &
         Others (Libya) [2014]."

32. We are satisfied that in the context of the material shown to the judge
    and his very full and carefully reasoned judgment on the wide range  of
    issues raised before him, there is no basis for finding  any  error  of
    law under ground 2.

Ground 3

33. Ground 3 criticises one part of the decision  in  the  Tribunal  alone,
    namely paragraph 122 where the judge said:

         "I accept that [at] the date of this hearing  that  there  is  some
         unrest in parts of Libya.  The Respondent, as a cautionary measure,
         has temporarily suspended  returns  of  failed  asylum  seekers  to
         Libya.  There may be therefore a delay in returning this  Appellant
         to Libya due to practical and logistical problems."

34. This challenge is presented in the context of the decision of the Court
    of Appeal in J1 v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 279.  Put shortly the principle there established is  that  it
    is improper for a  Tribunal  or  a  decision-  maker  to  rely  upon  a
    suspension of returns to a country as determinative of  risk.   Instead
    the obligation of the decision maker or the Tribunal is to  assess  the
    risk relating to a return on the evidence and as at  the  date  of  the
    decision or hearing.  It is plain from paragraphs 116  to  118  of  the
    judgment and the judge's careful citation of authorities, that  he  was
    well aware of his obligation which, in our view he did discharge.

35. Paragraph 122 of the judgment refers back to paragraph 99 in which  the
    Respondent's interim operational  instructions  stated,  "all  escorted
    returns to Libya should therefore be deferred  at  the  present  time".
    The judge's reference  to  practical  and  logistical  problems  simply
    related  to  the  suspension  of  escorted  returns  and  by  necessary
    implication the view taken by the Home Office and  the  Foreign  Office
    that it was inappropriate to deploy UK citizens for that purpose.  This
    passage was not used by the judge in order to avoid his  obligation  to
    assess risk of return in relation to the Appellant as at  the  date  of
    the hearing. The judge plainly did set out his conclusions on that risk
    in paragraphs 121 and 123, which were based upon preceding sections  of
    the judgment. The error which was committed in J1 simply did not  arise
    in this case and ground 3 must be rejected.

Conclusion

36. For all those reasons the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 29 October 2015

Mr Justice Holgate



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Mr Justice Holgate
