
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01083/2013
                                                               DA/01084/2013
                                                               DA/01086/2013
                                                               DA/01087/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 October 2013                               |On 16 October 2013         |
|Extempore Judgment                              |                           |


                                   Before
                   MISS E E ARFON-JONES DL, VICE PRESIDENT
                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                            Mrs Poornimah Rungoo
                              Mr Manraj Rungoo
                               Mr Kehar Rungoo
                             Miss Greata Rungoo
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Martin (instructed by Raj Law solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. These are four appeals to the Upper Tribunal by a mother, father, adult
    son and daughter (also now an adult) against  a  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge R J N B Morris and Mr  Getlevog)  who  heard
    the appeals at Hatton Cross on 22 July 2013.  In  their  determination,
    which was promulgated on  5  August  2013,  all  of  the  appeals  were
    dismissed.  The appeals were against  decisions  by  the  Secretary  of
    State made on 15 May  2013  to  deport  all  four  to  Mauritius.   The
    circumstances surrounding the making of the deportation orders was that
    the first Appellant,  the  mother,  was  convicted  of  using  a  false
    passport and sentenced to eighteen months in prison.

 2. What happened then has caused confusion in that  when  the  mother  was
    released from prison she was  notified  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    intention to deport her.  She then made an application in  August  2012
    for leave to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds.   That  was  before
    any deportation decisions had been made.  In  October  2012  the  other
    three members of the family, namely husband,  son  and  daughter,  also
    made applications for leave to remain in the UK on Article  8  grounds.
    At the date of those applications, the daughter (the fourth  Appellant)
    was 17 years of age. Her brother was over the age of 18.

 3. The Secretary of State made a Decision in September 2012 rejecting  the
    mother's application on Article 8 grounds.  That  decision  carried  no
    right of appeal as she then had extant leave.  The Secretary  of  State
    has never made decisions in relation to the applications by  the  other
    three members of the family.  The Secretary of  State  seems  to  think
    that she might have done because the Rule 24 reply  suggests  decisions
    were made in September.  However the only decision  made  in  September
    2012 related to the mother's application.

 4. The Secretary of State then made a Deportation decision.  That she then
    revoked  and  made  fresh  deportation  decisions  against   all   four
    Appellants on 15 May 2013.  However, by May 2013 the youngest child was
    also over the age of 18.

 5. The appeal we have before us is  not  in  relation  to  the  Article  8
    applications; it is an appeal against the Deportation decisions.

 6. The power to deport family members is to be found  in  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 and in particular Section 3(5) which provides:

         "A person who is not a British citizen  is  liable  to  deportation
         from the United Kingdom if -

         a)   the Secretary of State deems his deportation to  be  conducive
             to the public good; or

         b)   another person to whose family  he  belongs  is  or  has  been
             ordered to be deported."

 7. The definition of "family" is contained in Section  5(4)  of  that  Act
    which provides:

         "For the purposes of deportation, the following shall be those  who
             are regarded as belonging to another person's family-

         a)   where that other person is a man, his wife or  civil  partner,
             and his or her children under the age of 18;and

         b)   where that other person is  a  woman,  her  husband  or  civil
             partner, and her or his children under the age of 18

 8. There is no power for the Secretary of State to deport  adult  children
    of a person who is to be  deported.   That  renders  the  decisions  in
    relation to the third and fourth Appellants unlawful.

 9. That is such a fundamental matter that it is certainly Robinson-obvious
    and it is a matter that the First-tier Tribunal ought to have  noticed,
    considered and decided.  For that reason we find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law and we set  aside  its  Determination  in
    relation to all four Appellants.  We set  aside  the  Determination  in
    relation to the first two Appellants because consideration of Article 8
    will be informed by the situation with regard to their two children.

10. Having set aside the Determination, we note  that  there  has  been  no
    application to adduce additional evidence and so we can proceed to  re-
    decide the appeals.  We re-decide the appeals in relation to the  third
    and fourth Appellants, and we allow their appeals on the basis that the
    decisions appealed against are not in accordance with  the  law,  there
    being no power to deport them.

11. We then are left with the first and  second  Appellants,  who  are  the
    person who stands convicted and her husband.  Their appeals are brought
    on Article 8 grounds.  However, there are outstanding  applications  by
    the children for leave to remain in the  UK  before  the  Secretary  of
    State, which predated the decisions to  deport  the  parents.   Whether
    they  are  given  leave  to  remain  is  going  to  be   an   important
    consideration when deciding the Article 8 appeals of the  parents.  For
    that reason we cannot decide  the  parents'  today  and  adjourn  to  a
    resumed hearing before us after the Secretary of  State  has  made  her
    decision, which we hope will be in the near future.

12. The appeal in relation to the first and second Appellants are adjourned
    to be listed for a Directions Hearing  before us in three months  time,
    when we can establish what the situation then is and whether indeed  it
    is appropriate for us to decide the appeals in the  Upper  Tribunal  or
    remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. The appeals of the third and fourth Appellants to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    are allowed.




Signed                              Date 9th October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

