
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01503/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral determination given following   |On 24 August 2015                    |
|hearing on 7 July 2015               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                            PROFESSOR N M HILL QC
                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                karolis skema
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Cole, Counsel instructed by Sterling & Law
Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania who was born on 31 March  1994.
    When he was 16 years old, on 15 June 2010 he came to the  UK  with  his
    mother.  He is an only child and his mother works  as  a  self-employed
    seamstress in this country.  On 9 November 2013  he  committed  a  very
    serious offence of street robbery, the circumstances of which  will  be
    described below and he was also at that time equipped with an offensive
    weapon.  He was sentenced for these offences on 23 December to a  total
    of 25 months' imprisonment.  The sentencing remarks of the  judge,  His
    Honour Judge Zeidman QC, include the following:

         "Earlier this morning I  had  the  advantage  of  seeing  the  CCTV
         footage.  It is extremely useful to see  it.   It  says  more  than
         words would be able.  It makes it plain  this  was  a  particularly
         nasty attack by two men against one victim in  which  his  bag  was
         stolen.  It is an obvious aggravating feature but  even  after  the
         bag is taken, without interruption the  attack  continues  and  the
         victim is gratuitously kicked by this defendant.  He stamps on  him
         when the victim is on the floor."

 2. The judge then goes on to note that although the victim did not  suffer
    "the most serious injuries or even serious injuries" nonetheless he did
    lose consciousness for a short while.  The judge also  notes  that  "it
    seems clear from the footage that the kicks were very hard and one  can
    see on that CCTV footage what a petrifying experience  this  must  have
    been for the unfortunate victim".

 3. Before being sentenced for  these  offences  a  probation  pre-sentence
    report was prepared in which the reporting  officer  suggested  that  a
    suspended sentence of imprisonment (which it is accepted on  behalf  of
    the appellant before us today  would  have  been  totally  outside  the
    sentencing guidelines) might be considered.  Mr McMillan, the probation
    officer who prepared this report also  concluded  that  this  appellant
    presented a low risk of re-offending although he accepted that he would
    be at "medium risk of causing serious harm  in  the  future  should  he
    decide to re-offend given the nature of this offence".

 4. The reasons given by Mr McMillan for reaching this finding was that  he
    considered that the appellant's behaviour on the night of  the  offence
    "does appear out of character and an aberration on his behalf" but that
    now he appreciates the consequences which  were  that  he  was  "likely
    facing a lengthy immediate period in custody", Mr McMillan "gained  the
    impression that [the appellant's] experience of  the  criminal  justice
    system to date is likely to militate against further offending of  this
    magnitude at least".   He  also  had  in  mind  "the  statistical  risk
    assessment tools used by the Probation Service" when assessing  him  as
    being at low risk of re-offending.

 5. It should perhaps be noted that at page 3 of the pre-sentence report Mr
    McMillan apparently had difficulty in accepting the appellant's version
    of events, because he says there as follows:

         "Based upon [the appellant's] version of events the  offences  were
         committed  impulsively  without  any  pre-planning  or   discussion
         between him and the  other  unknown  man  with  alcohol  and  anger
         management  [sic]  following  the  breakdown  in  his  relationship
         appearing to be the underlying triggers to this offending  but  not
         financial gain.  The court  may  find  some  difficulty  with  this
         scenario, as I do myself, but  [the  appellant]  was  adamant  that
         there was no initial criminal intent in  his  actions  although  he
         accepts that his behaviour in assaulting [the victim]  was  totally
         inappropriate ...".

 6. In other words, Mr McMillan here  was  indicating  not  only  that  the
    appellant's version of events was difficult to accept at face value but
    that he himself did not do so. Clearly the judge in sentencing did  not
    agree with the sentencing recommendation which was made.

 7. Subsequently, on 24 July 2014 the respondent made a decision to  deport
    the appellant to Lithuania but before doing so,  those  acting  on  her
    behalf had in mind,  as  they  were  required  to  that  as  stated  at
    paragraph 4 of the reasons for this decision, "any such deportation  is
    required to be in accordance with Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations
    [this is a reference to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006]".   As
    recognised on behalf of the respondent, pursuant to  Regulation  21  an
    EEA national who has a right  of  permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom (which this appellant not having been present for a  continuous
    period of five years does not have) can only  be  deported  on  serious
    grounds of public policy or public security and that  an  EEA  national
    who has resided in this country for a continuous period of at least ten
    years  prior  to  deportation  decision  could  only  be  deported   on
    imperative grounds of public security.

 8. Furthermore, under Regulation 21 (5) of  the  2006  Regulations  it  is
    provided as follows:

         "Where a relevant decision [which is defined in  21(1)  as  meaning
         'an EEA decision taken on the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
         security or public health'] is taken on grounds of public policy or
         public security  it  shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this Regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles -

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision; [and]

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision".

 9. Pursuant to Regulation 21(6):

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin".

10. It is important to have the provisions of Regulation 21 in mind because
    these set out the factors that must be taken into account before an EEA
    national can be removed.

11. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to deport  him
    and his appeal was heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls
    sitting at Taylor House on 16 January 2015, in a hearing in  which  the
    appellant gave evidence as did his mother and various  other  witnesses
    called on his behalf.  In a decision prepared on 19  January  2015  and
    promulgated the following day, Judge Nicholls dismissed the appellant's
    appeal and the appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal,  permission
    having been granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge.

12. Before us, the appellant's Counsel,  Mr  Cole,  relied  on  a  skeleton
    argument which he had helpfully settled and on  which  he  expanded  in
    oral submissions.  Essentially his argument is that  on  the  facts  of
    this case no judge could properly have concluded  that  this  appellant
    presented a genuine and present threat of re-offending.  He  asked  the
    Tribunal to note in particular that this offence was considered by  the
    probation officer to be an "aberration"  and  he  also  submitted  that
    Judge Nicholls had misunderstood what was said in the probation  report
    about  the  appellant  having  denied  "initially"  having  a  criminal
    intention (at page 3 of the probation reports it is recorded  that  the
    appellant "was adamant that there was no initial criminal intent in his
    actions") because at paragraph 26 of his determination  Judge  Nicholls
    had stated  that  "the  appellant  denied  a  criminal  intention  when
    speaking to the probation officer".  Mr Cole seemed  to  be  suggesting
    that the absence of the word "initial" is a significant omission. While
    it  is  accepted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  sentencing
    recommendation  of  the  probation  officer  was  inappropriate  it  is
    nonetheless argued that that does not mean that the conclusion  of  the
    probation officer that the appellant only represented a low risk of re-
    offending should also be rejected.  Mr Cole asked the Tribunal to  bear
    in mind that had the appellant been considered  to  have  had  problems
    with alcohol these would have been identified as would  have  been  the
    case  had  he  been  considered  to  have  anger  management  problems.
    However, neither of these were perceived to be ongoing  problems  which
    could be cured by enrolling  him  on  any  of  the  courses  which  the
    probation service could supply.

13. In the course of his submissions Mr Cole suggested at  one  point  that
    had the appellant's offending "been more serious and  he  had  spent  a
    longer period in custody, these courses would have  been  available  to
    him" although he did accept later in  his  argument  that  he  was  not
    attempting to minimise the seriousness of the offences which  had  been
    committed.  Essentially his main argument with regard to whether or not
    the appellant represented a present threat was that as he had only been
    convicted of one offence (or more accurately one set  of  offences)  he
    could not be said to  be  predisposed  to  crime  or  have  a  criminal
    propensity and therefore the judge had no basis upon which to  conclude
    that he was a continuing threat.

14. One of the reasons given by the judge for his finding which I will deal
    with below was that the appellant appeared to show little or no remorse
    for his offending and certainly showed no sympathy for the victim while
    giving evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  was  a  matter
    which the judge noted  during  the  hearing.   While  Mr  Cole  on  the
    appellant's behalf did not seek to challenge this  particular  finding,
    he submitted that there were many other reasons why a person  might  be
    unlikely to re-offend  and  in  this  case  the  main  reason  was  the
    deterrent effect of the sentence which he had had.  He put it in  these
    terms:

         "There are a number of reasons why people may  not  offend  in  the
         future.  Sympathy for the victim is only one of  them.   Deterrence
         is another, and this is a well-recognised purpose of  imprisonment.
         There is no reason why it should not be effective".

15. The core of the appellant's claim in this regard  would  appear  to  be
    that the judge had no proper basis upon which he could depart from  the
    recommendation of an experienced probation officer.  It  was  suggested
    in argument that the judge might have had more regard to  the  opinions
    of the experienced criminal judge who had sentenced the  appellant  who
    did not follow the recommendations made by Mr McMillan, but  Mr  Cole's
    answer to that was that it did  not  follow  from  the  fact  that  the
    sentencing judge had rejected the sentencing  suggestion  that  he  had
    also come to the conclusion that he did not present a low risk  of  re-
    offending.

16. With regard to proportionality, although  the  main  challenge  to  the
    judge's finding that removal  was  proportionate  was  founded  on  the
    submission that the judge should not  have  found  that  the  appellant
    represented a present risk of re-offending, it was also submitted  that
    the judge had failed to take any account of the appellant's  case  that
    he was not himself in  regular  contact  with  any  of  his  family  in
    Lithuania.  While the judge noted that his mother did  have  a  brother
    and sister in Lithuania who were aware of  the  appellant's  conviction
    (this is noted at paragraph 31 of the determination) the judge  had  no
    regard or did not appear to have had any regard to the  fact  that  the
    appellant himself was not in contact with them.

17. On behalf of the respondent Mr Avery submitted that  the  determination
    was well-balanced and that the judge had had regard to all the  factors
    which he was obliged to have regard to. Even if one could not  discount
    the possibility that a different judge might have reached  a  different
    conclusion, the  conclusion  which  this  judge  reached  was  entirely
    sustainable and there was no error of law in the decision.

Discussion

18. In our judgment the judge in the  course  of  a  careful  and  detailed
    determination had full regard to the matters to which  he  should  have
    had regard and his findings are entirely unimpeachable.  It  is  common
    ground that as set out at Regulation 21(5)(c)  the  principal  test  is
    whether "the personal conduct of the person  concerned  [represents]  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society".  Even  on  the  basis  of  the  pre-
    sentence report, if there could be said to be a  real  risk  that  this
    appellant would re-offend, that would be a serious threat affecting one
    of the fundamental interests of society because as Mr McMillan notes at
    section 4 of  his  report  dealing  with  "risk  of  serious  harm  and
    likelihood of reconviction" he would have to "assess him  as  being  at
    medium risk of causing serious harm in the future should he  decide  to
    re-offend given the nature of this offence". In our judgment, given the
    nature of the offence which  this  appellant  has  shown  he  has  been
    prepared to commit, if he represents a genuine and present threat  then
    that threat is sufficiently serious to affect one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society which is that ordinary citizens should be able  to
    go about free from the  risk  of  being  attacked  in  the  street  and
    gratuitously kicked even after an offence has been committed.

19. Accordingly the major factor  which  the  judge  had  to  consider  was
    whether, on the basis of the evidence before him, this appellant  could
    be said to represent a genuine and present threat of re-offending.  The
    judge had in mind not only that the appellant did not  appear  to  have
    much sympathy for the victim of this offence but also that  the  reason
    that he gave for committing it was that he had had too much to drink on
    the night in question and had just broken up with his  partner.   There
    are undoubtedly many members of society who have broken up  with  their
    partners and who may also have had something to drink but who do not go
    out and commit offences as serious as this appellant has done.  This is
    not the sort of behaviour which one  would  expect  normal  law-abiding
    people to indulge in whatever the reasons now being put forward.

20. What the judge then noted was that this appellant had not  appeared  to
    address either of the factors said by  him  to  have  been  behind  the
    offence.  It was said on his behalf that the probation officer had  not
    considered he had a drink problem.  It was also said that  it  was  not
    considered he had any problem with anger management.  This  would  seem
    to beg the question of why if that  was  the  case  he  committed  this
    offence at all.  In our judgment the judge was  entirely  justified  in
    saying that absent any strategy of dealing with what must clearly be  a
    problem (because his case had been put on the basis simply that he does
    not have a problem of this kind), he cannot be said not  to  present  a
    real risk of re-offending.

21. The judge was not obliged to accept everything within the  pre-sentence
    report and in our judgment it is understating the  seriousness  of  the
    offence to describe it as Mr McMillan does as "out of character and  an
    aberration on his  behalf".   There  also  appears  to  be  a  lack  of
    development from Mr McMillan's statement at page 3 of the  report  that
    "the court may find some difficulty with this  scenario  [that  is  the
    appellant's explanation of how the offences came to be committed] as  I
    do myself".  In these circumstances it was open to the  judge  to  form
    the view that while not able to say whether or not the appellant  would
    actually commit further offences there was nonetheless a real risk that
    he would offend again such that he could properly be said to  represent
    a "genuine" and "present" threat of doing so.  In  these  circumstances
    as already noted above, it cannot in our judgment be said that  such  a
    threat is not sufficiently serious as to affect one of the  fundamental
    interests of society.

22. In our judgment having considered that this appellant did  represent  a
    genuine threat to one of the primary interests in the UK "which is  the
    prevention of crime" (as  the  judge  notes  at  paragraph  33  of  his
    determination)  the  judge  then  considered  all  the  other   aspects
    regarding this case including  what  ties  he  had  with  relatives  in
    Lithuania (which is noted at paragraph 31) and it was open  to  him  to
    conclude, having weighed up the various factors, that  the  removal  of
    this appellant now was entirely proportionate.  The factors  which  the
    judge needed to take into account were properly taken into account  and
    these are set out within the determination.  Although it is said on the
    appellant's behalf that the judge did not take account of evidence such
    as that given by his godmother, that he had little contact with anybody
    in Lithuania and that he was "responsible and diligent" and so  on,  it
    is quite clear that the judge  did  have  all  this  evidence  in  mind
    because it is set out in detail within the determination itself.

23. It follows that we are both entirely  satisfied  that  Judge  Nicholls'
    decision is properly reasoned and entirely sustainable  and  that  this
    decision contains no error of law.  This  appeal  must  accordingly  be
    dismissed.

Decision

There being no arguable error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge, this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 17 August 2015
