

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/01606/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   31.10.2014|
|on    27.10.2014                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |04.11.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                        Daniel Stephen CABRERA Torres
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Olanrewaju Oke  (counsel instructed by Universal)
For the respondent: Mr S Kandola

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Lawrence Lobo and a  lay  member),  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 30 May, to  a deportation appeal by a citizen of Ecuador, born
    22 October 1991. On 31 May 2011 he  was  found  guilty  by  a  jury  of
    robbery, and on 1 July that year sentenced to six years' detention in a
    young offenders' institution [YOI]. That sentence was later reduced  by
    the Court of Appeal to one of five years' detention; but the  judgment,
    giving reasons for that decision, was not produced by either side.

 2. Three young men were involved in the offence, of whom Castro  was  also
    found guilty of manslaughter. The sentencing judge, addressing  all  of
    them, said this: the victim

       ... was very drunk. You could see his condition on the  video  ...  I
       have no doubt that you regarded him as easy prey.  ...  you,  Castro,
       delivered a very heavy  punch  to  [the  victim]'s  face.  The  punch
       fractured his jaw and sent him on an a accelerated fall to the ground
       where his head struck the pavement. As a result of that fall the base
       of his skull was fractured and his brain was damaged. Within  moments
       of him hitting the ground, all three of you were upon him looking for
       what you might take from him. In fact, possibly the only  thing  that
       was taken was a mobile phone ...

 3. The judge found that the  injuries  the  victim  had  received  were  a
    substantial cause of his death, partly because they had contributed  to
    his failure to take the hydrocortisone on which he depended to  relieve
    the condition, possibly Addison's disease, from which he suffered.  The
    heavy punch landed on him had  not  been  necessary;  probably  a  mere
    threat of force would have enabled the robbery to be  carried  out.  As
    the judge had directed the jury, they would have had to  be  satisfied,
    before  finding  either  this  appellant,  or  the  other  young   man,
    Bustillos, guilty of robbery, that he had been aware of  Castro's  plan
    to use force on the victim before he landed the punch.

 4. The judge sentenced Castro, 20 at the time of the offence, and with one
    previous conviction for robbery, to ten years'  imprisonment  for  that
    and the manslaughter concurrently; Bustillos, 23 at the time, and  with
    three previous robberies, received seven for this one. The  judge  took
    full account, in all their cases, of the negligent treatment the victim
    had received in hospital; and, sentencing this appellant, still  19  at
    the time, and with no previous convictions at  all,  he  made  what  he
    described as "some further  distinction"  between  him  and  Bustillos,
    reducing his sentence to six. Perhaps the Court of Appeal thought  that
    was not enough difference: that of course is speculation, but certainly
    nothing else is apparent from the  judge's  remarks  which  could  have
    taken his final sentence down to five.

 5. The panel directed themselves in accordance with Masih  (deportation  -
    public interest - basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC) as to
    the sentencing judge's  remarks  being  the  starting-point  for  their
    consideration of the appellant's offence, and  its  effect  on  others.
    They also had in mind MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192,  which  they
    cited at some length in their paragraph 15, and at 16 noted  this  from
    paragraph 45 of the judgment

       ... the exceptional circumstances to be considered in  the  balancing
       exercise  involve  the  application  of  a  proportionality  test  as
       required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence.

 6. The panel had already pointed out at paragraph 14  the  need  for  such
    circumstances, if they were to allow the present  appeal.  However,  in
    their review of the law at 17 - 23, otherwise impeccable, they went  on
    to consider the nature of the balancing exercise in terms no  different
    from those which would have been appropriate before the 'new Rules' (in
    force from 9 July 2012) made it  necessary  for  cases  which  did  not
    satisfy them to show exceptional or compelling features, as set out  in
    MF (Nigeria).

 7. The 'new Rules' of course contained such  a  requirement  at  paragraph
    398: since this appellant had been sentenced to a term of at least four
    years (realistically, Mr Oke did not seek to make any  distinction  for
    this purpose between imprisonment and detention in a YOI), he could not
    benefit from the qualifications in paragraphs 399 or 399A. It  followed
    that, whether under the terms of paragraph 398 or the law as set out in
    MF (Nigeria),  this  appellant  needed  to  show  such  "...exceptional
    circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation   will   be
    outweighed by other factors."

 8. At paragraph 33, the panel set out at  (a)  -  (e)  the  usual  general
    considerations: at (f), they noted  the  factors  in  this  appellant's
    favour. Then, without further reference back to the sentencing  judge's
    remarks or the facts of the offence (though  they  had  said  something
    about the appellant's involvement in it at 32 (c) - (d)), they went  on
    to say this at 33 (g)

       The respondent has failed to persuade us that there are "very serious
       reasons" to justify the deportation of the appellant to Ecuador.

 9. The phrase quoted came of course from the well-known  decision  of  the
    European Court of Human Rights in Maslov v. Austria  -  1638/03  [2008]
    ECHR 546, which the panel had cited at paragraph 20. The need for  such
    reasons applied to this appellant because he was  a  'settled  migrant'
    who had lawfully spent all or most of his childhood and youth  in  this
    country, though he had not been a 'juvenile' in terms  of  the  age  of
    majority in this or most other European countries when he committed his
    offence.

10. The Upper Tribunal permission judge made this observation

       It may be that the judge [he meant of course the panel]  has  wrongly
       shifted the focus from  a  search  for  whether  the  appellant  [his
       emphasis] has identified the exceptional  circumstances  demanded  by
       paragraph 398 of the rules to an assessment of whether the respondent
        has identified the very serious reasons discussed in  Maslov  :  see
       now R (Akpinar) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 937.

11. Akpinar of course contains an exhaustive review, both of the  facts  of
    the two cases concerned, and of Maslov  and the rest  of  the  relevant
    jurisprudence. However, perhaps the most interesting part  for  present
    purposes comes at paragraphs  55  -  56,  where  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the application of the law to Akpinar's case.  He  was  even
    younger than this appellant, apparently not yet 18  when  he  committed
    the offence in question; but unlike him, he had a  substantial,  though
    not particularly serious record of  previous  offending.  Again  unlike
    him, however, he was sentenced to no more than  the  minimum  term,  12
    months' detention, entailing his  automatic  deportation.  It  followed
    that he could have benefited from the provisions of paragraph 399A  (b)
    of the Rules, if appropriate, which may have been one reason  why  (see
    next paragraph) the Court of Appeal referred  to  his  continuing  ties
    with Turkey.


12. At paragraph 55, the Court of Appeal (Sir Stanley  Burnton,  delivering
    the only reasoned  judgment)  referred  to  the  need  for  exceptional
    circumstances, and went on:

       The [First-tier] Tribunal found that  there  were  none,  and  in  my
       judgment there was ample material before them: the seriousness of the
       violent disorder offence, the lack of  remorse,  the  number  of  his
       offences, and his connections with Turkey and its  culture.  Applying
       the judgment of this Court in MF, I conclude that Mr Akpinar's appeal
       must fail.

13. At paragraph 56 Sir Stanley Burnton noted that the best point made  for
    Akpinar was that the First-tier Tribunal had  not  cited  the  relevant
    paragraph, 75, of Maslov, and had not expressly found that  there  were
    very strong reasons justifying his expulsion:

       ... however the Tribunal referred to "the Maslov principles" and must
       have  had  paragraph  75  in  mind.  In  any   event,   reading   the
       determination as a whole, it is clear that  the  Tribunal  considered
       all relevant factors and I think it did consider that there were very
       serious reasons in the context of his case to justify deportation.

14. Clearly Akpinar,  without  going  for  the  moment  into  the  relevant
    differences in the facts, was a case where the panel had gone  straight
    to consideration of the 'exceptional  circumstances'  question,  though
    without losing sight of the need for 'very serious reasons',  on  their
    assessment of the case as a whole. In the present case,  on  the  other
    hand, the panel stopped short at their finding that there were no 'very
    serious reasons', without going on to consider whether, in the  context
    of the case as a  whole,  there  were  'exceptional  circumstances'  to
    justify this appellant's not being deported. It is clear from  the  way
    in which the Court of Appeal dealt with Akpinar's case  that  this  was
    what they needed to do.

15. Realistically, Mr Oke accepted  that  the  facts  of  this  appellant's
    offence  were  capable  of  showing  'very  serious  reasons'  for  his
    deportation. If the panel had regarded the answer to that question as a
    step on the way to resolution  of  the  final  issue  before  them,  as
    opposed to the decisive point itself, as it is clear from Akpinar  that
    they should have done, then considering those facts,  they  might  well
    have taken the view that there was only one answer to it,  that  indeed
    there were 'very serious reasons' for the appellant's deportation.  The
    result is that the way in which  they  approached  their  decision  did
    indeed involve a material error of law, requiring  it  to  be  re-made,
    essentially for the reason given by the permission judge.

16. Both advocates were content for me to go ahead  and  do  this,  on  the
    basis of the panel's findings of fact. There was a good deal to be said
    in favour of this appellant, and  Mr  Oke  took  me,  with  commendable
    economy, through what the panel had said about  him.  At  paragraph  30
    they set out the  appellant's  family  and  individual  history;  after
    summing up their view of the law at 31, they went on at 32, noting

        a) the final sentence on appeal;
        b) his lack of previous convictions;
     c) Castro's causing the victim's  death,  together  with  the  medical
        treatment he had had, and what the sentencing judge had  recognised
        as the appellant's lower level of involvement;
     d) the appellant's remorse and awareness of the consequences  for  the
        victim's family;
     e) the low risk of his re-offending;
     f) his full co-operation with the Probation Service and pursuit of his
        own studies;
     g) his age when sentenced;
     h) his immigration history, going  back from his present age of 21  to
        his arrival here when he was ten, and his grant of indefinite leave
        to remain in 2009, covering the formative years of his life,  which
        he shared with his mother and three siblings;
     i) this being closer than normal, owing to their flight  from  Ecuador
        "because of the appellant's  father's  political  views";  but  his
        father had been sent back there in 2006, though later he  moved  to
        Italy, and since then they had had to get on here without him, with
        the appellant's mother speaking no English;
     j) the appellant's  having  no  friends  or  family  in  Ecuador,  not
        speaking fluent Spanish, though he could understand his mother; and
        finally
     k) his not having started a family life of his own.

17. These are all of course relevant factors in the balancing exercise, and
    the panel noted at 33 (a) - (e) that, though  the  appellant's  removal
    would infringe his right to family life in  terms  of  article  8,  the
    balance had to be struck between that  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    right and duty to protect its own citizens. Then  they  summed  up  the
    factors in the appellant's favour at (f), and, as already noted  at  8,
    went straight on at (g) to announce  their  finding  on  'very  serious
    reasons', which they then treated as conclusive  on  the  appeal  as  a
    whole.

18. This was where the panel  went  wrong,  and  I  have  to  consider  the
    balancing exercise, not only in terms of 'very serious reasons', but of
    whether, looking at all the factors as a whole, there were  exceptional
    circumstances justifying  this  appellant's  not  being  deported.  The
    factor which the panel clearly left out of their consideration of 'very
    serious reasons' involved the facts of the offence itself,  which  they
    had only touched on at paragraph 32 (c).

19. I need not repeat the sentencing judge's remarks, already set out at  2
    - 3, to show that this was a very serious offence indeed,  where  these
    three young men had acted in pursuit of a common plan to use  violence,
    whether necessary or not,  to  rob  a  relatively  helpless  victim  of
    whatever they might find on him. Apart from  the  important  fact  that
    only Castro was convicted of manslaughter, the only  differences  found
    by the sentencing judge (or, so far  as  can  be  seen,  the  Court  of
    Appeal) between this  appellant  and  the  others,  and  in  particular
    Bustillos, lay in his even  younger  age,  and  his  complete  lack  of
    previous convictions.

20. These factors were of course important too, and the judge made clear he
    had considered them. The passage in his remarks which  shows  just  how
    much weight he gave to them comes at pp 7 - 8 of the transcript. There,
    for reasons he gave, he  rejected  the  defence  submission  that  this
    should be dealt with, in terms of the sentencing guidelines, as a level
    1 robbery, and accepted those of the prosecution, to the effect that it
    was a level 3 case, involving the use of significant force, and causing
    serious injury, and normally leading to imprisonment for between  seven
    and 12 years. He also noted the victim's vulnerability, the  number  of
    those involved, and its happening at  night-time;  and,  on  the  other
    hand, the lack of proper medical treatment for the victim. All of  this
    resulted, for this appellant,  in  a  final  sentence  of  five  years'
    detention, a very serious one indeed  for  a  young  man  of  his  age,
    especially with no previous convictions.

21. While the panel were no doubt entitled to  accept  that  the  appellant
    sincerely regretted what he  had  done  (unlike  for  example  Akpinar,
    though his offence was much less serious), I have equally little  doubt
    in saying that the facts of his offence themselves  did  provide  'very
    serious reasons' why he should be deported. That is not of  course  the
    end of it, because I have also to consider the balancing exercise as  a
    whole. I have thought hard about all the factors in his favour, and  in
    particular the fact that the offence seems to have been very  much  out
    of character for him, coming from what is clearly a  good,  if  divided
    family, and with no previous convictions.

22. However, this was a very unpleasant offence indeed, and  the  appellant
    has to bear the full responsibility for his  own  part  in  it;  it  is
    hardly something to be written off as a mere  youthful  aberration.  It
    will be deeply unfortunate for him if he has  to  be  parted  from  his
    family members  in  this  country,  where  they  are  all  now  British
    citizens; but, according to his mother, it was because of  the  pending
    proceedings for this offence that he could not go through that  process
    too. It will also be unfortunate if he has to go to Ecuador, where  the
    panel found he would have no friends or relations, and cannot speak the
    language  fluently  any  more.  However,  he  clearly  has  enough   to
    understand his mother; Spanish is not a hard language at  all,  and  he
    grew up speaking nothing else till he was ten: it  should  not  be  too
    difficult for him to pick it up again.

23. Sometimes the consequences of crime must  be  deeply  unfortunate,  not
    only for the victim, as  here,  but  for  the  offender.  Despite  this
    appellant's previous good character, and good family, I cannot take the
    view,  on  the  facts  as  a  whole,  that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances justifying his not being deported.

Home Office appeal : decision re-made
Appeal against deportation dismissed
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
       03.11.2014


