
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01268/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination  Promulgated    |
|On 14th January 2015                          |On 11th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              disimua tukimona
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Phillips
    made following a hearing at Kingston on 1st October 2014.

 2. The Appellant appeals against the Respondent's  decision  of  29th  May
    2014 to make him the subject  of  a  deportation  order  by  virtue  of
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 3. The Appellant did not appear at the hearing.  The judge  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal and said that  there  was  no  explanation  for  his
    failure to attend.

 4. The Appellant challenges the judge's decision on the basis that he  was
    not given proper notice of hearing.

 5. As realistically  conceded  by  the  Respondent's  representative,  the
    hearing notice had gone to Maidstone Prison but, by  the  date  of  the
    notice, the Appellant had been transferred to a detention centre.

 6. Since the hearing notice went to the wrong address  and  the  Appellant
    did not in fact receive it, although this is a full  and  well-reasoned
    determination I am satisfied that it ought to be set aside.

 7. The appeal is therefore remitted to be heard before a  different  judge
    other than Judge Philips,  at  the  Taylor  House  Hearing  Centre.   I
    understand it will be listed for a CMR when a final hearing  date  will
    be fixed.



Signed        Date 14th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

