
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01803/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 28 May 2015                                |On 1 June 2015                |
|Oral judgment                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              Mr Maleko Bogondo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Mak of MKM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a decision  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, First-tier Judge Davidson, promulgated  on  27  January  2015
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 18 December 2014  in  which  the
    judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  order  for  his
    deportation from the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant was born on 1 January 1985  and  is  a  national  of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo. Before the judge he and the Secretary  of
    State were both represented, Mr Bogondo by Mr Mak,  who  has  helpfully
    appeared to assist the Tribunal this morning.

3.   The reason for the deportation order  was  the  appellant's  conviction
    and sentence on 30 April 2013 at the Crown Court at  Snaresbrook.   The
    judge in his sentencing remarks made the following comments:

         "Mr Bogondo you were found guilty by a jury of these  two  offences
         of sexual activity with a child.  They both took  place  on  9  May
         2012.  You in very serious breach of  trust  and  using  a  certain
         amount of deceit had sex with a girl who was 15 years and 7  months
         old at the flat of her aunt and uncle,  who  were  your  very  good
         friends.  And you had just had a child yourself, and as I say, used
         some deceit and very serious breach of trust to achieve that.

         You are charged first of all with Count 1 relates  to  having  full
         sexual intercourse with her.  Count 2 relates  to  penetrating  her
         vagina with your fingers, which happened before that.   So  far  as
         Count 2 is concerned she said in her interview with the police that
         she agreed to that.  She said she did not agree to Count 1,  but  I
         am not here sentencing you for rape.  You  were  not  charged  with
         that.  The jury did not consider it.  And in fact the only issue at
         trial was whether you knew that she was under 16 and the jury  were
         clearly satisfied you did, although you protested otherwise.

         The guidelines indicate that the right sentence  for  this  offence
         starts at four years' custody and the range is three to seven.   In
         your favour Mr Walker points out that  first  of  all  the  age  of
         consent in the Congo is apparently 14.  I am  afraid  that  has  no
         influence on me at all.  I am afraid you are taken to know the  law
         and I suspect you did perfectly well know the law,  that  you  have
         not to have sex with people under  16  in  this  country,  and  the
         issue, as I said, at trial was whether you knew she was  under  16.
         The only other point in your favour apart from the  fact  that  she
         agreed that the fingering was consensual  was  that  she  was  very
         nearly 16, as I say she was 15 years and 7 months, you were 26,  or
         25 at the time, which is also a relevant factor.

         It seems to me, taking all that into account, this is at the bottom
         of the sentencing range, but not below the bottom by any means, and
         the sentences I pass are three years on both counts concurrent."

4.   As  a  result  of  that  conviction  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
    deportation order pursuant to the provisions  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  An automatic deportation order.

5.   The judge in the determination notes the immigration history  including
    that relating to a previous asylum claim which was dismissed on appeal,
    an appeal that the appellant failed  to  attend,  and  that  he  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 9 December 2004.

6.   The judge sets out the correct burden and standard  of  proof  and  the
    documentation  considered.   Indeed  Mr  Mak  confirmed  in  his   oral
    submissions today that the  information  to  be  found  in  the  bundle
    submitted on the appellant's behalf was all that was being relied on by
    the appellant in relation to the  issues  in  the  appeal.   The  judge
    records that oral evidence was given both  by  the  appellant  and  his
    partner, who was cross-examined and re-examined, and  that  submissions
    were made.  Findings on credibility commence at  paragraph  16  of  the
    determination in which the  position  of  the  appellant,  his  various
    children, his partner Julia and others, together with the  core  points
    raised in evidence are set out and taken into account.

7.   There are two separate heads on which the appellant  sought  to  oppose
    his deportation.  The first related  to  the  protection  element.   In
    paragraph 38 of the determination the judge records that the  appellant
    still maintains that he should be granted asylum on the  basis  of  the
    claim he made twelve years ago.  The judge considered the evidence that
    was available then and made available at the hearing and noted what  he
    describes as a howling anomaly and implausibility  in  the  appellant's
    claim by reference to geographical points of location  referred  to  by
    the appellant in  the  DRC.   The  judge  found  that  his  account  of
    travelling from or between two points by boat and having passed through
    Inongo was totally implausible.  He dismissed the asylum claim  on  the
    basis of lack of credibility in the appellant's account.

8.   At paragraph 39 the judge records that the appellant  did  not  impress
    the trial judge at the criminal trial and did  not  impress  the  judge
    giving his evidence in relation to the deportation decision and in fact
    found the appellant to be dishonest, to  lack  credibility  and  to  be
    prepared to do and say whatever suited his ends.

9.   The findings in relation to the asylum appeal are  findings  that  have
    not been shown to be infected  by  any  material  error  of  law.   The
    Secretary of State did  raise  in  the  refusal  letter  the  issue  of
    exclusion by virtue of the provisions of Section 72,  which  the  judge
    does not appear to have dealt with specifically  in  these  paragraphs,
    but the fact that the judge did deal with  the  asylum  claim  suggests
    that either if the Section 72 certificate was upheld there would be  no
    Refugee Convention claim but if it was not such claim would fail in any
    event for the reason given.  It cannot be held that any error  made  is
    material to the decision in relation to this element.

10.  The second element of the protection claim related to  risk  on  return
    as a failed asylum seeker who is also  a  criminal  deportee.   Mr  Mak
    referred in general conversation to the fact that in a  different  case
    that he was involved in the panel in that case, having found  an  error
    of law, had adjourned the matter pending the  outcome  of  the  country
    guidance case on this specific point.  The Tribunal were advised  today
    that the case has been heard and the determination  is  awaited.   That
    matter was specifically listed as a result of the decision in the  High
    Court in P and R v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWHC 3879 which appeared to result in a finding that  a  normal  failed
    asylum seeker from the United Kingdom was at no risk on return  to  the
    DRC but if that failed asylum seeker then committed a criminal  offence
    and was imprisoned and deported, as a result of that  and  that  matter
    only, he would face  a  real  risk  sufficient  to  engage  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Article 3.  That decision was  appealed  to
    the Court of Appeal although the documents before  this  Tribunal  from
    the respondent indicate that that appeal has in fact been withdrawn for
    reasons that will be known to the  Secretary  of  State  but  not  this
    Tribunal.  But the judge had before him far more than the transcript of
    the judgment in P and R in that  what  the  judge  had  was  additional
    information that had been referred to in paragraphs 141 and 142 of  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter which updated  the  situation  and  included
    confirmation from the Director General of Migration  of  the  DRC  that
    they had no interest in returning foreign nationals  or  failed  asylum
    seekers unless there are criminal matters outstanding in  the  DRC.  In
    this case there was no evidence before the judge that there was.

11.  A decision of the High Court is not binding upon any Tribunal or  court
    below.  The position in relation to High Court judgments is  that  they
    are persuasive and no more.   The  judge  clearly  considered  all  the
    evidence made available with the required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny
    and clearly concluded that greater weight  could  be  attached  to  the
    information that was provided  and  referred  to  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  The judge clearly found that there was no real risk to
    the appellant being returned sufficient  to  engage  either  his  claim
    under the Refugee Convention or Articles 2 or 3 on  the  basis  of  the
    information before him.  It has not been established that in  doing  so
    the judge made any error of law material to that decision.  The  weight
    to be given to the evidence was a matter for the judge and the relevant
    evidence was clearly considered.

12.  The second ground on which  deportation  was  opposed  related  to  the
    appellant's partner and his children's human rights.   Details  of  the
    various children fathered by the appellant appear at  paragraph  16  of
    the determination as well as the partners or women with whom he had had
    various relationships.

13.  The starting point at paragraph 42 in  relation  to  the  human  rights
    assessment by the judge gives rise to the grounds  pleaded  by  Mr  Mak
    that the judge made an error of law.  In this respect  Mr  Mak  may  be
    arguably correct.  This is a deportation appeal in  relation  to  which
    post 28 July 2014 the judge was required to apply in the first instance
    the Immigration Rules set out at A398 to 399B where applicable  as  the
    first stage of his assessment process.  The relevance of that date  was
    established recently by the Court of  Appeal  in  YM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 where a failure of the judge to have  taken  those
    provisions into account was found to amount to a material error and  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and case law  that  has  followed
    thereafter is authority for the proposition that the Immigration  Rules
    are a complete code and that they are therefore the starting  point  in
    relation to any assessment of an Article 8 claim opposing a deportation
    order.  Indeed in LC (China) [2014] EWCA Civ 1310 it was  held  by  the
    Court of Appeal that the starting point for any such assessment was the
    recognition that the public interest in deporting  a  foreign  criminal
    was so great  that  only  in  exceptional  circumstances  would  it  be
    outweighed by other factors, including the effect of deportation on any
    children.  In McLarty [2014] UKUT 315 (IAC) it was held that there  was
    little doubt that, in enacting the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,  Parliament
    views the object of deporting those with a criminal record  as  a  very
    strong policy, which is constant in all cases,  with  reference  to  SS
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.

14.  The judge erred therefore in stating in the first line of paragraph  42
    that when considering the question of whether the deportation would  be
    an unlawful breach it was necessary to consider Article 8 ECHR.  As the
    Rules are a complete code there should be no need  in  other  than  the
    most exceptional circumstances, of which this case is not  one,  for  a
    judge to be required to consider Article 8 outside  the  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The importance of the judge applying the  Rules
    as they stand  from  28  July  2014  is  also  that  those  Rules  were
    themselves amended to incorporate the changes brought into force by the
    Immigration Act 2014 and the provisions that now appear in Section  117
    of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   As  those
    provisions have been included it reinforces  the  argument  that  those
    Rules form a complete code.

15.  If one looks at the factual  findings  made  by  the  judge  the  judge
    comments upon the nature of the relationship between the appellant  and
    the children including a claim that he sees Jamal aged 9 in the  school
    holidays  and  weekends  although  the  judge  stated  that   was   not
    corroborated.  The judge makes various comments upon the suitability of
    the appellant as a good father and a role model but then  in  paragraph
    51 does specifically mention the criteria in Rule 399.

16.  The judge in paragraph 51 makes the following finding:

         "In the  normal  course  of  things,  in  a  non-deport  case,  the
         appellant would probably have persuaded  me  that  it  would  be  a
         disproportionate interference with his  family  life,  particularly
         with his children, but in this case, bearing in  mind  his  history
         while in the UK, and particularly his offending, and  the  judgment
         of Lord Justice Richards in JO and JT, cited above in  relation  to
         deport cases, I find  that  it  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with his family life if he were to be deported."

    That suggests therefore that notwithstanding the fact  that  the  judge
    embarked on the exercise on the wrong foot when considering it  appears
    Article 8 first and foremost, the judge did recover his stance somewhat
    by considering the Immigration Rules and paragraph 399.

17.  The Immigration Rules in their current  form  do  provide  guidance  in
    relation to the issues that  this  appeal  actually  turns  upon.   The
    appellant was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  four
    years but at least twelve months as recognised  in  398(b).   Paragraph
    399 therefore applies and sets out various criteria that the judge  was
    required to look at to establish whether the appellant had made out  or
    discharged the burden of proof upon him to show that he  could  satisfy
    the requirements of the Rules.  These include that the appellant has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a child under the age
    of 18 years who is in the United Kingdom and the  child  is  a  British
    citizen or the child has lived continuously in the UK for at least  the
    seven years immediately preceding the date of the immigration  decision
    and in either case, and I stress the word "and" in this respect,

    (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the  country  to
         which the person is to be deported; and

    (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without
         the person who is to be deported.

18.  Stopping at that point and focusing upon the children, the children  in
    the United Kingdom have been cared for within the  family  unit  which,
    when the appellant was not in prison, was composed  of  Julia  and  the
    appellant.  Indeed the judge notes in paragraph 50 that the family life
    involved considering that of his current partner  and  three  children.
    There are no  concerns  regarding  Julia's  ability  to  care  for  the
    children or indeed  any  of  the  mothers'  ability  to  care  for  the
    appellant's children and before the judge was  a  letter  from  Waltham
    Forest Safeguarding and Family Support Unit confirming that in  respect
    of the child Esther the legal department had undertaken  and  completed
    an assessment on the above child  and  that  their  investigations  had
    found no concerns of a child protection nature.  Then, of course,  what
    the local authority were doing was looking at the  statutory  level  of
    child  protection  intervention  but  during   the   process   of   the
    investigation and outcome it is clear that the mother of  the  children
    and Julia in particular has demonstrated her ability to  care  for  the
    children and to meet their emotional,  physical  and  practical  needs.
    That must have been particularly so since 2012 because if the appellant
    was imprisoned in 2012 and remains in detention at  the  date  of  this
    hearing in 2015 she has effectively had the  role  and  obligation  and
    duties of a single parent for her children throughout all  that  period
    of time.

19.  The judge looked at Section 55 and the best interests of  the  children
    at paragraphs 53 and 54.  The judge noted that it was  highly  unlikely
    that the children and Julia would join the appellant in the  Congo  and
    so it appears that this was either a case in which the family were  not
    going to go because they did not want to go or because there were  good
    reasons why they should not be expected to go.  In this  respect  Julia
    in her statement refers to her own  experiences  in  the  DRC  and  the
    reasons why she maintains she would be unable  to  return.   The  judge
    appears to have accepted it would be harsh for the children  to  return
    to the DRC and was clearly viewing the matter on the basis that this is
    a family separation case.  The judge notes that  as  British  nationals
    the children have a right to remain in the United Kingdom  and  it  has
    not been argued there is a Zambrano point  before  the  judge  as  that
    obviously does not arise if the children remain in the  United  Kingdom
    with their mother or their mother decides voluntarily to take  them  to
    the Congo to join the appellant if he is deported.

20.  What the judge found in relation to the children was  that  the  public
    interest  in  maintaining  immigration  control,  as  deportation   was
    conducive to the public good, outweighed the paramount interests of the
    children in this case.   The conclusion that the paramount interests of
    the children in the case are outweighed must infer a  specific  finding
    by the judge that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant.

21.  We spent a  lot  of  time  in  the  early  parts  of  this  hearing  in
    conversation with Mr Mak about the term unduly harsh and  what  factors
    were before the judge to establish or to make out  the  claim  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for  the  children  to  have  to  remain  if  the
    appellant was deported.  The Oxford English Dictionary defines "unduly"
    as "excessively" and "harsh" as "severe, cruel". Mr Mak referred  to  a
    number of practical issues, namely the fact that the children would  be
    without the father, he would not be in the family  unit,  he  would  be
    away from the United Kingdom for a  long  time  possibly  for  all  the
    children's childhood, and effectively the loss of a  father  figure  as
    they developed.  While that may be harsh,  and  if  one  looks  at  the
    respondent's guidance in relation to the interpretation of unduly harsh
    there are some very useful examples set out as to what  are  considered
    harsh and the interpretation of the term 'unduly', the  fact  that  the
    family would be separated does not per  so  satisfy  this  requirement.
    Lord Justice Sedley in the case of Lee v Secretary of  State  commented
    upon the fact that the separation of a family or a parent from a  child
    was the impact of a deportation, that is the effect of deportation.

22.  The IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in  Article  8  ECHR  Cases
    V5.0 (28 July 2014) in relation to this element states:

         2.5.3 The effect of  deportation  on  a  qualifying  partner  or  a
             qualifying child must be considered  in  the  context  of  the
             foreign  criminal's  immigration  and  criminal  history.  The
             greater the public interest in deportation, the  stronger  the
             countervailing factors need to be to succeed.  The  impact  of
             deportation on a partner or child  can  be  harsh,  even  very
             harsh, without being unduly harsh, depending on the extent  of
             the public interest in deportation  and  of  the  family  life
             affected.

         2.5.4 For example, it will usually be more difficult for a  foreign
             criminal who has been sentenced more than once to a period  of
             imprisonment of at least 12 months but less than four years to
             demonstrate that the effect of  deportation  would  be  unduly
             harsh than for a foreign criminal who has been convicted of  a
             single offence, because repeat offending increases the  public
             interest in deportation and so requires a  stronger  claim  to
             respect for family life in order to outweigh it.

         2.5.5 It will usually be more difficult for a foreign  criminal  to
             show that the effect of  deportation  on  a  partner  will  be
             unduly harsh if the relationship was formed while the  foreign
             criminal  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  or   with   precarious
             immigration status  because  his  family  life  will  be  less
             capable of outweighing     the public interest than if he  was
             in the UK with lawful, settled immigration status.

         2.5.7 Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act states  that  it  is  in  the
             public interest that those who seek to remain in  the  UK  are
             financially  independent.  If  a   foreign   criminal   cannot
             demonstrate that he is financially  independent,  it  will  be
             more difficult for him to show that the effect of  deportation
             on his qualifying partner or qualifying child will  be  unduly
             harsh. Financial independence here means not being a burden on
             the taxpayer. It includes not having access to  income-related
             benefits  or  tax  credits,  on  the  basis  of  the   foreign
             criminal's income or savings or those of his partner, but  not
             those of a third  party.  There  is  no  prescribed  financial
             threshold which must be met and no prescribed  evidence  which
             must  be  submitted.  Decision-makers  should   consider   all
             available information, though less weight  will  be  given  to
             claims unsubstantiated by original, independent and verifiable
             documentary evidence,  e.g.  from  an  employer  or  regulated
             financial institution.

23.  The use of  the  term  'unduly'  is  very  important  because  'unduly'
    suggests that all factors have to be taken into  account  and  then  it
    weighed up to establish whether the consequences even if they are harsh
    or very harsh are unduly harsh.  That is the incorporation of the  need
    in Section 117 for the judge to undertake, in any  event,  a  balancing
    assessment of all relevant factors.  The judge clearly did that, albeit
    not referring to the specific phraseology of the Immigration Rules  and
    it cannot be found on the basis of the evidence  that  was  before  the
    judge that the conclusion it had not been  shown  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to remain in the caring environment  with  their
    mum in the United Kingdom meant that it was unduly harsh  for  them  to
    remain without the appellant.

23.  The information provided is itself somewhat limited,  being  restricted
    to a witness statement from the appellant,  a  witness  statement  from
    Julia and the birth certificates of the appellant's children.   Mr  Mak
    confirmed that the judge had before  him  all  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant wished to rely upon at the hearing and so I need say no  more
    other than that was the material the judge was asked to  consider,  the
    judge did consider it, and the judge made a decision  weighing  up  the
    nature of the offending, a very serious  sexual  offence,  against  the
    grounds that were put forward and found that they did  not  enable  the
    appellant to succeed in relation to paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b).

24.  The second element related to Julia  herself.   Paragraph  399(a)(i)(b)
    states that if a person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    a partner who is in the United Kingdom and  is  a  British  citizen  or
    settled in the United Kingdom and (iii) it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    that partner to remain in the United Kingdom without the person who  is
    to be deported, that may have been an additional  ground  available  to
    the appellant to succeed.  However, the material  falls  far  short  of
    establishing that the required test of unduly harsh effect  upon  Julia
    would be met.  I do not minimise the impact of removing a father figure
    from the home, and Mr Mak's submissions were in reality a plea from the
    heart in relation to the practical impact of doing that where  children
    of any age are involved or where an adult relationship exists.   It  is
    accepted that there will be emotional  consequences.   It  is  accepted
    there would be a period of readjustment for Julia as well  as  for  the
    children.  It is accepted that the children may at  some  point  become
    angry and cross and feel they have been betrayed.  It may be that Julia
    will have the difficult task of having to explain  to  them  why  their
    father has been removed from the United Kingdom  by  reference  to  his
    conduct and his criminal behaviour.

25.  What has not  been  established  on  the  evidence  is  that  Julia  is
    incapable of meeting the requirements and obligations as a parent,  she
    appears to have done so very well to her credit to date, or that any of
    the children would be severely affected.  It has not  been  established
    on the evidence that the impact on the  children  would  be  such  that
    there may be or will be or is a real possibility of  serious  long-term
    consequences for them.  It has not been  established  on  the  evidence
    that if such consequences possibly arose or are likely  to  arise  that
    there would be inadequate support from Social Services  who  have  been
    involved with the family, the GP, the school or any other  professional
    body within the United Kingdom sufficient to ensure that the children's
    needs are met and that they are assisted through what may be seen as  a
    difficult period for them.

26.  The simple matter in this case,  however  tragic  it  may  be  for  the
    family members who remain in the United Kingdom, is that  the  evidence
    provided to the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not establish  the
    existence of unduly harsh consequences for either the children,  Julia,
    or any partner, if the appellant is deported and they have to remain in
    the United Kingdom without him.

27.  The appellant had therefore failed to  discharge  the  obligation  upon
    him to show that he was able to succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Immigration Rules are a complete code and therefore  the  judge  in
    dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds, albeit that he  purports
    to do it under Articles 2, 3 and 8 rather than the  Immigration  Rules,
    is not a decision that is materially affected by what  appears  on  the
    face of it to be the structural error in relation to the approach taken
    by the judge to the Article 8 assessment.

28.  For those reasons I find that any legal error that the judge  may  have
    made in approaching this appeal as illustrated by Mr Mak in the grounds
    in relation to Article 8 is not material to the decision to dismiss the
    appeal.  On the basis of the conviction and the evidence  available  it
    is hard to see that the judge could have made  any  other  decision  in
    relation to the Article 8 elements of the claim under  the  Immigration
    Rules and for that reason the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 29th May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

