
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01906/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HOLROYDE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                             Mr Shahjahan Afzal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 8 October 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    decided to deport Mr Shahjahan Afzal following his  earlier  conviction
    and sentence for serious criminal offences.  Mr Afzal appealed  against
    that decision.  On 13 April 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Woodcraft
    dismissed the appeal.

 2. Mr Afzal  now  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  pursuant  to  limited
    permission granted on 14 July 2015.  This is the decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal upon hearing the appeal.

 3. Summarising the relevant history very briefly,  Mr  Afzal  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 14 September 2005.   He  entered  lawfully  but  then
    overstayed.  His visa expired on 6 January 2006.  In the  period  since
    then, nearly a decade, he has had  no  entitlement  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  On 30 August 2013 in the  Crown  Court  at  Harrow  Mr
    Afzal pleaded guilty to serious offences  involving  deception  of  the
    immigration authorities.  He was sentenced, having  been  given  credit
    for his guilty pleas, to  a  total  of  thirteen  and  a  half  months'
    imprisonment.  The learned  judge  who  sentenced  him  summarised  the
    position by saying: "The plain fact is that you were able  to  live  in
    this country with  your  family  by  a  series  of  deceptions  on  the
    immigration   authorities".    The   deceptions   related   to    false
    documentation about purported academic study, false documents  relating
    to a sham marriage and false documents relating to children.

 4. Mr Afzal's wife was convicted after trial of similar offences.  She too
    received a total sentence of thirteen and a half months'  imprisonment.
    She had pleaded not guilty and therefore could receive no credit for  a
    guilty plea.  On the other hand she had particular personal  mitigation
    relating to the fact that she had suffered violence from  Mr  Afzal  in
    the course of the marriage.

 5. As a result of his convictions and sentence Mr Afzal became  a  foreign
    criminal within the meaning of the legislation and liable for automatic
    deportation.  By Section 32 of the United Kingdom Borders Act 2007  the
    Secretary of State was required to make a deportation order unless  one
    of the exceptions in  Section  33  applied.   In  this  case  Mr  Afzal
    particularly relied upon  the  exception  in  Section  33(2)  that  his
    removal from the country would breach "a person's Convention rights".

 6. By Section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the
    Secretary of State was obliged to have regard to the considerations  in
    Sections 117B  and  117C.   It  is  not  necessary  to  set  out  those
    provisions in this judgment.

 7. On 8 October 2014 the Secretary of  State  notified  Mr  Afzal  of  her
    decision to deport him.  Her reasons  were  set  out  in  detail  in  a
    lengthy letter.  Mr  Afzal  appealed  against  that  decision  and  his
    solicitors prepared a substantial bundle of documents.  The appeal  was
    listed for hearing on 4 December 2014.

 8. About two weeks before that date Mr Afzal's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal saying that they had issued proceedings in  the  family  court
    seeking a child arrangement order and a residence order in  respect  of
    Mr Afzal's three children then aged 16,  13  and  12.   The  solicitors
    indicated that there was likely to be a hearing  in  about  mid-January
    2015 and submitted that the appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    order should await that hearing.  The listing of the  appeal  was  then
    adjourned.  A case  management  hearing  was  held  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 8 December 2014.  By that stage no response  had  yet  been
    received from the family court.

 9. The final hearing of the appeal was  on  that  occasion  listed  for  4
    February 2015.  On that date Mr  Afzal  and  a  number  of  prospective
    witnesses attended.  The appeal did  not,  however,  proceed,  for  two
    reasons.  First, it was said that Mr Afzal had  not  yet  received  the
    Secretary of State's bundle of  documents.   Secondly,  the  judge  was
    informed that a further hearing in the family court had been fixed  for
    16 March 2015.  We have had the advantage that the  submissions  before
    us today on behalf of Mr Afzal have been made by Counsel Mr Ahmed,  who
    was present at the hearing on 4 February 2015.  He has told us - and we
    of course accept from him - that at that hearing he  was  able  to  put
    before the judge, First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft, his  draft  copy
    of what had in fact by then become an order of the family court made on
    29 January 2015.  That order was an interim order  subject  to  further
    consideration once Cafcass had completed certain  necessary  enquiries.
    It recorded, however, that the family court in principle approved child
    arrangements which included the  three  children  residing  with  their
    father every weekend during the school term and for half of each school
    holiday.  In addition there was provision for the children to stay with
    their father overnight  on  a  Wednesday  once  every  four  weeks  and
    provision for telephone communication at other specified times.

10. The outcome of the hearing of 4 February 2015 was that the  matter  was
    adjourned to be relisted before the same judge on 13  March  2015.   Mr
    Ahmed tells us, and again of course we accept from him, that it was  by
    then known that the family court would be considering final approval of
    the interim arrangements order on 16 March.   Unsurprisingly  therefore
    the question arose of whether the hearing  of  this  appeal  should  be
    adjourned for a somewhat longer period so  that  it  would  take  place
    after the family court had made its final adjudication.

11. Mr Ahmed tells us that on that occasion  the  judge  did  not  find  it
    necessary to adjourn to a date later than he did, because he  had  seen
    the terms of the draft of the January interim order and  had  indicated
    that that would provide a basis for him  to  consider  the  extent  and
    quality of Mr Afzal's relationship with his children.

12. So it was that the hearing of the appeal was adjourned until  13  March
    2015.  The day before that hearing, on 12 March, Mr Afzal's  solicitors
    again wrote to the Tribunal requesting an adjournment.  They did so  on
    the basis that Mr Afzal had the misfortune to be unwell with  gout  and
    would be unable to attend.  No request was made for an adjournment on a
    ground relating to the date of the hearing in  the  family  court.   Mr
    Ahmed indicates that was because of the indication which had been given
    by the judge at the February hearing.

13. Judge Woodcraft rejected the application for an adjournment on  medical
    grounds.  He was in our judgment plainly right to do so.  The  evidence
    put before him comprised a letter from Mr Afzal's general  practitioner
    which did not say that Mr Afzal was unfit to attend.

14. So the application for an adjournment was refused and the  matter  came
    on for the hearing of the appeal on the following day,  13  March.   Mr
    Afzal was not present.  More than that, his witnesses were not  present
    either because they had been stood down.  Counsel other than  Mr  Ahmed
    attended but indicated that his primary instructions  were  limited  to
    applying for an adjournment and that he would be handicapped in dealing
    fully with other issues.  Counsel did apply for the  adjournment.   The
    judge refused it.  The hearing then proceeded by way of submissions and
    the  documents  before  the  Tribunal.   Those  documents  included   a
    statement from Mr Afzal in which he referred to the order of the family
    court in January but surprisingly neither quoted its  terms  accurately
    nor produced a copy of that order itself.

15. In the course of his judgment the judge summarised the  submissions  on
    either side.  He referred to the evidence in the statement provided  by
    Mr Afzal.  He indicated,  rightly,  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children were a primary though not paramount concern for the  Tribunal.
    He concluded that as the children had refugee status as a result of the
    successful claim by their mother  that  she  had  been  the  victim  of
    domestic violence at the hands of their father, it would therefore  not
    be reasonable and indeed would be unduly harsh to expect  the  children
    to travel with Mr Afzal to Pakistan.  The judge continued:

         "The question however is whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the
         children  to  remain  behind  in  the  United  Kingdom  whilst  the
         appellant is deported to Pakistan.  That requires an examination of
         the relationship between the appellant and the children."

16. The judge then proceeded in particular in paragraphs 37 and 38  of  his
    judgment to conduct an examination of that relationship.  Unfortunately
    it would appear that in doing so he overlooked the evidence  which  was
    already before him as to the proceedings in, and interim order made by,
    the family court.  It is perhaps understandable how the judge  came  to
    fall into that error.  As we have indicated, Mr Afzal's  own  statement
    did not quote the terms of the order  with  any  precision;  the  order
    itself does not appear at any stage to have been put before the  court;
    the court file does not contain any copy of the draft document which Mr
    Ahmed says he had shown to the judge at the February hearing;  and  the
    request made only the previous day for an adjournment of the hearing of
    the appeal had not made any reference to the imminent  hearing  in  the
    family court.  In all those circumstances we can, as we say, see how it
    may have come about that the judge overlooked what  he  had  previously
    been told.

17. Be that as it may, the judge in his  judgment  described  Mr  Afzal  as
    having "a limited form of contact with his children".  He noted from  a
    letter of support written by Mr Afzal's  wife  that  contact  with  the
    children had not apparently been denied.  The judge  continued:  "There
    is no evidence that the appellant has in fact issued proceedings in the
    Family Court for an order."  He noted as significant the fact that  the
    very recent application  for  an  adjournment  had  not  mentioned  the
    pending hearing before the family court.  He continued:

         "In those circumstances I reject the argument  that  the  appellant
         would need to  remain  in  this  country  to  pursue  family  court
         proceedings as it does not appear that they are  in  existence,  if
         they are their institution would appear to be quite unnecessary and
         merely a device to delay the appellant's deportation."

18. The judge went on in his judgment to refer to the  appellant  Mr  Afzal
    himself being responsible for the recent  restriction  on  his  contact
    with the children due to his imprisonment.  He continued:

         "It is evidently not in the best interests  of  the  children  that
         they should reside with the appellant and no-one suggests that they
         should.  There is  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  has
         increased  his  interest  in  the  contact  arrangements  with   an
         awareness that the deportation proceedings  are  pending.   However
         the key issue is what is in the best interests of the children  and
         the best interests are that they should continue to be looked after
         by their mother the appellant's estranged wife.  To the extent that
         their best interests would include maintaining a relationship  with
         their father, this would in my view be  outweighed  by  the  public
         interest in  the  appellant's  deportation  in  the  light  of  his
         conviction for serious immigration offences."

19. An initial ground of appeal against  the  judgment  based  on  wrongful
    refusal of the adjournment  was  rejected  by  the  judge  who  granted
    permission and that has  not  been  further  pursued.   Permission  was
    granted on the limited basis  that  there  was  an  arguable  issue  in
    respect of the family proceedings, which was of arguable  relevance  in
    respect of the best interests of the children and the implications  for
    them of Mr Afzal's removal from the United Kingdom.

20.  Pursuing  that  ground  of  appeal  Mr  Ahmed  submits  that  in   the
    circumstances which we have summarised the judge simply  overlooked  an
    important  aspect  of  the  potentially  relevant  evidence  and   that
    accordingly his assessment of  the  true  nature  of  the  relationship
    between Mr Afzal and his children was inevitably flawed.

21. Ms Everett on behalf of the Secretary of State accepts that it  appears
    that the judge may have overlooked at least part of the evidence  which
    was already before him.  She submits, however, that when  his  judgment
    as a whole  is  considered  this  Tribunal  should  conclude  that  his
    decision would have been the same even if the full terms of  the  court
    order had been before him.

22. She further submits that the factors which the judge  appears  to  have
    regarded as somewhat suspicious, for example as to the  genuineness  or
    otherwise of Mr Afzal's recent desire for increased  contact  with  his
    children, are matters which would have carried equal force even if  the
    family court order had been available in its precise terms.  In  short,
    she submits, whatever error may have been made by  the  judge  made  no
    difference to the outcome of the hearing because a  full  knowledge  of
    the family court proceedings  would  not  have  put  Mr  Afzal  in  any
    stronger position than the judge found him to be.

23. We have considered those competing submissions.  We remind ourselves of
    that part of the judgment below which we  have  already  quoted:  "that
    requires an examination of the relationship between the  appellant  and
    the children".  It is very regrettable that a situation arose in  which
    the judge appears to have overlooked, and  appears  not  to  have  been
    reminded of, the full detail  as  it  was  then  known  of  the  family
    proceedings; but whatever the explanation for  that  unhappy  situation
    may be, the end result is that the judge did not  hear  or  consider  a
    full account of the arrangements for Mr Afzal to have the children  not
    merely in contact with him but also residing with him  for  significant
    proportions of their lives.  Nor did the judge  proceed  on  the  basis
    that the arrangements for residence and contact were exactly as they in
    fact were pursuant to the family court order.

24. It seems to us that in those circumstances there has  been  a  material
    error, for the judge has made his decision without taking into  account
    the full detail of evidence which he may have  found  relevant  to  his
    final determination.

25. In those circumstances it seems to us that his decision  cannot  stand.
    It must be set aside on the grounds of a material error as to  evidence
    which may have been of significance.

26. We have considered how best to resolve matters once the decision  below
    is set aside.  In the majority of cases the Upper Tribunal when setting
    aside the decision will be able to remake the relevant decision itself.
     However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 7.2 recognises that it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a) The effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

27. In our judgment this case falls within that category.  The points  made
    by Ms Everett are of course points which will need to be considered  at
    the rehearing before a different Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  but
    we are satisfied that there must be a rehearing.

Notice of Decision

For those reasons the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
making of an error on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  We
set it aside in its entirety. We remit this case to the First-tier  Tribunal
for a hearing of Mr Afzal's appeal against the deportation decision  on  the
merits on all issues by a judge other than Designated Judge  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Woodcraft.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. No application  was
made to the Upper Tribunal for an anonymity order.


Signed   Date

Mr Justice Holroyde
