
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01880/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR BAbIHARAN BALAMURALI
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bramall, Counsel, instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For the purposes of this determination, we shall refer to  the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  (FTT):  the  Secretary  of
    State is therefore the Respondent, and Mr Balamurali is the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  FTT  Judge
    Pedro,  promulgated  on  26  March  2015,  in  which  he  allowed   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision, dated  6  October
    2014, to remove him from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  Regulation
    19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    (the Regulations).

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 14 April 2015
    by FTT Judge Grant-Hutchinson.

Background to the Appellant's case

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of Norway, born on 15 April 1992. He came to
    the United Kingdom in June 2006 with  his  family,  consisting  of  his
    parents, brother and sister. On 4 January 2007  the  Respondent  issued
    the Appellant with a registration certificate under  Regulation  16  of
    the Regulations, on the basis that he was a dependent of his father.

 5. On 21 March 2014 the Appellant was convicted at Kingston Crown Court of
    six offences relating to theft and one of possession  of  a  controlled
    article  for  use  in  fraud.  He  received   sentences   of   one-year
    imprisonment for each offence, all to run concurrently. On 7 July  2014
    the Appellant was convicted at South West London Magistrates' Court  of
    being drunk and disorderly, and was fined. Then, on 17 July  2014,  the
    Appellant  was  convicted  at  Central  London  Magistrates'  Court  of
    possession of a controlled article for use in fraud and  theft  from  a
    meter,  and  he  was  sentenced  to  twelve  and  twenty   four   weeks
    imprisonment for the respective offences, to run concurrently.

 6. As a result of the Appellant's offending (in particular the convictions
    on 21 March) the Respondent instigated action to remove  the  Appellant
    from the United Kingdom on the grounds of public policy. The  Appellant
    duly completed a questionnaire (ICD.0350) in which  he  set  out  basic
    personal details and his circumstances in this country.

 7. On 6 October 2014 the Respondent made a decision under the  Regulations
    to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

The Respondent's decision

 8. The notice of decision refers to the Appellant's convictions for  which
    he was sentenced  to  a  year's  imprisonment  (although  the  date  is
    misstated as being 9 March 2013). It is said that the Appellant posed a
    sufficiently serious threat to the interests of public policy that  his
    removal from the United Kingdom was justified under Regulation 19(3)(b)
    of the Regulations, with reference to Regulation 21.

 9. The Respondent's reasons for  her  decision  are  expanded  upon  in  a
    detailed letter, dated 16 October 2014. The  relevant  aspects  of  the
    Regulations are set out and considered  in  light  of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances. Sentencing remarks and information contained in NOMS and
    OASys reports is referred to. The Respondent took account not  only  of
    the convictions, but also alleged connections to gangs. It is concluded
    that the Appellant posed a real threat to the public, and that  he  had
    not made progress in terms of rehabilitation. It is also said that  the
    Appellant had not acquired a permanent right of residence in the United
    Kingdom.  Even  if  he  had  done,  this  made  no  difference  to  the
    Respondent's ultimate conclusion.

10. As to Article 8, the letter makes several references to  the  Appellant
    having no children or partner. It  appears  to  be  accepted  that  his
    parents reside in the United Kingdom. There is no  express  mention  of
    the Appellant's brother or sister. The Respondent utilises Part  5A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  Paragraphs  A398-
    399D of the Immigration Rules as a guide for assessing  the  Article  8
    claim. It is concluded that the Appellant's removal  would  not  breach
    either private or family life (in fact, there is said to be  no  family
    life in the first place).

11. The Appellant appealed to the FTT.

The history of the appeal before the FTT

12. Following lodgement of the appeal a CMR was conducted.  The  Respondent
    sought to rely on evidence of misconduct by the Appellant not involving
    convictions. The appeal became what is referred to as  a  'NEXUS'  case
    (this being the name of the operation conducted by the  Respondent  and
    Metropolitan Police into the activities of foreign nationals thought to
    be a risk to the public by virtue of their associations).

13. The appeal then came before FTT Judge Adio  on  11  February  2015.  He
    adjourned the case on the basis that the Appellant had had insufficient
    opportunity to see additional evidence submitted by the  Respondent  as
    to alleged gang associations.

14. The appeal came before FTT Judge Pedro on 13 March 2015.

The decision of FTT Judge Pedro

15. At paragraph 3 of his decision, FTT Judge Pedro records  a  preliminary
    issue that was raised  at  the  hearing.  The  Respondent's  notice  of
    decision and detailed reasons letter made no reference to section 55 of
    the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  (section  55),
    notwithstanding the claimed family life between the Appellant  and  his
    immediate family, and in particular, his twelve year  old  sister.  The
    Judge records that the claimed family life  had  been  brought  to  the
    Respondent's attention prior to the decision  being  taken.  He  states
    that the Respondent's decision did not consider  the  section  55  duty
    either in form or substance.

16. In paragraph 4 the Judge refers to JO  and  Others  (section  55  duty)
    [2014] UKUT 517 (IAC) and goes on to allow the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    the limited basis that the Respondent's decision was not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law.

17. An issue relating to whether the  Appellant  had  in  fact  acquired  a
    permanent  right  of  residence  under   the   Regulations   was   left
    undetermined as this matter could be considered by the Respondent  when
    making a fresh decision on the case.

The Respondent's grounds of appeal

18. Ground 1 asserts that FTT Judge Pedro erred in failing to give  any  or
    any adequate reasons for why he was allowing the appeal on the basis he
    did. It is said that there was no reference by the  Judge  as  to  what
    evidence he relied on when stating that the Respondent was aware of the
    claimed family life. There is no explanation as to why he  reached  his
    conclusion that the Respondent's decision was unlawful.

19. Ground 2 asserts that FTT Judge Pedro should not have relied on JO  and
    Others as this decision is wrong in law in light of cases including  AJ
    (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.

The grant of permission

20. Permission to appeal was granted on both grounds.

The hearing before us

21. Mr Tarlow provided us with the recent decision of the President  in  MK
    (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT  00223  (IAC).
    He submitted that the onus of showing that the section 55 duty has been
    breached rests with the Appellant. The Respondent cannot be expected to
    deal with matters she is not made aware of. Relying upon ground  1,  Mr
    Tarlow submitted that the FTT Judge erred in allowing the appeal.

22. Mr Tarlow maintained his reliance upon  ground  2  notwithstanding  the
    fact that MK expressly states that JO and Others is consistent with the
    other decisions cited in the Respondent's grounds.

23. Mr Bramall provided us with a skeleton argument. We asked him where the
    evidence was to indicate that the Appellant had in fact put  forward  a
    family life claim to the Respondent prior to her decision. He responded
    by relying on the fact that the Appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom
    with his parents and siblings. The Respondent had  subsequently  issued
    EEA documentations to all the family  members.  It  followed  that  the
    Respondent was on notice that the Appellant  was  here  as  part  of  a
    family household. Page 23 of the core bundle (or G1 of the Respondent's
    appeal bundle) was also  relied  on.  Mr  Bramall  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's sister would have been known about. He confirmed that there
    had been no separate representations based on  Article  8  family  life
    sent in to  the  Respondent.  The  Respondent  should  have  considered
    section 55. The duty stood apart from the need to consider  Article  8.
    On ground 2, Mr Bramall submitted that section 55 was  a  free-standing
    duty. It had  to  be  considered  when  assessing  Article  8  and  the
    Regulations.

24. It was submitted that the FTT Judge was entitled to allow the appeal.

Decision on error of law

25. Having considered the evidence and arguments put to us  with  care,  we
    found that ground 1 is made out and FTT Judge Pedro did err in law when
    allowing the Appellant's appeal. We informed the parties of this at the
    hearing. Our reasons for the decision are as follows.

26. As it currently stands, the case law on  section  55  and  family  life
    cases in general contains three important points relevant to the appeal
    before us: that there is an onus on the  person  asserting  the  family
    life to adduce evidence and reasons as to why removal will have adverse
    consequences (see for example, SS (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550,  at
    paragraph 62); that the burden of showing a breach of  the  section  55
    duty lies with the Appellant (see MK, paragraph 18); finally, that if a
    breach of the duty is found, the FTT is not bound to 'remit'  the  case
    back to the Respondent (see AJ (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191, paragraphs
    21 and 24, and MK, paragraph 26).

27. In consequence of the above,  FTT  Judge  Pedro  was  obliged  to  give
    adequate reasons for concluding why the section 55 duty was engaged  in
    the first place. This entailed a need to identify what evidence he  was
    relying on when concluding that the Respondent had been made  aware  of
    the Appellant's purported family life claim  (and  in  particular  that
    relating to his sister) prior to the decision being made. With  respect
    to the Judge, he simply did not cite any such evidence in his decision.
    There is an absence of any reasoning in respect of the core issue  upon
    which the appeal was allowed.

28. It cannot be said that relevant evidence on the family life  issue  was
    in some other way readily apparent either on the face  of  the  Judge's
    decision when read as a whole, or indeed from the other evidence before
    him. There are passing mentions of the family in the ICD.0350  and  the
    NOMS report, but no details whatsoever. There is nothing  of  substance
    anywhere else, as far as we can see. Certainly, no representations were
    made to the Respondent  about  family  life  and  the  consequences  of
    removal upon anyone other than the Appellant himself.

29. Mr Bramall  sought  to  rely  on  the  fact  of  the  issuance  of  EEA
    documentation to the whole family in the past as being  sufficient  for
    the section 55 duty to arise. We disagree.  The  mere  existence  of  a
    family member (in this case a younger  sister)  does  not,  in  and  of
    itself,  create  a  family  life  issue  which  in  turn  required  the
    Respondent to regard her as being an affected child for the purposes of
    section 55. Therefore, the FTT Judge's failure to state the  evidential
    basis for his conclusions  is  not  cured  by  the  presence  of  other
    information in the case.

30. It follows from the above that FTT Judge Pedro erred in law. The  error
    was clearly material to the outcome of the appeal.

31. Further, in light of the case law on section 55 we find that whilst  as
    a matter of law he was potentially  entitled  to  take  the  course  of
    action he did (see  MK),  FTT  Judge  Pedro  was  required  to  provide
    reasons, albeit brief ones, as to why he decided to allow the appeal on
    a limited basis, rather than either using  case  management  powers  or
    proceeding to hear relevant evidence at the hearing.  As  the  FTT  (or
    indeed the Upper Tribunal) is not bound  to  send  cases  back  to  the
    Respondent where the section 55 duty has not been complied  with,  some
    explanation from the relevant judge is needed in  order  to  understand
    the conclusion that one route has been followed as opposed to  another.
    There is no such explanation here, and this constitutes a second  error
    of law. It too was material to the outcome of  the  appeal  before  the
    FTT.

32. Our consideration of this appeal does not turn on  ground  2.  For  the
    sake of completeness, we do not accept that JO and Others is  wrong  in
    law, as asserted by the Respondent. At paragraph 32 of MK the President
    specifically addresses the compatibility of JO and Others with previous
    decisions of the higher courts, and finds that there is no  divergence.
    We respectfully agree with his analysis.



Disposal of the appeal

33. Having announced our decision on the error of law issue,  we  indicated
    that a remittal to the FTT might well  be  the  appropriate  course  of
    action in this appeal, given the absence thus far of  any  findings  on
    the substance of the case. Both representatives agreed to this.

Procedural matters

34. We have not obtained a fixed date for the next hearing in the FTT,  nor
    are we issuing specific  directions  to  the  FTT  in  respect  of  the
    advancement of the case. This is because it appears sensible to us that
    a further CMR is arranged  in  the  FTT  at  which  the  production  of
    manageable bundles, timeframes for the final hearing of the appeal, and
    live issues can be canvassed.

35. We would suggest that the Respondent might wish to consider  addressing
    further the issues of the Appellant's claimed family life under Article
    8 and permanent residence under the Regulations  in  light  of  further
    evidence provided by the Appellant during the course of this case.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of errors on a point of law.

We set aside aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

The case is remitted to the First-tier tier Tribunal,  pursuant  to  section
12(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Directions

Under section 12(3)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007,
we direct that FTT Judges Pedro and Adio shall have no  further  involvement
in the remitted hearing.



Signed      Date: 4 June 2015


Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

