
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01185/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31May 2013                                 |On 20 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                               mr andrej sivak

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Goh, Counsel, instructed by Forest Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a Roma citizen of  the  Czech  Republic,  born  on  10
    February  1989.   He  has  been  granted  permission  to   appeal   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jhirad and Mr A J Cragg, CMG
    JP dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision made  on  26
    November 2012 to make a deportation order  against  him  in  accordance
    with Regulation 21 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  6  March  2000  with  his
    family.   They  claimed  asylum  at  port  on  arrival.    The   asylum
    application was refused on 27 March 2000.  The appeal was dismissed  on
    3 August 2000 and leave to appeal to the Tribunal  was  refused  on  14
    August 2000.  A second application was made by the  appellant's  mother
    on  25  September  2000,  with  the  appellant  as  a  dependant.   The
    application was refused on 5 October 2000 and the appeal was  dismissed
    on 9 May 2002.

3.   On 27 April 2006, the appellant and his family were granted  indefinite
    leave to remain under the family ILR exercise.

4.   On 27 September 2010 the appellant  was  convicted  at  Basildon  Crown
    Court of possession with intent to supply  controlled  drugs.   He  was
    sentenced to sixteen  months'  imprisonment  which  was  suspended  for
    eighteen months.

5.   On 5 March 2012 the appellant was convicted at Basildon Crown Court  of
    supplying a controlled class A drug.  On 16 April 2012 he was sentenced
    to sixteen months'  imprisonment.   A  further  four  months  from  his
    original conviction on 27 September 2010 was added.  The appellant  was
    sentenced to a total of  twenty  months'  imprisonment.   There  is  no
    record of him appealing against the conviction or sentence.

6.   The appellant was served with a liability  to  deportation  letter  and
    questionnaire on 25 May 2012 which  he  completed  and  returned.   The
    appellant advised that he had been in the UK since 2000 and also stated
    that he came to the UK for a better life and  because  of  racism.   An
    asylum interview was requested  as  the  appellant  has  raised  racism
    issues and fear to his life if he returned back to Czech Republic.   An
    asylum interview was scheduled for 9 October 2012.   At  the  interview
    the appellant declared that he did not wish to claim asylum and refused
    to do the asylum screening interview.

7.   On 8 October 2012  a  letter  was  sent  to  the  appellant  requesting
    further information of residency and exercising of treaty  rights.   He
    failed to provide the information requested.

8.   In view of his conviction for supplying class A  drugs  the  respondent
    took the view that the appellant had a propensity to re-offend and that
    he presented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the
    public to justify his deportation.

9.   The panel heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  mother  Ms  Tana
    Sivakova, a Czech citizen born on 24 November 1966, and his  girlfriend
    Miss Iveta Pacajova, a Czech citizen born on 18 June 1987.

10.  In determining the appellant's appeal the panel  took  account  of  the
    sentencing judge's remarks.  Essentially the judge gave  the  appellant
    full credit for his plea of guilty.  He said that a deterrent  sentence
    was essential because of the untold misery  drugs  cause  to  both  the
    individuals concerned and to  society  at  large  and  they  cannot  be
    ignored.  This was not the first time the appellant had supplied drugs.



11.  The judge stated that he had  read  the  pre-sentence  report  and  the
    recommendation therein was totally  and  completely  unrealistic.   The
    appellant's crime could not come within the confines of  the  community
    order, as the appellant was in breach of a suspended sentence order and
    furthermore this was not a first time he had supplied drugs.  The judge
    considered that the offence  was  so  serious  that  only  a  custodial
    sentence could be justified.

12.  The panel noted that the appellant had a criminal record that  included
    not only the drug offences mentioned but other  miscellaneous  offences
    dating from  2005,  which  included  motor  vehicle  theft  and  allied
    motoring offences and criminal damage to  property.   At  the  date  of
    sentencing for the main offence the appellant was unemployed.

13.  They also took account of the NOMS 1 assessment in which  the  offender
    management found  that  the  appellant  posed  a  medium  risk  of  re-
    offending, even though posing a  lower  risk  of  harm  to  the  public
    exposed through his drug dealing.  In making  that  assessment  it  was
    acknowledged that there were identifiable indicators that he would  re-
    offend.  The appellant had stated that he was motivated  to  offend  in
    order to  feed  his  addiction  to  heroin  and  financial  gain.   The
    appellant claimed that prior to custody he was employed as  a  cleaner,
    although he was now a jobseeker.

14.  The panel noted the evidence of Tana, the appellant's mother, who  said
    that she has problems with her back and needed the  appellant  to  help
    with things around the house and generally to look after her.  Prior to
    the appellant's imprisonment she lived with her  married  daughter  and
    grandchildren, but the former now lived half an hour's walking distance
    away as her three children were her main priority, and  was  unable  to
    assist her.  Her youngest child is at school and is unable to carry out
    certain tasks.  She had submitted a  letter  from  Southend  University
    Hospital stating that she suffered from cervical and thoracic pain  and
    appropriate  medication  was  prescribed.   She  was  unemployed.   The
    appellant's father went to the Czech Republic for treatment of a cardio
    condition where he died in May 2011.  The funeral took place there  and
    the UK based family were present.  Other Czech  relatives  residing  in
    the Czech Republic also attended.

15.  Iveta said that she and the appellant had  known  each  other  for  the
    past seven years.  She claimed they were in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  She suffered a  miscarriage  in  August/September  2011.
    She was employed as a cleaner but lost her job about twelve months  ago
    and is currently a jobseeker.  Both Iveta and his  mother  visited  the
    appellant when he was in prison.  Iveta said that if the appellant were
    deported to the Czech Republic she would not join him there because her
    family was in the UK and she believed that she and the appellant  would
    be homeless in their country of origin.

16.  The panel noted that the Czech Republic joined the EU on  1  May  2004.
    The appellant came to the UK in March 2000 and was not lawfully in  the
    UK prior to the accession date because only  the  period  when  he  has
    resided lawfully in the UK can be taken into account  when  determining
    the period of permanent residence.

17.  The appellant was granted ILR on 26 May 2006.  There  was  no  evidence
    that he was exercising treaty rights in the  UK  of  continuous  lawful
    residence prior to 2006.  He was in custody  from  January  2012  to  3
    January 2013.  Time spent in custody  does  not  count  towards  lawful
    residence.  Therefore his period of continuous lawful residence in  the
    UK since 2006 exceeds five years but was less than ten years.

18.  The panel noted that the appellant commenced offending well before  the
    death of his father and his criminal records date back to 2005.   Petty
    crime escalated into drug dealing.  As a persistent  offender,  he  has
    demonstrated contempt for the laws of this country.  He  is  at  medium
    risk of re-offending.  He has  squandered  the  educational  and  other
    great opportunities he was given when he came to  the  UK  and  instead
    chose to embark on a life of crime.

19.  The panel stated  that  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence
    committed by the appellant is thoroughly  repugnant  to  the  generally
    accepted standards of morality and the public policy/interest in  being
    protected against those who commit such  offences  is  of  considerable
    importance and deserves protection.  The appellant's criminal behaviour
    undermines the good order of society and renders a threat to it.

20.  The UK is not required to keep here someone whose  conduct  strikes  so
    deeply at its social  values  and  strains  the  tolerance  of  even  a
    broadminded society.  The  public  policy/interest  in  deportation  of
    those who commit crimes goes well beyond depriving  the  offender  from
    the chance to re-offend in this country; it extends  to  deterring  and
    preventing  serious  crime  generally  and  to  upholding  the   public
    abhorrence of such offending.

21.  The panel stated that as regards the appellant's private  life,  it  is
    clear he has relatives in the Czech Republic and there is  no  evidence
    that they are unwilling or unable to house and maintain  him  until  he
    can forge an independent life of his own.  The appellant has spent  his
    formative years in the Czech Republic and has  re-visited  the  country
    since he came to the UK.  He would  return  to  a  country  with  whose
    culture, language, heritage and customs he is familiar  with  and  with
    the useful skills acquired in a developed country and a good  knowledge
    of the English language, that  would  stand  him  in  good  stead  upon
    return.  His private life would continue in all  material  respects  in
    the  Czech  Republic  save  for  different  societal  community  links.
    Friends and family members in the UK could maintain communication  with
    him by the usual means and by visits.  There is no  evidence  that  the
    Czech Republic is in any way unsafe for him.  No evidence was submitted
    in respect of  potential  homelessness,  unemployment  or  destitution.
    Deportation would not have the effect  of  breaching  his  right  to  a
    private life.

22.  The panel stated that the policy/interest in  deporting  the  appellant
    must be weighed against his right to family life.   He  has  failed  to
    demonstrate ties of dependency with his family  and  Iveta  beyond  the
    usual emotional ties.  It is significant that Iveta has refused to join
    him in the Czech Republic.  The panel found that this does not  suggest
    a strong and abiding link between them that would lead to marriage  and
    a family unit of their own, as has been claimed.  The panel found  that
    deportation of the appellant would  constitute  interference  with  his
    family life but this is proportionate to the legitimate  objective  and
    prevention of crime and disorder and would not amount to  a  breach  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

23.  The panel also found that the Secretary of State's decision  to  deport
    the appellant is in accordance with the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM)
    and the applicable policy is not unlawful.

24.  The appellant was granted permission on grounds which argued  that  the
    panel failed to consider case law, wrongly  evaluated  the  appellant's
    private and family life arrangements and failed  to  properly  consider
    the  effect  of  the  appellant's  removal  on  third  parties.    They
    particularly took issue with the panel's finding that the fact that the
    appellant's partner had refused to join him in the Czech  Republic  did
    not suggest a strong and abiding link between them but other than  that
    insufficient reasons  were  given  for  reaching  the  conclusion  that
    deportation outweighed rights under article 8 of the ECHR.

25.  Counsel submitted that she had relied on the Upper Tribunal's  decision
    in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  60  (IAC)  (18
    February 2013) at the hearing before the panel but the  panel  did  not
    refer to this  case  at  all.   She  argued  that  the  facts  of  this
    appellant's case are similar to the facts in  Ogundimu,  in  particular
    both the appellant and Ogundimu came to the UK when they were young and
    spent their formative years in the UK.   Therefore  the  panel  got  it
    wrong when they said that the appellant had spent his  formative  years
    in the Czech Republic.  In this regard Counsel submitted that the panel
    failed to consider paragraph 399A of the  Immigration  Rules  which  is
    referred to in Ogundimu.  At page 18 of  Ogundimu  the  Upper  Tribunal
    cited 399A(b) which says that this paragraph applies where  the  person
    is under 25 years, and has spent at  least  half  of  his  life  living
    continuously  in  the  UK  immediately  preceding  the  date   of   the
    immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  has
    no ties (including social, cultural or  family)  with  the  country  to
    which he would have to  go  if  required  to  leave  the  UK.   Counsel
    submitted that the appellant is 24 years old and has spent half of  his
    life in the UK.  He has no social ties with the Czech Republic.

26.  Counsel submitted that the panel were wrong in their assessment of  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.  She submitted that the
    appellant's partner of seven years explained why she could not join him
    in the Czech Republic and this was because she has family  in  the  UK.
    She also believed that they would be homeless if they returned  to  the
    Czech Republic.  Counsel argued that the panel failed to  take  account
    of the impact of the appellant's removal on third parties and failed to
    consider MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC).   As
    to this latter point, I informed Counsel that she  did  not  raise  the
    panel's  failure  to  consider  MF  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   She
    apologised and said she did not draft the grounds.

27.  Mr Melvin in respect of ground 1 relied on  the  second  head  note  of
    Ogundimu which states:

         "The introduction of the new Immigration Rules (HC  194)  does  not
         affect the circumstance that when  considering  Article  8  of  the
         Human Rights Convention 'for a settled  migrant  who  has  lawfully
         spent all or the major part of his or her childhood  and  youth  in
         this  [country]  very  serious  reasons  are  required  to  justify
         expulsion'.  The principles derived from Maslov  v  Austria  [2008]
         ECHR 546 are still to be applied."

28.  Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant and his family  exhausted  their
    appeal rights in 2002.  The  family  did  not  go  back  to  the  Czech
    Republic but were granted lawful residence in 2006 when  the  appellant
    was 17.  It cannot on these  facts  be  argued  that  he  was  lawfully
    resident in the UK prior to 2006.  This is the difference  between  the
    appellant and Ogundimu.  The panel considered that the appellant had no
    lawful residence prior to 2006.  There is no case law  to  support  the
    proposition by Counsel that  because  the  panel  failed  to  refer  to
    Ogundimu the failure was a material error of law.

29.  Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant spent the first eleven years  of
    his life in the Czech Republic.  The next five years he spent illegally
    in the UK.  Even if the formative point is made out, it is not material
    because the panel considered the appellant's Article  8  claim  against
    the appellant's offending behaviour.

30.  As to the appellant's  relationships,  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  the
    panel had before them the evidence of the appellant's family life  with
    his partner and his family.  He has relatives in  the  Czech  Republic.
    He is an adult and has been for a considerable number of years.   There
    is no reason why he should not be able to  return  to  his  country  of
    origin.  Dealing in class B drug to class A drug  is  high  up  on  the
    proportionality assessment made by the panel.  They considered that  he
    had escalated from petty crime to a more serious crime  and  had  shown
    contempt for the laws of the UK.

31.  In response Counsel said that the appellant has lived  in  the  UK  for
    thirteen and a half years and therefore has spent half of his  life  in
    the UK.   He has a partner who has indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
    whole of his family is in the UK.  The appellant then  interrupted  and
    though Counsel stated that the family  came  to  the  UK  because  they
    feared for their lives in the Czech Republic.  He had made  that  point
    to the judge.  However I noted that this point did not feature  in  the
    grounds of appeal lodged on behalf of the appellant against the panel's
    decision. I also noted that the appellant's immigration history that he
    failed to pursue an asylum claim when given the opportunity on  grounds
    of fear for his life if returned to the Czech Republic.

32.  I find that the panel did not err in law.

33.  There is no support for Counsel's argument that the panel's failure  to
    refer to case law put before them amounts to an error of law.   In  any
    event I do not support  Counsel's  argument  that  the  facts  of  this
    appellant's case are  similar  to  the  facts  in  Ogundimu.   Ogundimu
    arrived in the UK at the age of 6 to  join  his  father  who  had  been
    settled in the UK since 1961.   He  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain eight years later and had been resident in the UK for  21  years
    at the time of the hearing and for about three quarters  of  his  life.
    In his appeal against the respondent's decision Ogundimu had relied  on
    the fact of his long residence and that  he  was  the  father  of,  and
    maintained a relationship with a  British  citizen  child  born  on  24
    August 2004.  There  were  other  issues  the  Tribunal  considered  in
    Ogundimu, such as his relationship with his stepchild, (TS)  with  whom
    he had lived in the same household for over half of her life.  A social
    worker indicated that the appellant had a  positive  relationship  with
    TS.  Central to the concern of the Tribunal was whether  the  appellant
    had remained addicted to crack cocaine.  It was that addiction that led
    him to engage in serious criminal conduct in the past and would pose an
    unacceptable risk to the public in the future.  I find that these facts
    are in no way similar to the facts of this appellant.

34.  The appellant came to the  UK  when  he  was  11  years  old  with  his
    parents.  He is now 24 years old and has therefore been in the  UK  for
    thirteen years.  I find on these facts that the appellant spent part of
    his formative years in the Czech Republic and part in the UK.  Even  if
    the panel erred in their finding that the appellant spent his formative
    years were in the Czech Republic, I find that the error is not material
    as not all of his formative years were spent in the  UK  as  argued  by
    Counsel.

35.  I find no error of law in the panel's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 appeal.  As the panel rightly said the appellant  has  failed
    to demonstrate ties of dependency with this  family  beyond  the  usual
    emotional ties.  The  appellant  is  an  adult.   His  mother  has  two
    daughters and grandchildren in the UK.  She would not be  without  help
    should she require it.  Indeed one daughter lives with her.

36.   Even  if  the  panel's  finding  with  respect  to   the   appellant's
    relationship with Iveta is flawed, the error  is  not  material.   They
    have been in a relationship for seven years.  They are  both  from  the
    Czech Republic.  They are both unemployed in the UK.  The appellant has
    family in the Czech Republic.  No evidence was submitted to  the  panel
    in respect of potential homelessness, unemployment or destitution.

37.  I find that the panel weighed the nature of  the  appellant's  criminal
    offending and its escalation from petty crime into drug dealing against
    the appellant's right to family and private life.  The panel  took  all
    the evidence into account in reaching a decision which I find discloses
    no error of law.

38.  I consider Counsel's submission that the  panel  failed  to  take  into
    account MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  00393  (IAC).
    The panel at paragraph 17  found  that  the  respondent's  decision  to
    deport the appellant was  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules
    (Appendix FM).  I accept that the panel did not give a reason for their
    finding. Furthermore they failed to look firstly at the new Immigration
    Rules as required by FM.  These errors are not material because I  find
    that had the panel  considered  the  new  Immigration  Rules  first  in
    respect of the article  8  appeal,  they  would  have  found  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for leave to remain under the new Immigration
    Rules.  As already stated he came here at the age of 11 and  has  spent
    another  thirteen  years  in  the  UK.   Discounting  the   period   of
    imprisonment, he has been here for eleven years and with  lawful  leave
    since April 2006. The appellant has not lawfully spent all or the major
    part of his childhood and youth in the UK.  In  addition  to  that  the
    panel's finding that the appellant has social, cultural and family ties
    in the  Czech  Republic  has  not  been  challenged.   Accordingly  the
    appellant would not have succeeded under paragraph 399A(b).

39.  I find that the panel did not  make  a  material  error  in  law.   The
    panel's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal against  deportation
    shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
