
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01086/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 December 2013                            |On 17 January 2014           |
|Prepared 6 December 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                dandi kosova

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C H Hulse, Counsel instructed by Messrs
                  Duncan Lewis & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  Kosovo  born  on  15  April  1982  who
    appealed against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  revoke  his
    refugee status and make a  deportation  order  against  him  under  the
    provisions of Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.   His  appeal  was
    allowed in the First-tier.  That decision was  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by the respondent and on 29  July  2013  I  heard  submissions
    thereon.  I set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal in a
    decision dated 6 August 2013.  I  directed  that  there  be  a  hearing
    afresh.  At a "for mention" hearing on 9 October 2013 I  directed  that
    the appeal remain in the Upper Tribunal and noted that the respondent's
    representative  stated  that  there  would  be  likely  to  be  fifteen
    witnesses but that no interpreter was required for the further hearing.



2.   My detailed decision setting aside the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal is annexed to this determination.

3.   At the beginning of  the  hearing  before  us  Ms  Hulse  requested  an
    adjournment on two grounds.  Firstly, that she wished the appeal to  be
    re-heard in the First-tier on the basis that it  is  easier  to  obtain
    permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  than  it  is  to  obtain
    permission to appeal from the Upper Tribunal to the  Court  of  Appeal.
    Secondly she stated that the OASys Report  had  not  been  obtained  by
    either representative and that those instructing her had been  informed
    the day before the hearing that in order to obtain the report a freedom
    of information request would have to be made by the appellant.

4.   We refused the application.  It had already been decided  that  it  was
    appropriate that this appeal should proceed in the Upper Tribunal given
    the complexity of the issues raised. Secondly,  at  the  "for  mention"
    hearing  the  respondent's  representatives  had  indicated  that   the
    respondent was not able to obtain the OASys Report from  the  Probation
    service as it was confidential to  the appellant and it was only he who
    was entitled to receive a copy.

5.   The appellant is a citizen of Kosovo who was born  on  15  April  1982.
    He entered Britain in  December  1988  after  the  Serbian  forces  had
    entered Kosovo.  In his asylum  application  he  gave  details  of  his
    parents and his brother who lived in Ramoc, Gjakova and  said  that  he
    was  claiming asylum because,  although he was  not  a  member  of  any
    political party, he supported all Kosovan movements who  were  fighting
    for  Kosovan  rights  and  independence,  and  that  he  had  therefore
    distributed leaflets,  and written slogans on street walls against  the
    Serbians.  He said that he had been  beaten  up  by  Serbian  policemen
    after he had been seen at an LDK demonstration in August 1998 and  that
    Serbian police had come to the family home on 8 December, beat  up  his
    father and himself and fired at the house and burnt it down. He and his
    father were told to report to the police station.  His father had  made
    arrangements for him to leave the country with the help of an agent.

6.   In May 1999 the appellant was granted refugee status.

7.   From November 2003 onwards the appellant committed  and  was  sentenced
    for a series of petty crimes as follows:-

     12 November 2003 - Criminal damage, failing to  surrender  to  custody,
    battery.  For these he received community punishment  orders.

     In February 2004 he received  a  fine  for  a  breach  of  a  community
    punishment  order and in August that year he was fined  for  driving  a
    motor vehicle with excess alcohol.

    In January 2005 he received a 60 hour community  punishment  for  theft
    and in August that year a twelve month community order for theft from a
    person and a twelve month community order  for  attempted  theft  of  a
    vehicle.


    He received three months' imprisonment for battery on 1 April 2008  and
    on 10 June 2010 was fined for using a licence with intent to deceive.


    In November 2010 he  received  a  community  order  for  driving  while
    disqualified and using a vehicle while uninsured.


    On 14 September 2011 and 3 October 2011 he was sentenced to 30  months'
    imprisonment for burglary with intent to steal from a  dwellinghouse  -
    four counts in all.  In  sentencing  the  appellant  His  Honour  Judge
    Gratwicke stated:-


         "You have pleaded guilty to four  dwelling  house  burglaries,  the
         first of which occurred on 19 July in Lewisham.  Two days later you
         committed three further burglaries in the Essex area.  Those  three
         burglaries were committed in an area that you had  some  attachment
         to, which you  clearly  had  travelled  up  from  London  with  the
         intention of committing burglaries.


         In the course of that day you come along it  appears  with  others,
         committed three.  In the course of all  these  burglaries  electric
         goods and jewellery were stolen.  Any householder, whether they own
         the property or rent it, is entitled, when they leave it, to expect
         that when they  return  the  properly  will  be  intact  and  their
         possessions will remain there.  The effect of a burglary as  indeed
         this Court has noted from one of the victims  of  your  dishonesty,
         can vary.  One thing that this  Court  consistently  sees  is  that
         people are shocked by virtue of the fact that someone has been into
         their property when are they not there and,  of  course,  has  then
         taken their goods.  You have done  this  on  four  occasions.   You
         have, quite simply, broken into people's homes  in  order  to  take
         their property.  Property that you had absolutely no right to.   It
         is for that reason that the Courts have always regarded offences of
         domestic burglary as serious.  These burglaries are  aggravated  by
         the fact they were committed whilst on bail.   There  were  clearly
         not in my  judgment,  certainly  so  far  as  the  Essex  ones  are
         concerned, opportunist.  Those three houses were targeted by you.


         In passing sentence upon you I, of course, give you credit for your
         guilty plea, I bear in mind the realistic submissions made by  your
         Counsel but in relation to each of these burglaries the very  least
         sentence I can impose upon you is one of  two  and  a  half  years'
         imprisonment.  All those sentences to run concurrently.   You  will
         know that you will serve one half of that and thereafter you  will,
         subject to one further matter be released on licence.


         These  being  sentences  in  excess  of  12  months  the  automatic
         deportation considerations will apply.  It seems to me that  those,
         in fact, charged with that will no doubt look very  closely  as  to
         whether or not your continued presence in this country is something
         that each citizen should have to put up with."


8.   Following the sentence the Secretary of State wrote  to  the  appellant
    on 21 December 2011 seeking reasons why he should not be deported  from
    the  United  Kingdom  following  his  convictions  for  burglary.    In
    particular he was asked if there was any  reason  why  he  should  fall
    within one of the exceptions to  automatic  deportation  under  Section
    32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  following  his  convictions.   The
    appellant was requested to complete a document giving personal details.
     In completing that document the appellant  indicated  that  he  had  a
    British passport and that he had been made a British citizen  in  2004.
    That was clearly incorrect.  He stated that both his parents were  dead
    and the family home had been blown up.  When asked  about  his  current
    health he said that he had been wounded  in Kosovo and still had  pains
    in his leg but other than that had no health issues.  On 10 August 2012
    the appellant's solicitors wrote to  the  respondent  setting  out  the
    appellant's background and stating that the only family in  Britain  he
    had was an aunt, uncles and cousins, his aunt being his  late  father's
    sister.  They stated that in 2011 he had  met  Miss  Beverley  Hill,  a
    British citizen, in a pub and that they had started dating and that she
    visited him in prison.  The letter argued that the appellant should not
    be deprived of refugee status by the operation of  Section  72  of  the
    Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 2002 and that he was  still  at
    risk on return to Kosovo.  It was  stated that his mother had  been  of
    Roma descent.  The family had therefore experienced  prejudice  because
    his father was of  Albanian  descent  and  he  had  been  harassed  for
    marrying the appellant's mother.  It was  argued  that  his  Article  8
    rights would be infringed by his removal.

9.   The Secretary of State issued a decision that Section 32(5) of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applied stating that it had not  been  concluded  that
    the appellant fell within one of the exceptions in Section 33  of  that
    Act.

10.  The letter referred to a request made to UNCHR  on  28  September  2012
    regarding the proposal to cease/revoke the appellant's  refugee  status
    and their response of 12 October 2012 and to representations  that  had
    been made on the appellant's behalf by his solicitors.

11.  With regard to Section 72 of the NIA Act 2002 it was  stated  that  the
    provisions of Section  72(2)  applied  where  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted in Britain of  an  offence  and  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least two years and that therefore  the  consequence
    was that his status  was  revoked  under  paragraph  339(A)(x)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was stated that the appellant had  been  invited
    to rebut the  presumption  that  the  crimes  for  which  he  had  been
    convicted  were particularly serious and that his continued presence in
    Britain would constitute a danger to the community.  It was noted  that
    his solicitors had stated  that  he  had  taken  various  courses  here
    including courses in the English language and drug and alcohol  support
    and that he was likely to complete further courses in prison.   It  was
    said that no attempt had been made to rebut the presumption that he had
    been convicted of a particular serious  crime  and  although  his  good
    conduct in prison was  noted  that  was  considered  to  be  a  minimum
    expectation and might not be indicative of his  behaviour  if  he  were
    allowed to rejoin the community in Britain.  Reference was made to  his
    convictions for sixteen offences between November 2003 and October 2011
    and to the National Offender Management Service (NOMS) Report which had
    assessed the appellant as posing a high risk of serious harm to  women,
    ex-partners and the public and assessed him as presenting a medium risk
    of re-conviction.  It was stated that he had not shown  that  he  would
    not be a danger to the community if he were to remain in Britain on the
    face of his "lengthy and escalating  criminal  record  and  the  recent
    findings made by NOMS".

12.  In accordance with the provisions Section 72(9)(b) of the NIA Act  2002
    the Secretary of State certified that the presumption under sub-Section
    72(2) applied to the  appellant.   Having  referred  to  the  terms  of
    paragraph 339A of the Rules the letter stated  that  his  asylum  claim
    would not prevent his removal from Britain in line with  Article  33(2)
    of the Refugee Convention.

13.  Turning to the issue of  Article  1C  of  the  Refugee  Convention  the
    letter went on to say  that, irrespective of the position under Section
    72, the appellant came within one  of  the  six  cessation  clauses  in
    Article 1C of the 1951 Convention.   Having  noted  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's  claim  for  asylum  the  letter   maintained    that   the
    circumstances under which he had been  granted  asylum  had  ceased  to
    exist.

14.  The writer of the  letter   referred  to  the  Country  of  Origin  Key
    Document Report of 27 October  2009  which  referred  to  an  estimated
    250,000 Kosovan Albanians fleeing  their  homes  in  1998   as  Serbian
    forces had begun  a  programme  of  systematic  reprisals  and  village
    clearances.  NATO had acted  to  prevent  a  humanitarian  crisis,  air
    strikes on Serbia continuing until 9 June 1999.   It  was  stated  that
    850,000 Kosovan Albanians had been driven out of Kosovo  by  the  Serbs
    during this period but that on 10 June 1999 Milosevic had agreed to the
    withdrawal of Serbian troops from Kosovo enabling those who had left to
    return.   Kosovo  had   then   been   placed   under   a   transitional
    administration under the UN Interim Administration  Mission  in  Kosovo
    (UNMIK), a new Kosovan constitution had come into force  in  June  2008
    and the administration had been handed over to  the  authorities  under
    Kosovo's independence constitution.

15.  Reference was made to the US State Department Report of  8  April  2011
    which  stated  that  Kosovo  was  a  parliamentary  democracy  with   a
    population of  approximately  2.2  million,  independence  having  been
    declared in 2008.  It was clear that Kosovo was no longer  administered
    by the Serbian authorities who had presided over  the  situation  which
    led to the appellant's claim for asylum and that  therefore  there  had
    been a fundamental and durable change in Kosovo since the appellant had
    been recognised as a refugee.

16.  It was  accepted  that  some  ethnic  tensions  remained,  particularly
    around Mitrovica,  and certain minority groups suffered discrimination.
    Given, however, that the appellant had lived in Gjakova, it was  stated
    there were no known reports of ongoing inter-ethnic violence  there  as
    no Serbs remained in that municipality.

17.  In paragraph 58 of  the  decision  it  was  noted  that  the  appellant
    claimed to be of mixed  Roma/Kosovan  Albanian  ethnicity  but  it  was
    pointed out he had made no such  claim  previously  and  had  not  been
    recognised as a refugee as a result of such a claim.  He had  not  made
    any other mention of that  claim  either  in  representations  made  by
    himself or through his solicitors and instead submitted that he was  an
    ethnic Kosovan Albanian.   It  was  therefore  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant was of mixed  Kosovan  Albanian/  Roma   ethnicity.   It  was
    pointed out that he had made other false claims  such  as  having  been
    brought to Britain by the British Armed Forces and having  been  issued
    with a British passport.

18.  The Secretary of State then considered conditions  in  Kosovo.  It  was
    concluded that there was nothing to indicate that the  appellant  would
    face persecution or treatment contrary to his rights under Article 3 of
    the ECHR there.  In particular it was stated there was  no  independent
    evidence to demonstrate that he would be destitute upon his return.

19.  It was not accepted that he had no remaining family in  Kosovo  and  in
    particular it was stated that although he had stated after his  arrival
    that his parents had been killed, there was no evidence that  that  was
    the case.

20.  With regard to the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the  ECHR  the
    Secretary of State set out the provisions of paragraphs 398 and 399  of
    the Rules and stated that the appellant did not qualify  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds under those paragraphs.  His family life
    was considered. It was noted that he had a  girlfriend,  Miss  Beverley
    Hill,  and he had said that  he had met Miss Hill's children  and  went
    on social outings with them he had no paternal relationship  with  them
    and they had not co-habited as a family.

21.  It was not considered that the appellant's rights under the ECHR  would
    be infringed by his removal.

22.  The appellant appealed and after the history set  out  in  paragraph  1
    above,  came before us for a substantive hearing .

23.  The appellant gave  evidence  relying  on  a  witness  statement  which
    referred to the ill-treatment which he and his father had  suffered  at
    the hands of the Serb forces and his arrival in  Britain  by  lorry  in
    December 1998.  He referred to his family here and his  girlfriend  and
    went on to say that he was sorry for the offences he had committed  and
    he wished to have the opportunity to stay in Britain and live an honest
    and happy life.  He claimed that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Kosovo and would not be able to obtain protection from the police.  His
    second statement stated:-

         "I am not an inherently bad person but I fell into  alcoholism.   I
         started drinking when I came  to  the  United  Kingdom  because  of
         everything that happened back in Kosovo.  I had lost my family, and
         found comfort in alcohol.  I was drunk when committing the offences
         which are listed on  my  record.   And  it  did  not  help  that  I
         associated with bad people, who were telling me that I  should  not
         worry about anything, as life was too short  to  worry,  and  so  I
         ended up drinking and committing crimes whilst drunk.  I also  used
         to smoke cannabis."


24.  He referred to rehabilitation courses for alcohol and  drugs  which  he
    had undertaken in prison and said that he was now  more  grounded.   He
    emphasised that he could no longer feel part of Kosovo as he  had  been
    in Britain for fourteen years.

25.  In his oral evidence he repeated what he had stated in his  statements,
    referred to his certificates  for  the  courses  in  drug  and  alcohol
    rehabilitation which he had taken and said that he would live a  normal
    life here.

26.  In reply to questions from Mr Tufan, he  stated  that  Kosovo  was  not
    ready for normal life.  He was asked about the claim  that  his  mother
    was Roma  and why he had not mentioned that  before  2012.   He  stated
    merely that he had a new life here.  He was asked why Beverley Hill was
    not at court and he said that she had difficulties with  childcare  and
    work.  He has a flat near to her and he would see her once a week.   He
    could not see her where he lived because he was sharing a room with  an
    Indian man.

27.  Mr Sahab Sokolaj then gave evidence.  In his statement he said that  he
    was willing to find the appellant a job and  emphasised  the  appellant
    had nothing in Kosovo.  Although he had known the  appellant  for  some
    time he had not known that he had committed burglary.  He said that  he
    himself was Albanian and had come to Britain as a refugee from  Albania
    in 1998.  His wife was a cousin of the appellant.

28.  The appellant's aunt, Albina Byberi,  then gave evidence  stating  that
    she was very close to the appellant  having  fed  him  and  washed  his
    clothes since he was very  young, as he had not had a good relationship
    with his father.  She set out all that she had done for  the  appellant
    here and added that when he had arrived he had been  upset  about  what
    had happened to his family and would have  nightmares  about  what  had
    happened in Kosovo.  She would then tell him that he was safe.  She had
    not been aware of his offence when he had been sent to prison  for  the
    first time and could not remember who had told her  that  he  had  been
    sent to prison.  The appellant had called her from there.   She  stated
    how close her children were to him.  She emphasised, however, that  she
    did not believe that he would commit any other offence.

29.  In evidence she stated the appellant was a brother of  her  stepsister.
    She and his father had the same father.  His mother's mother had been a
    gipsy.

30.  When cross-examined she  stated  that  she  had  not  known  about  the
    appellant's crimes until the police had come to  her  house.   She  was
    asked why she had not stated that the appellant's mother  was  a  Roma,
    and she said that was because they did not share a mother.  It was  put
    to her that she was saying the appellant had one Roma  grandparent  and
    she stated that that was his mother's mother.  She  confirmed  that  sh
    and the appellant  would speak Albanian together.

31.  Sokol Pebibaj then gave evidence.  He said that he is a friend  of  the
    appellant's uncle and that he had worked with the appellant  at  a  car
    wash where the appellant had been hardworking and fun to be around.  He
    said he was sure that the appellant regretted his actions.  Mr  Pebibaj
    had been back to Kosovo but he felt  uncomfortable  there  because  his
    mother was a gipsy.  He was reluctant to return as he had built up  his
    life here.

32.  Mr Tufan asked him when he had heard about the  appellant's  crime  and
    he said that he had heard as soon as it had happened because  they  had
    strong contact.  He had known that the appellant  had  been  in  prison
    before and was very surprised that he had committed a further offence.

33.  Mr  Tufan  put  to  Mr  Pepibai   that  he  had  a  surprisingly  light
    complexion if his mother had been a gipsy and he said that  his  mother
    had not been dark or was not "fully white".  Mr Tufan  pointed  out  to
    him that he had not mentioned that he was only partially gipsy.

34.  Isa Byberi then gave evidence.  He said that he was  a  cousin  of  the
    appellant's aunt, Albina Byberi.  He said that he  would  not  wish  to
    return to Kosovo because he had seen so much war there.

35.  In summing up Mr Tufan relied on the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and
    asked us to uphold  the  Section  72  certificate  and  find  that  the
    appellant had committed a particularly serious offence.  He referred to
    paragraph 47 of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  EN  (Serbia)  v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 630  when  Stanley  Burnton  LJ  had  stated  that
    offences against property were capable of  being  particularly  serious
    crimes as well as to  the importance placed on  to respect for  statute
    in that judgment.

36.  He pointed out that it was for the appellant to rebut  the  presumption
    and argued that had not been done.  Moreover,  he argued that under the
    provisions of Article 1(C)(5) of the Refugee Convention the changes  in
    Kosovo were such that the circumstances which caused the  appellant  to
    flee were no longer in existence.

37.  Having referred to the judge's sentencing remarks,  and  the  terms  of
    the NOMS report he asked us to find that it  would  be  appropriate  to
    return the appellant.  With regard to the  appellant's  claimed  rights
    under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  he  pointed  out  that  the  appellant's
    girlfriend had not attended court and indeed had not  been  present  at
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appellant  had  said
    that he only saw her once a week and Mr Tufan  argued that there was no
    subsisting relationship.  He referred to the appellant's long  list  of
    crimes and stated that he was a criminal recidivist and it was  in  the
    public interest that he be deported.

38.  In reply Ms Hulse argued that the appellant fell within  the  exception
    to removal under  Section  33  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  as  the
    deportation of the appellant would be in breach  of  his  rights  under
    both  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and   the   Refugee
    Convention.

39.  She argued that the situation  in  Kosovo  was  particularly  difficult
    because  of  very  high  rates  of  unemployment  and   it   would   be
    disproportionately harsh to return the  appellant.   He  would  not  be
    returning to  a  stable  environment.   There  was  not  a  pattern  of
    offending which showed escalating levels of more serious crime and  she
    argued that the offences for which the appellant  had  been  imprisoned
    were merely  a  blip  in  his  record.   They  were  not,  she  argued,
    sufficient to cause the removal of his refugee status.  She referred to
    the way in which the appellant had behaved  in  prison  and  emphasised
    that he was not a danger to society.  She  referred  to  the  terms  of
    UNHCR  Handbook  and  stated  it  was   important   to   consider   the
    proportionality of removal.

40.  With regard to the issue of the appellant's rights under Article  8  of
    the ECHR she emphasised that he had lived in Britain for fourteen years
    having come here at the age of 16 and that those  he  regarded  as  his
    close family were all here.  He had expressed a clear  fear  of  return
    and his fears had been supported by the other  witnesses.   She  stated
    that he had worked in Britain and that applying the criteria set out in
    Maslov [2008] ECHR 546 his  deportation  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his Article 8 rights here.

Discussion

41.  The appellant is aged 31.  He arrived in Britain in  1998  and,  having
    been granted refugee status and indefinite leave to remain has lived in
    Britain ever since.  While there is no independent  evidence  that  the
    appellant's parents and brother are no longer  alive,  we  will  accept
    that that is the case, and also accept that his father arranged for his
    departure from Kosovo after the Serbs had invaded and that he  and  his
    father were ill-treated by the Serb police.  We  accept  that  when  he
    arrived in Britain he turned to his aunt for support and, although  she
    arranged separate accommodation for him, he has particularly close ties
    with her and her family.  He has  a  number  of  close  friends  and  a
    girlfriend, Beverley Hill, here.

42.  It was not until the appellant's solicitors wrote to  the  Home  Office
    after the deportation process had been initiated that  it  was  alleged
    that  the  appellant  was  a  Roma  and  for  that  reason  would  face
    discrimination in Kosovo.  The reality is however that the  appellant's
    mother was half Roma - his maternal grandmother was Roma.   His  father
    was not nor his paternal grandparents or his maternal grandfather.   We
    consider it unlikely that the appellant would therefore  be  classified
    as Roma; indeed, he did not seek to classify  himself in that way  till
    a very late stage  of his life  as an asylum seeker  in  this  country:
    see paragraph 26. The appellant had no  satisfactory  explanation   for
    that failure, and we regard it  as equally significant  in terms of how
     others  would see him. Even if the appellant  were seen   as  a  Roma,
    while we accept that there is discrimination  against  Roma  in  Kosovo
    that discrimination does not amount to persecution. Although parties to
    mixed marriages where one partner is Roma and the other  is  an  ethnic
    Albanian do face problems which in the past have been characterised  as
    persecution that is clearly not the case of this appellant.  Given  his
    particular ethnic mix, noting that in neither of his statements did  he
    claim to be Roma and therefore would have difficulties  on  return  and
    indeed noting that Ms Hulse did not, in her submissions,  rely  on  the
    appellant's ethnicity, we find that the fact that the appellant  had  a
    Roma grandmother is not significant  in terms of any  risk  on  return.
    We would add that we accept that the appellant's return to Kosovo would
    be likely to mean that he would face some hardship but the  reality  is
    he has learned some skills here which   he  could  put  to  use  there.
    Apart from his complaint that he can still sense the injury to his  leg
    he is in good health.

43.  The Secretary of State has invoked the provisions  of Section 72(2)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which states that  for
    the purposes of Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  a  person  is
    presumed to have been convicted by a final judgment of  a  particularly
    serious crime and constitute a danger to the community of the UK  where
    he has been convicted in Britain of  an  offence  and  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment  of  at  least  two  years.   It  was  therefore
    considered that the appellant's refugee status should be revoked  under
    paragraph 339(A)(x) of the Immigration Rules.

44.  The issue for us is whether or not the four burglaries  for  which  the
    appellant was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 30 months  bring
    the appellant within the provisions of Section 72.  The presumption  is
    rebuttable.  We are assisted by the judgment of Stanley Burnton  LJ  in
    EN (Serbia).  He makes it clear in paragraph 47 that  offences  against
    property are capable of being a particularly serious crime.  He  points
    out that, if that statute  was  "unambiguously  in  conflict  with  the
    Convention" then subject to any statutory or equivalent authorities the
    courts must enforce the statute.

45.  Since Stanley Burton LJ's judgment  in EN (Serbia) the Court of  Appeal
    have issued judgments in SS  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550  and  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.   Both of those judgments emphasise the
    respect that must be paid to statute.  In paragraph 48 of the  judgment
    of Laws LJ in SS (Nigeria) he, in the context of a claim under  Article
    8 of the ECHR states:-

         "I think with respect that insufficient attention has been paid  to
         the weight to be attached, in  virtue  of  its  origin  in  primary
         legislation, to the policy of deporting foreign criminals."

46.  We note the terms of a letter from UNHCR dated 12 October 29012   which
     deals with the application of Article 33 and states that UNHCR  is  of
    the view that the burden is on UKBA to establish that the appellant has
    committed  a  "particularly  serious  crime"  and   states   that   all
    circumstances surrounding the crime should be considered.  They suggest
    that these include the nature of the act, the  actual  harm  inflicted,
    the intention of the perpetrator and the circumstances  of  the  crime,
    the form procedure used to prosecute  the  crime,  the  nature  of  the
    penalty imposed, and whether  most jurisdictions would  consider  it  a
    particularly  serious crime.

47.  The reality is that the serious nature of the crime was  shown  by  the
    sentence imposed and indeed the comments of the judge in his sentencing
    remarks are apt.  There is nothing to indicate that  the  intention  of
    the appellant was to do anything other than seek economic gain  without
    regard to the rights of others not to be burgled in their own homes.  A
    burglary is a danger to the community,  affecting as it does the rights
    of those in the community to enjoy their property.

48.   We  consider  that  it  is  particularly  important  to  respect   the
    definition of "particularly serious crime" set out in Section 72.   The
    reality is moreover that the appellant has shown nothing to rebut   the
    presumption that what he did was a particularly serious  crime.   While
    the First-tier Tribunal stated that the fact that the occupants of  the
    homes which the appellant burgled were not at home when the  burglaries
    were carried out we do not consider that that could possibly be thought
    to lessen the seriousness of the crime or to  refute  the  presumption.
    We refer below to the NOMS  Report,  and  to  the  various  letters  of
    support from the appellant's prison officers but we would not  consider
    that there is anything  therein  that  discharges  the  burden  on  the
    appellant in this regard.  In particular we do not  consider  that  the
    fact that the crimes which he committed prior to  the  four  burglaries
    were relatively minor offences only one of which had led  to  a  prison
    sentence is capable of refuting the presumption.   We consider that  we
    should look mainly at the appellant's sentence for the four  burglaries
    and what the sentencing Judge said  about  them,   and  on  that  basis
    conclude that the  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to  invoke  the
    provisions of Section 72.

49.  However even if we are wrong in that regard  we  have  considered   the
    provisions of Article 1C of the Refugee Convention  and  consider  that
    the  appellant is no longer entitled to asylum.   That  Article  states
    that the Convention shall cease to apply to any person who:-

         "5.  He can no longer, because of circumstances in connection  with
             which he has been recognised  as  a  refugee  have  ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of his nationality."

50.  The situation in Kosovo has  changed  radically  since  1998  when  the
    appellant came to Britain.  When he  came  as  he  made  clear  in  his
    application for asylum that he  feared  persecution  from  the  Serbian
    authorities.  The reality is that that fear no longer runs  in  Kosovo.
    Kosovo was placed under the UN Interim Administration in 1999   and  in
    2008  after  the  new  Kosovan   Constitution   was   in   place,   the
    administration of Kosovo was handed over  to  the  authorities  set  up
    under it. It is now described in the  US  State  Department  Report  on
    Human Rights Practices as a parliamentary democracy.  That report  sets
    out in some detail the climate for human rights in  Kosovo.   There  is
    nothing therein to indicate that ordinary Kosovo Albanians such as  the
    appellant would face persecution or treatment contrary to their  rights
    under Article 3 of the ECHR in Kosovo.  There is a properly functioning
    police service and courts which provides a sufficiency of protection to
    the  Horvath  standard.   While  there  is  certainly  corruption   and
    discrimination against ethnic minorities there was nothing to  indicate
    that such treatment would amount to persecution.  We have  already  set
    out above why we  have  found  that  the  appellant  would  not  suffer
    discrimination amounting to Article  3  ill-treatment  because  of  his
    claimed Roma descent.

51.  We have considered the terms of the expert report prepared by Dr  James
    Korovilas.  We note that Ms Hulse did not refer to the  report  in  her
    submissions, though it formed part  of  the  material  put  in  by  her
    instructing solicitors.  Having referred  to  Kosovo's  Declaration  of
    Independence in 2008 Dr Korovilas considered the issue  of  whether  or
    not there had been fundamental and  durable  changes  in  Kosovo  since
    1998.  He states that, while it is certainly the case there have been a
    number of fundamental changes in Kosovo  since  1998,  and  the  forced
    removal of the Serbian security forces in  Kosovo  in  1999  "certainly
    means that ethnic Albanians in Kosovo are no longer at  risk  of  being
    persecuted by the agents of the Serbian state" there  are  other  risks
    faced by forced returnees to Kosovo.  He then refers to the position of
    ethnic  minorities  and  the  dramatic  increase  in   property-related
    incidents owing to the difficulty  in  resolving  numerous  outstanding
    property disputes.  The reality of course is that  this  appellant  has
    not claimed that he has any property to which he could claim on  return
    to Kosovo.

52.  Dr Korovilas  states  that  there  is  insufficient  support  for  IDPs
    returning to Kosovo and that the municipal offices for communities  and
    returns (MOCR) are the only potential source of support  for  returning
    internally displaced persons  and  were  chronically  underfunded.   He
    goes on, however, to state:-

         "Thirdly there is far too much emphasis in addressing the needs  of
         ethnic minority IDPs  returning  to  Kosovo,  and  far  too  little
         emphasis on addressing  needs  of  ethnic  Albanians  returning  to
         Kosovo".

    That comment in itself shows an emphasis  placed  on  the  position  of
    minorities such as Roma, when they return, rather than  those  such  as
    this appellant but of course that does mean that the appellant,  if  he
    were to emphasise his Roma ethnicity might be able to turn that to  his
    advantage.

53.  The report goes on to state that the appellant would find a  very  high
    level of economic hardship because of high levels of unemployment.  The
    reality is, however,  that the appellant  has  friends  and  family  in
    Britain one of whom at least has been back to Kosovo on  one  occasion,
    who might well be able to assist him  through  their  own  contacts  on
    return.

54.  The conclusions of Dr Korovilas are:-

         "Having considered the documents associated with this case  I  have
         reached the following conclusions:

         Firstly whilst I accept that Mr Kosova would  no  longer  face  any
         threat from the Serbian security forces in Kosovo, I am however  of
         the opinion that some of the other changes which have  taken  place
         in  Kosovo  since  1999  would  impose  severe  difficulties   upon
         returning IDPs such as Mr Kosova.  For  example,  Mr  Kosova  would
         find it extremely difficult to reclaim any property which  he  left
         behind in 1998 and the Kosovo state would be unable  to  offer  him
         any useful assistance on this matter.  Secondly in the absence of a
         family network to support him in Kosovo  and  the  absence  of  any
         family property Mr Kosova  would  face  an  unacceptable  level  of
         economic hardship in Kosovo.  Indeed  the  extent  of  the  changes
         which have occurred in Kosovo since 1999 would most likely make  it
         harder for him, since he would be returning to a country which  has
         changed almost beyond recognition.  Finally I do not  believe  that
         relocation within Kosovo would be  an  effective  solution  to  the
         potential problems that Mr Kosova would face should he be  forcibly
         returned to Kosovo.

         In conclusion, I am firmly of the opinion Mr Kosova would  find  it
         extremely difficult to effectively re-establish himself in  Kosovo,
         and he would most likely face an unacceptable level of hardship  if
         returned to Kosovo.  Therefore it would be unreasonable for him  to
         be forcibly returned to Kosovo."

55.  We would comment that that Dr Korovilas'  report   does  not   indicate
    that the appellant would face persecution or treatment contrary to  his
    rights under Article 3 of the ECHR  on  return.   He  might  well  face
    hardship but that is quite simply not the same as  persecution  nor  is
    there anything to indicate that it would cross the  high  threshold  of
    Article 3 ill-treatment.

56.  We have  considered  the  letter  from  UNHCR  dated  12  October  2012
    regarding the  revocation  of  the  appellant's  refugee  status  under
    Article 1(C)(5). After general comments the  letter  states  that  that
    there  had  not  been  a  "fundamental  and  durable  change   to   the
    circumstances under which the appellant is recognised  as  a  refugee".
    The basis for that conclusion appears to be that there is evidence that
    the situation in Kosovo is unstable, but that of course does  not  deal
    with the fundamental change which has taken place  which  is  that  the
    Serbian authorities no longer have any power within Kosovo.   The  fact
    that they do not is surely a fundamental  and  durable  change  in  the
    circumstances on which the appellant based his claim to asylum.

57.  The letter emphasises that a UN Security Council Report of  31  January
    2012 had stated that the situation in northern Kosovo continued  to  be
    tense and politically unstable and there were clashes between groups of
    Kosovo Albanians  and  Kosovo  Serbs  during  the  year.   However  the
    appellant's home area was that around Gjakova which is to the  west  of
    Kosovo.  It is not near the north part  of  Kosovo,  around  Mitrovica,
    where the clashes between the Serb and Albanian  communities  may  well
    have continued.  There is nothing to indicate that there are any  Serbs
    left in the area around Gjakova.

58.  We have considered the terms of the UNHCR Handbook where  at  paragraph
    135 a gloss is put on the terms of  Article  1(C)(5).   That  makes  it
    clear that where there is a mere or  transitory  change  in  the  facts
    surrounding the individual's refugee fear which does not entail a major
    change of circumstances that is not sufficient to make Article  1(C)(5)
    applicable.  It goes on to emphasise the second part of Article 1(C)(5)
    which states:-

         "Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a refugee  falling
         under Section A(1) of this Article who is able to invoke compelling
         reasons arising out of previous persecution for refusing  to  avail
         himself of the protection of the country of nationality."

59.  We have considered whether or not that paragraph  would  apply  to  the
    appellant.  The reality is, however, that the appellant, who claimed to
    have been beaten up by the Serbs and to have received a  wound  in  the
    leg was sent to Britain by his father.  He  was  not  present  when  he
    claims his family were killed - there is indeed some confusion  in  his
    evidence as to whether or not they were killed when the house was burnt
    or whether or not the house was first burnt before they died.  There is
    indeed no  independent  evidence  that  the  appellant's  parents  were
    killed, Athough we have accepted for present purposes that  they  were.
    But more particularly, however, there is nothing to indicate  that  the
    appellant suffered such trauma or continues to suffer such trauma  that
    it would be wrong for him to be returned.

60.  We therefore find that the Secretary of State was correct  to  conclude
    that the appellant is no longer  entitled  to  refugee  status  firstly
    because of the application of Section 72, and secondly because  of  the
    application of Article 1(C)(5) of the Refugee Convention.

61.  We now turn to the issue of  whether  or  not  the  appellant's  rights
    under the ECHR would be infringed by his removal.  We note the terms of
    Rules 398 and 399.   The  appellant  comes  within  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 398B of the Rules because he had been sentenced to  a  period
    of imprisonment of  less  than  four  years  but  over  twelve  months.
    Therefore the provisions of paragraph 399  apply.   The  only  relevant
    part of that Rule would be the issue of whether or not the appellant is
    in a genuine subsisting relationship with a partner in Britain and  who
    is a British citizen.  The reality is that  Misss  Hill  did  not  give
    evidence before us and it was the evidence of the appellant that he has
    never lived with her and sees her only once a week.  We do not consider
    that  that  can  be  termed  as  a  genuine  subsisting   relationship.
    Moreover, under the provisions of paragraph 399A it is of note that the
    appellant has not lived continuously in Britain for twenty  years,  and
    therefore cannot benefit from sub-paragraph  (a).   He  cannot  benefit
    from sub-paragraph (b) as he is not under the  age  of  25.   The  only
    issue is whether or not there are  such  exceptional  circumstances  as
    would mean that the removal of the appellant would be  disproportionate
    amounting  to  the  very  compelling  reasons  "  referred  to   in  MF
    ((Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at paragraph 43.   In effect that  test
    is the same as that under the fifth of the Razgar questions.

62.  We accept that the appellant has enjoyed private and family  life  here
    in that he has a number of close relatives (but  not,  of  course,  his
    parents or sibling) here, good friends and a girlfriend.  He  has  also
    worked here, at times in a car wash  and  at  times,  it  appears,  for
    Everest Double Glazing.  Aside from those factors he does not appear to
    have put down roots here and the reality is that his English  is  still
    not particularly fluent.  It is obvious  that  Albanian  would  be  the
    language which he would most likely speak here and indeed we noted that
    an interpreter was required for the  appellant's  aunt  when  she  gave
    evidence.

63.  We then consider the fact that the appellant has been sentenced  to  30
    months for  four  burglaries  and  that  that  sentence  came  after  a
    previous, short, period in prison  and  that  he  has  committed  other
    offences such as driving offences and battery.

64.  We take into account the NOMS Report which sets out an offence  summary
    which included two offences against the person in 2003  and  2008,  one
    against property in 2003, one of fraud in 2010, eight theft and kindred
    offences  between  2005  and  2011  and  two   offences   relating   to
    police/courts  and  prisons  in  2003/2004  plus  three   miscellaneous
    offences.  Twelve "non-convictions"  were  listed  which  included  two
    offences against the person, one sexual offence in 2008, one fraud  and
    kindred offence in 2009, three theft and kindred offences  in  2005  to
    2011 and two public order offences in 2009 as well as a drug offence in
    2007 and three miscellaneous offences in 2008.  A number of not  guilty
    disposals were also recorded although we are not concerned with those.

65.  The risk of  re-conviction  predictor  gave  a  risk  of  re-conviction
    within two years, 65% for OGRS, 44% OGP  and  30%  OVP.   The  risk  of
    serious harm level to women, ex-partners and the public was  considered
    as high.

66.  We note that the protect-personal part of  the  form  stated  that  "17
    Heston House, Tanner Hill, London SE8 is  the  home  address  of  Elson
    Byberi and Tahir Krasniqi.  Previous  intelligence  suggests  that  the
    Byberi and Krasniqi families are well-known  for  drug  supply  in  and
    around Bromley".

67.  We would emphasise that we only take into account the crimes  of  which
    the appellant has been convicted and ignore the comments made regarding
    the home of his aunt and cousins. We bear in mind that  the  levels  of
    risk predicted may be based  to some extent on  those  comments  ,  and
    discount them  to that extent, including any risk of violence  on  this
    appellant's part. However, we also bear very  much  in  mind  what  the
    sentencing judge  said about the circumstances  of the appellant's four
    convictions  for  burglary;  and  we  consider  that  the   appellant's
    protestations that he will now no longer commit crimes here  cannot  be
    relied on, given those and his previous convictions.  Taking all  these
    factors into consideration we consider not only that the  Secretary  of
    State was correct to decide that the deportation of the  appellant  was
    conducive to the public good  but  further  that,  notwithstanding  the
    length of time he has lived in Britain and the  difficulties  he  would
    face on return to Kosovo that it would not be disproportionate for  him
    to be removed there now.

68.  Accordingly, having set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    we re-make the decision and dismiss this appeal on immigration,  asylum
    and human rights grounds.





Decision.

This appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.

This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds

This appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

































                                   ANNEX.



                           DECISION and DIRECTIONS


1.    The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,   with   permission,   against   a
    determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Freestone and Mr H G Jones MBE JP  (Legal  Member)  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 30 May 2013 allowed the appellant's appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to revoke the  appellant's
    refugee status and make a  deportation  order  against  him  under  the
    provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in the  appeal  before
    me I will, for ease of reference, refer to her as the respondent as she
    was the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly, although
    Mr Dandi Kosova is the respondent in the appeal before me I will  again
    for ease of reference refer to him as the appellant, he having been the
    appellant before the Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Kosovo  born  on  15  April  1982.   He
    arrived in Britain in 1998 and the following year was  granted  refugee
    status and indefinite leave to remain.  He has committed  a  number  of
    offences in Britain starting in November 2003 and finally on 3  October
    2011 was given an immediate custodial sentence of 30  months  for  four
    offences of burglary.

4.   The Secretary of State considered that he had committed a  particularly
    serious crime and therefore decided, under the provisions of Section 72
    of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  to  revoke  the
    appellant's refugee status on the basis that he had been convicted by a
    final judgment of a particularly serious crime and constituted a danger
    to the community of the United Kingdom, that  being  evidenced  by  the
    fact that he had been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  for  at
    least two years.

5.   The appellant argued that not only was  it  wrong  that  a  deportation
    order should be made against him but that he still had  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Kosovo.  He also argued that  his  rights  under
    the ECHR would be infringed by his removal.

6.   In paragraph 22 of their determination the Tribunal stated that:

         "22. The appellant has been convicted of four offences of  dwelling
             house burglaries.  As the sentencing judge pointed  out  these
             are serious offences.  However it would appear that when  they
             were committed the properties were  unoccupied  and  the  fact
             that the judge found them not  to  be  opportunist  burglaries
             would  indicate  that  the  appellant  was  aware   that   the
             householders were not at home at the time.  That would  reduce
             the seriousness of the offending.  The judge did not refer  to
             any other aggravating features apart from the  offences  being
             committed whilst on bail.  Whilst it can be  argued  that  the
             seriousness of the Appellant's  offending  is  increasing,  he
             does not have a history of this type of offence.   Accordingly
             it seems to us that, whilst these  are  serious  crimes,  they
             cannot be regarded as particularly serious crimes of the  sort
             envisaged in EN (Serbia)."

7.   In reaching that conclusion the Tribunal referred to  the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in  EN  (Serbia)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  630  where  at
    paragraph 45 it was stated:-

         "The words 'particularly serious crime' are clear,  and  themselves
         restrict drastically the offences to which the Article applies.  So
         far as 'danger to the community' is concerned, the danger  must  be
         real, but if a person is convicted of a particularly serious crime,
         and there is a real  risk  of  its  repetition,  he  is  likely  to
         constitute a danger to the community."


8.   The Tribunal went on in paragraph 23 of the determination to state:-

         "In any event, in  addition  to  the  nature  of  the  crime  being
         'particularly  serious'  there  must  also  be  a  danger  to   the
         community.  The Request for Offender Management  Information  on  a
         Foreign National Prisoner (NOMS) report states that  the  Appellant
         is a high risk of causing serious harm to women,  ex  partners  and
         the public.  It assesses him of medium risk of reconviction.  As Ms
         Sirikanda pointed out to us, the assessment contains little detail.
          It is based on unsubstantiated information provided by the police,
         probation records and records of previous convictions.  There  does
         not appear to be  any  independent  assessment  based  on  personal
         knowledge.  There does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  interview
         conducted with the Appellant.   In  those  circumstances  we  place
         little weight on the risk assessment."


9.   Having stated that they considered that the presumption in  Section  72
    had been rebutted the Tribunal then went on to consider whether or  not
    it was correct to revoke the appellant's refugee status on the  grounds
    there had been a change of circumstances in his country of origin.

10.  They had before them the COIS Report from 2009 and US State  Department
    Report on Human Rights Practices from 2011.  They noted that the report
    indicated that "some issues including ethnic tensions remain ongoing in
    Kosovo".  They also had before them a report from  UNHCR  which  stated
    that it was not accepted that there had been a fundamental and  durable
    change in Kosovo.

11.  They noted that the appellant's  representatives  had  submitted  a  UN
    security report of 31 January 2012 which said that  "the  situation  in
    northern  Kosovo  continues  to  be  dense  and  potentially  unstable,
    influencing much of the present political discourse".

12.  The Tribunal therefore found  that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    discharge the burden of proof upon her to show that there had  been  an
    appropriate adequate change of circumstances in Kosovo which would mean
    that the appellant could return there without fear of persecution.

13.  They therefore allowed the appeal.

14.  The Secretary of State appealed referring to the terms  of  Section  72
    of the 2002 Act and arguing that  the  Tribunal  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for concluding that the appellant had not been convicted  of  a
    particularly serious  crime  or  that  he  was  not  a  danger  to  the
    community.  He also argued  that  the  Tribunal  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for finding that the Secretary of State had failed to show that
    there had been a fundamental change in country circumstances.

15.  A detailed  reply  under  Rule  24  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant which argued that the Tribunal had  properly  considered  the
    ratio of the judgment in EN (Serbia), stating that  the  Tribunal  were
    correct to take into account the fact that this had been the first time
    of offending of  this  particular  type  and  that  they  had  properly
    considered what weight to place on the NOMS report.  The  reply  placed
    particular weight on the determination of the Tribunal  in  Farquharson
    (removal - proof of conduct) Jamaica [2013] UKUT 146 (IAC) which stated
    that if the respondent wished to rely  upon  police  reports  then  the
    respondent should provide such material in good time in order  for  the
    appellant to prepare his case.  It was claimed that sufficient  reasons
    were given by the Tribunal to show that they  had  properly  considered
    all relevant factors.  Again the reply emphasised the importance to  be
    placed on the UNHCR Report.

16.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Nath relied  on  the  grounds
    of appeal referring to the details in the NOMS Report regarding various
    offences committed by  the  appellant.   He  argued  that  insufficient
    reasoning had been given both with regard to the decision under Section
    72 and the issue of whether or not there had been a fundament change in
    the situation in Kosovo such that it was  safe  for  the  appellant  to
    return.

17.  In reply Mr Cheng who had produced a  detailed  and  well  thought  out
    argument argued that although the appellant had  been  convicted  of  a
    crime it was not a particularly serious  crime.   He  referred  to  the
    spectrum of crimes which might be committed and argued that as this was
    not a particularly serious crime as  there was no one present when  the
    appellant burgled  the  houses,   the  Tribunal  had  been  correct  to
    consider that the Secretary of State had not shown that the  crime  was
    one which crossed  the  specific  threshold  of  being  a  particularly
    serious crime.

18.  He referred to various  mitigating  factors  such  as  the  appellant's
    reliance on alcohol and cannabis and said that there was clear evidence
    in the bundle that he had sought to address his reliance on those.   He
    emphasised that as no one had been in the houses which had been burgled
    they would not have had the immediate fear of  those  who  are  present
    when a burglar breaks into the house.  He argued  moreover  that  there
    was no evidence that the appellant was a danger to society.

19.  He argued that the respondent had not discharged the  burden  of  proof
    upon her to show that there had  been  a  change  of  circumstances  in
    Kosovo such that the appellant would no longer have a well-founded fear
    of persecution there.

Discussion

20.  I stated that I considered there were material errors  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Tribunal.   In  considering  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had committed a particularly serious crime the  Tribunal  did
    not place sufficient weight on the length of the appellant's  sentence.
    He was sentenced to 30  months'  imprisonment  for  each  of  the  four
    burglaries, the sentences running concurrently.   Taking  into  account
    the terms of Section 72(2) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 I consider that  the  Tribunal  should  have  found  that  the
    appellant had been convicted of a particularly serious crime  -  weight
    should be placed on the clear guidance in an Act  of  Parliament  which
    itself reflects the public's  concern  at  the  commission  of  serious
    crimes by foreign nationals.

21.  Moreover  I  consider  that  there  were  aggravating  factors  as  the
    appellant had committed these offences while on bail.  I  also  do  not
    understand the weight placed by the Tribunal on the fact  that  no  one
    was in the houses when they were burgled.  The fact that  these  crimes
    were considered to be  premeditated does, in  my  view,  aggravate  the
    serious nature of the offences. I also note the sentencing  remarks  of
    His Honour Judge Gratwicke who stated:-

         "Any householder, whether they own the  property  or  rent  it,  is
         entitled, when they leave it, to expect that when they  return  the
         property will be intact and their possessions  will  remain  there.
         The effect of a burglary, as indeed this court has noted  from  one
         of the victims of your dishonesty, can vary.  One thing  that  this
         court consistently sees is that people are shocked by virtue of the
         fact that someone has been into their property when  they  are  not
         there an, of course, has taken their goods."


22.  I consider that taking these factors into account it was  not  open  to
    the Tribunal to consider that the appellant had not been convicted of a
    particularly serious crime.

23.  With regard to the NOMS Report, I consider that their attitude to  that
    was somewhat cavalier.  They appear to dismiss what is  stated  in  the
    report because the documents on which it was based were not before  the
    Tribunal.  It was incompetent of the  respondent  not  to  ensure  that
    these documents were before the Tribunal  - there  most  certainly  had
    been a pre-sentence report and an OASys Report as mentioned in the NOMS
    Report.  However, I consider that it was simply wrong not to take  into
    account the terms of that report or  at  least  to  place  some  weight
    thereon.  The reality is that the appellant's history of offending is a
    relevant factor when considering whether or not he is a danger  to  the
    community of the United Kingdom and the terms  of  the  report  clearly
    indicate that he is such a danger unless it could be  shown  that  what
    was written on the report was simply not true.  I would point out  that
    the report itself lists the appellant's offences  and  state  that  the
    level of risk of serious harm level is high.  The offences listed  show
    two offences against the person, an offence against property,  a  fraud
    offence, eight theft and kindred offences,  two  offences  relating  to
    police/courts/prison and three miscellaneous offences.  There were also
    a number of matters on which the appellant had  been  charged  but  not
    convicted.

24.  The Tribunal should surely have considered those offences in detail.

25.  Finally, with regard to the issue of the safety  of  the  appellant  on
    return to Kosovo I consider that the Tribunal have not given sufficient
    reasons for finding that he would still face persecution there.   While
    the UNHCR Report states that there has been no change in the  situation
    in Kosovo that is surely incorrect given the outcome of the war there.

26.  I therefore consider that it is appropriate for me to  set  aside  this
    decision as there are material errors of law in the  determination.   I
    further consider that the appeal should be heard afresh.

27.  I asked both representatives which forum  they  considered  appropriate
    for the re-hearing to take place.  Mr Cheng  argued  persuasively  that
    given that there had been no findings  on  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim and given that I had set aside the finding of the  Tribunal  with
    regard to Section 72 notice and  that  that  issue  would  need  to  be
    considered in detail it is appropriate that the appeal should return to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Nath argued that  it  would
    be appropriate for the appeal to remain in the Upper Tribunal.

28.  I stated that I would find out in  which  forum  the  appeal  could  be
    dealt with most  quickly  but  that  in  the  meantime  I  would  issue
    directions for appropriate documentary evidence to be produced and  for
    the further conduct of the appeal and that  I  would  ensure  that  the
    appeal be brought out for a for mention hearing  as  soon  as  possible
    after 21 days to ensure that the directions be complied with before the
    appeal was set down for a final hearing.

Decision

          I set aside the determination of  the  First-tier  tribunal.   The
    appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh.




Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

