
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01425/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reason Promulgated      |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MICHAL RONDOS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Templeton, of Quinn, Martin & Langan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Slovakia, born on 3 October 1986.  He was
    sentenced at Glasgow Sheriff Court on 20 March 2013 to imprisonment for
    3 years and 3 months on 3 charges  of  participation  in  a  fraudulent
    scheme, which involved transporting persons from the Slovak  and  Czech
    Republics  to  Scotland  on  the  pretence  of  providing   them   with
    employment.  In terms of a decision and a letter  both  dated  15  July
    2014 the respondent decided to make an order for  his  deportation  and
    removal to Slovakia under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

 3. By determination promulgated on 15 October 2014, Judge Reid allowed the
    appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal under the regulations.

 4. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal on  the  following
    grounds:

         'Ground 1: Material misdirection of law

          a) Rehabilitation: on the authority of Essa [2013] UKUT 00316 the
             judge erred by considering the issue  of  rehabilitation  when
             she had found that the appellant had  not  acquired  permanent
             residence, and therefore could not be said  to  be  integrated
             and  to  fall  within  the   scope   of   the   principle   of
             rehabilitation.

          b) Integration:  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  that  the
             appellant's criminality  showed  that  he  disregarded  social
             values; integration is not based only on temporal and familial
             factors.

          c) Regulation 21(5)(c): the judge concluded at paragraph 50  that
             there was "no evidence that the appellant  is  now  a  present
             threat and sufficiently serious threat".  This failed to  have
             regard to the  appellant's  ongoing  denial  of  his  offence,
             although the judge had commented that he was not  prepared  to
             accept responsibility.'

 5. There is a second ground of appeal, aiming to show perversity,  but  it
    is in confused terms.  Mr Matthews conceded that it could not  be  made
    out.

 6. Mr Templeton sought to persuade me that  there  was  no  error  of  law
    because even if the judge's finding that the appellant did not  pose  a
    threat  was  inconsistent  with  other  findings  and  aspects  of  the
    evidence, there was before her a social work report which said that  he
    presented a low risk of serious harm to the wider community and  a  low
    level of overall offending, and the Secretary of  State  had  taken  no
    issue with the terms of that report and the low risk assessment.

 7. Mr Templeton, whose firm had not represented the appellant at the stage
    of the hearing on the First-tier Tribunal, had not obtained a  copy  of
    the respondent's letter dated 15 July 2014 explaining the  reasons  for
    the decision.  This says at pages 3-4:

         "In  completing  your  criminal  justice  social  work  report  the
         offender manager found that you posed a low risk  of  harm  to  the
         community should you re-offend.  In reaching this  conclusion  your
         offender manager has taken into consideration those  factors  which
         originally led to your offending behaviour and whether  those  same
         factors continue to exist.  However, the  overall  score  given  on
         your report is  in  conflict  with  the  written  comments  of  the
         sentencing judge who found your  crimes  to  be  well  planned  and
         cynical frauds involving young, often, and almost  always  trusting
         people who were down on their luck and in the main unemployed.   It
         is therefore considered that you pose a high risk  of  harm  should
         you re-offend.  Whilst the risk of your re-offending is  viewed  as
         low, the serious harm which would be the cause  of  the  result  is
         such that it is not  considered  reasonable  to  leave  the  public
         vulnerable to the effects of your re-offending."

 8.  That  letter  was  before  the  judge  and  was  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent's representative in submissions.  The judge should also have
    considered at this point her findings that he minimised  his  offending
    and showed no empathy or remorse.  The conclusions in the  social  work
    report, as Mr Matthews submitted, are difficult to  understand  and  do
    not appear to follow from the body of the report.

 9. The judge's statement at paragraph 50 that  she  saw  "no  evidence  to
    support the assertion that the appellant is now a  present  threat  and
    sufficiently serious threat" contradicts  what  has  gone  before.   It
    might have been possible to  reach  the  conclusion  that  he  did  not
    represent such a threat, but only after  a  proper  resolution  of  the
    evidence.  That result could not be received  by  adopting  the  rather
    surprising  conclusion  in  the  social  work   report   and   ignoring
    significant aspects of the evidence and of  the  respondent's  analysis
    which pointed in the other direction.

10. The respondent's decision was reached on the basis that  the  appellant
    failed to show that he had resided in the UK  in  accordance  with  the
    regulations for a continuous period of 5 years and thereby acquired the
    right of permanent residence.  The point is significant in relation  to
    the level of protection available  to  him  against  deportation.   The
    judge found that his evidence failed to establish that he  did  have  a
    permanent right of residence.  The appellant says that he was let  down
    by his previous representatives in this  respect  and  that  given  the
    chance he would be able to lead additional evidence  to  establish  the
    right of permanent residence.  Mr Matthews agreed that in remaking  the
    decision the appellant should have that opportunity.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  No findings
    are to stand. Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial fact finding  necessary
    for the decision to be remade is such it is appropriate  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are not to include Judge Reid.

12. Since preparing the determination as above I have noted  the  reporting
    of Dumliauskas and others [2015] EWCA Civ 145, which may  be  a  useful
    reference in the remaking of the decision.

13. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




             [pic]


             4 June 2015
             Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


