
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01682/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 6 November 2015                        |        On 24 November 2015       |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   MR D B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Solanki, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
As a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to make a direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant in relation to the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davda, promulgated on 9 April 2015, dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal ("the Decision"). It comes before me in relation  to
    whether the Judge made an error of law in the Decision,  permission  to
    appeal having been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baird on 7  May
    2015.

 2. The grounds on which the Appellant submits that an  error  of  law  was
    made are that the Judge failed to take into account the expert evidence
    of Dr Campbell and materially  erred  in  considering  the  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claim. The  Appellant  is  an  Eritrean  asylum
    seeker who seeks to have his deportation order revoked on the basis  of
    a change in the country situation in Eritrea and the  country  guidance
    case of MO (Illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea [2011] UKUT 00190 in
    light of the fact that he was found in a previous appeal to be somebody
    who had served in  the  military  between  1999  and  2000.   In  those
    circumstances it was necessary to consider whether the  Appellant  left
    Eritrea illegally, and if so whether he may be at risk on that account.

 3. The Secretary of State  has  conceded  that  the  Decision  did  indeed
    contain an error of law. Both parties are agreed that the appeal should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. I am satisfied that the Decision does contain an error of law and I set
    it aside. I have considered whether it  is  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal.  In circumstances where  the  expert
    evidence and the findings  of  the  previous  Tribunal  based  on  that
    evidence go to the Appellant's credibility it  will  be  necessary  for
    further evidence to be heard and fresh findings on  credibility  to  be
    made. It is appropriate that the appeal be remitted.

Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that the First-Tier Tribunal's Decision contains an error  of
law.  I set it aside and remit it to the First-Tier  Tribunal  for  the  re-
making of the decision.  No findings are preserved.

Signed


[pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Smith
 Date: 20 November 2015

