
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01417/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 February 2014                           |On 26 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |
|Decision delivered extempore                  |                             |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. MR JUSTICE JAY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JAHWAHRAH BOGLE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Spearing, instructed by Westkin Associates

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica born in May 1993.   He  sought  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a visitor with his mother in September 1999
    but that application was refused.  He and his  mother  were  thereafter
    instructed to report on temporary admission but failed to do so.

2.   On 18 April 2007 the claimant was granted  three  years'  discretionary
    leave in  line  with  the  leave  granted  to  his  mother.   This  was
    subsequently extended for a further period of three years  in  December
    2010.

3.   In September 2010 the claimant was convicted of robbery and  aggravated
    burglary and was sentenced to a two year training and detention  order.
    Subsequently, on 22 March 2013, he was convicted of supplying  Class  B
    prohibited drugs and driving whilst  uninsured  and  was  sentenced  to
    seven months  in  detention.   Given  these  criminal  convictions  the
    Secretary of State decided, on 3 July 2013, that it  was  conducive  to
    the public good to make a deportation order against the claimant.   The
    claimant appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth  sitting
    with Mr G Getlevog, a Non-Legal Member.  They  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules in a determination promulgated on 16
    October 2013.  The tribunal did not go on to consider  Article  8  ECHR
    outside of the Rules.

5.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane in a decision of 4 December 2013.
     In doing so Judge Lane stated as follows:

         "The only arguable issue is whether at [26] the  panel  have  given
         legally adequate reasons for finding there are no ties with Jamaica
         (as to which see paragraph 2(b) of the grounds and  the  submission
         that 'ties' include social and linguistic ones)."


6.   The core  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning  is  found  within
    paragraphs 25 to 26 of its determination which read:

         "25. With regard to a DTO this only clicks  in  if  it  is  for  24
             months.  The position was that this  only  just  crept  within
             conducive deportation with  the  first  offence.   The  second
             offence  did  not  attract  automatic  deportation.   It   was
             confirmed by Mr Evans that there was no challenge to Counsel's
             submission regarding the case falling  within  the  new  Rules
             subject to a finding as to ties.


         26.  We find that the appellant in the light of his history and the
             period of time he has spent in the United  Kingdom  does  fall
             within the new Immigration Rules subject to a  finding  as  to
             whether or not the appellant has any ties to Jamaica.  We find
             that he has no ties to Jamaica.  That aspect of the  case  has
             not been challenged.  The witnesses have given evidence as  to
             there being no relatives in  Jamaica.   Assertions  have  been
             made in evidence which  has  been  accepted  to  this  effect.
             There is no property in Jamaica which has been retained.   The
             only visits made to Jamaica do not lead to the conclusion that
             ties have  been  retained.   The  new  Immigration  Rules  are
             prescriptive.  There is no room for judicial discretion  where
             such Rules are prescriptive.  The appellant therefore succeeds
             in his appeal."

7.   It is immediately apparent that the Tribunal did not direct  itself  to
    the reported decision of a Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal  in
    Ogundimu (Nigeria) [2008] UKUT 00060, and in particular paragraphs 123-
    124 of that decision, in which the Tribunal sought to give guidance  on
    the meaning of the word 'ties' in paragraph 399A of the Rules. However,
    such failure would only amount to an error of law  if  the  conclusions
    the tribunal reached were not consistent with the application  of  such
    guidance.  The relevant paragraphs of the decision in Ogundimu state:

         "[123] The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' imports,
         we think, a concept involving something more than merely remote  or
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a  claimant  to  his  country  or  her
         country of origin. If this were not the case then it  would  appear
         that a person's nationality of a country  of  proposed  deportation
         could of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements  of  the
         Rules. This would render the application of  the  rule,  given  the
         context within which it operates, entirely meaningless.


         [124] We recognise that the text under the  rules  is  an  exacting
         one. Consideration of whether  a  person  has  'no  ties'  to  such
         country must involve a  rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant
         circumstances and is not to be  limited  to  social,  cultural  and
         family circumstances..."

8.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  identified  a  number  of  features  of  the
    claimant's case which led them to conclude that  the  claimant  has  no
    ties to Jamaica.  These, found in paragraph 26  of  the  determination,
    are that the claimant has no relatives in Jamaica;  that  there  is  no
    family property there and, thirdly, that he has  only  visited  Jamaica
    once since his arrival in the United Kingdom.

9.   In her grounds of application the Secretary of State submits  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account a  number  of  relevant
    factors when coming to its conclusions.  The grounds  themselves  refer
    to two such claimed material factors; first, that the claimant grew  up
    in the United Kingdom living with his  Jamaican  mother  and  therefore
    must have cultural ties to his homeland and, second, that the  claimant
    speaks English, the language spoken in Jamaica. At the  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal Ms Isherwood sought to  identify  a  third  material
    factor said to  have  been  excluded  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    considerations, that being that  the  claimant's  grandmother  did  not
    spend all her time in the United States as claimed  and,  consequently,
    might spend time in Jamaica thus providing a tie for  the  claimant  to
    that country.

10.  Turning to a consideration of those three factors:  as  to  the  first,
    the submission is founded on  nothing  more  than  speculation  on  the
    Secretary of State's behalf.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  the
    evidence before it in detail.  Nothing in that  evidence  supports  the
    contention that the claimant holds any such cultural ties  to  Jamaica.
    This was a matter upon which the Secretary  of  State's  representative
    could have cross-examined upon before the First-tier Tribunal but there
    is no indication that such cross-examination took place or, if it  did,
    that any evidence was provided which supports the Secretary of  State's
    contention as now raised.

11.  As to the  second  matter  i.e.  the  fact  that  the  claimant  speaks
    English, it seems to us that this is  an  entirely  a  neutral  factor,
    English being a language widely spoken in the Caribbean. In any  event,
    the Tribunal were plainly aware that the  claimant  spoke  English,  he
    having given the entirety of his evidence in this language.

12.  As to the final matter, first raised on the day of the  hearing  by  Ms
    Isherwood, no explanation has been provided as  to  why  this  was  not
    pleaded in the written grounds.  In any event, it  does  not  take  the
    Secretary of State's case any further.  There is no indication  in  the
    accepted evidence that the appellant's grandmother spent  any  time  in
    Jamaica.

13.  Therefore, whilst we accept the reasons of the First-tier Tribunal  are
    brief, we find that (i) the conclusion it reached was open  to  it  for
    the reasons given, (ii) its conclusion and reasons do  not  offend  the
    guidance given by this Tribunal in Ogundimu and  (iii)  that  there  is
    sufficient reasoning in the determination for the losing party, in this
    case the Secretary of State, to understand why she lost.

14.  Ms Isherwood did not pursue the other grounds of application before  us
    today and she was right not to do so.  They are plainly  not  made  out
    given the  concession  recorded  in  paragraph  25  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.


15. For the sake of completeness, we indicate that had we had set aside the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and re-made the decision on  appeal  for
    ourselves we would have come to exactly  the  same  conclusion  as  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The claimant came to the United Kingdom aged  just
    6 years old, has been educated here and  has  lived  here  continuously
    since the date of his arrival, save for  one  short  visit  to  Jamaica
    during which time he stayed in a hotel.  He may speak a language spoken
    in Jamaica but he has no family there.  To all intents and purposes  he
    is a stranger to Jamaica and its way of life.


Decision


We find there is no error on point  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
determination and we consequently dismiss the Secretary  of  State's  appeal
before us.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 24 February 2014






