
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01054/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2016                               |On 28 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    K G A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan instructed by CASA UK, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The anonymity order imposed in my decision sent on 26 May 2016  remains
    in force.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Cameroon who was born on  [  ]  1976.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 16 June 2010 with leave as the  spouse
    of a British citizen ("M") whom he had married in Venice on 31  October
    2008.  On 10 September 2012, the appellant was granted indefinite leave
    to remain as a spouse.

 3. On 18 February 2014, the appellant was  convicted  at  the  Blackfriars
    Crown Court, after a trial, of the offence of "possession  of  a  false
    identity document with intent".   He  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    fifteen months' imprisonment.

 4. On 11 March 2014, the  appellant  was  served  with  a  notice  of  his
    liability to automatic deportation  under  the  provisions  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 (the "2007 Act").  In response,  representations  were
    made by the appellant that he should not be deported because to  do  so
    would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.  In particular,  the  appellant  relied
    upon his relationship with his wife and her children and grandchild.

 5. On 3 June  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the  appellant's
    representations and made a  decision  that  s.32(5)  of  the  2007  Act
    applied because the appellant's deportation would not breach Art 8.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 15 May 2015, Judge  I  Ross  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The judge found that the appellant could not succeed under the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended), in particular para 399(b) on the
    basis of his "genuine and subsisting relationship" with his wife (which
    the judge accepted existed) because he concluded that  the  appellant's
    deportation would not be "unduly harsh" either for the appellant's wife
    or  for  the  appellant  and  that  there  were  not  "very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 or 399A"
    to outweigh the public interest in deportation.  The judge  also  found
    that  Exceptions  1  and  2  set  out  in  s.117C(4)  and  (5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act (the "NIA Act  2002")  did  not
    apply.

 7. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal against that  decision  on
    the basis that the judge had failed properly to consider the  issue  of
    whether his deportation would be "unduly harsh".

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the FtT but  was  granted
    by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Blum) on 4 August 2015.

 9. The appeal initially came before me on 17  May  2016.   In  a  decision
    dated 26 May 2016, I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    erred in law and set aside his decision.  The appeal was  adjourned  to
    be listed for a resumed hearing in order  to  remake  the  decision  in
    respect of Art 8.

10. That resumed hearing was listed before me on 19 July 2016.

The Resumed Hearing

11. Neither the appellant  nor  his  wife  attended  the  resumed  hearing.
    Following enquiries, Mr Khan, who represented the  appellant,  informed
    me that the appellant was  providing  support  to  his  niece  who  was
    receiving medical treatment and  neither  he  nor  his  wife  would  be
    attending the hearing.  His  instructions  were  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing on the  basis  of  submissions  only  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant.

12. I note that the appellant did not attend the  previous  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing although he and his wife did  attend  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  In the circumstances, I considered it proper to proceed  with
    the hearing, on the  basis  proposed  by  Mr  Khan  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, in the interests of justice.

The Applicable Law

13. The appellant relies upon  Art  8  of  the  ECHR.   He  is  a  "foreign
    criminal" falling within para 398 of the Immigration Rules (HC  395  as
    amended) and s.117D(2) of the  NIA  Act  2002  as  a  result  of  being
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months.

14. It is clear from a consistent series  of  decisions  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal that the Rules (in particular paras 398-399A) read with Part  5A
    of the NIA Act 2002 (in particular s.117C) create a "complete code" for
    determining, in deportation cases, whether a decision  breaches  Art  8
    (see MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; LC (China) v SSHD [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1310;  SSHD  v  AJ  (Angola)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1636  and  NA
    (Pakistan) and Others v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662).

15. As a "foreign criminal" falling  within  s.32  of  the  2007  Act,  the
    appellant is subject to the automatic  deportation  provision  in  that
    Act.  As a consequence, his deportation is  "conducive  to  the  public
    good" (see s.32(4)) and the Secretary of State is required  to  make  a
    deportation order  unless  the  individual  falls  within  one  of  the
    exceptions set out in s.33 of  the  2007  Act.   In  this  appeal,  the
    appellant claims to fall within Exception 1 in s.32(2)(a) of  the  2007
    Act, namely that his deportation would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

16. As applicable to the appellant, para  398  of  the  Rules  provides  as
    follows:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and

         .... (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
         the public good and in the public interest because they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than four years but at least  twelve
         months;

         .... the Secretary of State in assessing the  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

17. In this appeal, the appellant  does  not  rely  upon  para  399A  which
    addresses any claim based upon the appellant's private life.  He cannot
    satisfy the requirement in 399A(a) that he has been "lawfully  resident
    in the UK for most of his life".

18. Instead, the appellant relies upon  para  399(b)  which  addresses  the
    appellant's claim based upon his relationship with his wife.  So far as
    relevant, para 399(b) provides as follows:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

         .... (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         a partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen or  settled  in
         the UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

             (ii)     it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported."

19. Paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM which is relevant when considering  para
    399(b)(ii) provides that:

         "'Insurmountable obstacles' means the very significant difficulties
         which  would  be  faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
         continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and  which
         could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the
         applicant or their partner."

20. Mr Khan, on behalf of the appellant submits that it  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" for the appellant's wife to live with him in  the  Cameroon  and
    further that it would be "unduly harsh" for his wife to remain  in  the
    UK if he were deported to the Cameroon.

21. As para 398 states, if an individual cannot  establish  that  he  falls
    within either para 399 or 399A then the public interest will "only"  be
    outweighed by other factors where:

         "there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
         described in paragraph 399 and 399A."

22. In applying that provision, all factors  must  be  taken  into  account
    including factors that fell, in principle, within para 399 or para 399A
    even though they did not result in a finding in the individual's favour
    under the respective rule (see NA (Pakistan) and Others v SSHD at [28]-
    [37]).

23. The relevant Immigration Rules must, however, be applied in conjunction
    with Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002.  That set outs a  number  of  matters
    concerned with the "public interest question" which a Court or Tribunal
    must "have regard" to when determining whether there is a breach of Art
    8 (see s.117A(1) and (2)).  The "public interest  question"  refers  to
    the proportionality issue under Art 8.2 (s.117A(3)).

24. Section  117B  (apart  from  s.117B(6))  deals  with  "public  interest
    considerations applicable in all cases"  including  deportation  cases.
    Section 117B provides as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

25. Additional considerations to be applied in deportation cases  involving
    foreign criminals are set out in s.117C as follows:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

26. As will be apparent, Exception  1  in  s.117C(4)  and  Exception  2  in
    s.117C(5) closely mirror para 399A and para  399  respectively  of  the
    Rules.  Likewise s.117C(6) mirrors the provision in para 398 (where the
    individual has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least
    four years) namely that deportation will  be  in  the  public  interest
    unless there are "very compelling circumstances, over and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2".

27. In NA (Pakistan) and Others, the  Court  of  Appeal  acknowledged  that
    Parliament had sought to reflect the same substantive content in s.117C
    as the Rules as amended following the  inclusion  of  Part  5A  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 with effect from 28 July 2014  (see  [26])  .   In
    that regard, the Court of Appeal held that s.117C(6) - which is on  its
    face restricted to foreign criminals  who  have  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least four years  -  must  also  apply  to
    foreign criminals who have been sentenced to a period of at  least  one
    year but less than four years  where  neither  Exceptions  1  or  2  in
    ss.117C(4) and (5) do not apply.  In that instance, the Court reasoned,
    the public interest will require the  individual's  deportation  unless
    there are "very compelling circumstances over and above those described
    in Exceptions 1 and 2" (see [27]).

28. In this appeal, Mr Khan's submission focused on  the  impact  upon  the
    appellant's spouse such that it would, he submitted, be "unduly  harsh"
    for her to live in the Cameroon or to remain in the UK if the appellant
    were deported.  That is in substance a reliance  upon  para  399(b)(ii)
    and (iii) and Exception 2 in s.117C(5).  In addition,  Mr  Khan  relied
    upon the "very compelling circumstances"  provision  in  para  398  and
    s.117C(6) of the NIA Act 2002.  In  addition  to  not  relying  on  the
    private life provisions in para 399a and Exception 1 in  s.117C(4),  Mr
    Khan did not rely upon any  "parental  relationship"  with  his  wife's
    children and the impact upon them being "unduly harsh".

29. What, then, is meant by "unduly harsh"?  There had been a different  of
    view expressed in the Upper Tribunal in the two decisions of MAB [2015]
    UKUT 435 (IAC) and KMO [2015]  UKUT  543  (IAC).  The  former  excluded
    consideration of the gravity of the offender's criminality and required
    focus simply upon the impact on the  individual;  the  latter  included
    consideration of the gravity of the offending as part  of  a  balancing
    exercise weighting the public interest against all  the  circumstances.



30. In MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, the Court of Appeal approved
    the approach in KMO and overruled MAB.  The Court of  Appeal  concluded
    that the phrase "unduly harsh" required a decision maker to have regard
    "to all the circumstances  including  the  criminal's  immigration  and
    criminal  history"  (see  [26]).   The  Court  of  Appeal  subsequently
    considered itself bound by MM even where the Court expressed doubts  as
    to its correctness tentatively preferring  the  approach  in  MAB  (see
    R(MA(Pakistan) and others) v Upper Tribunal [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [43]
    per Elias LJ with whom King LJ and Sir Stephen Richards agreed).

31. At [24] in MM Laws LJ (with whom Vos and Hamblen LJJ  agreed)  set  out
    the correct approach as follows:

         "Accordingly the more pressing the public interest in his  removal,
         the harder it will be to show that  the  affect  on  his  child  or
         partner will be unduly harsh.  Any other approach  in  my  judgment
         dislocates the 'unduly harsh' provisions  from  their  context,  it
         would mean that the question of undue  hardship  would  be  decided
         wholly without regard to  the  force  of  the  public  interest  in
         deportation in the particular case.  But  in  that  case  the  term
         'unduly' is mistaken for  'excessive'  which  imports  a  different
         idea.  What is due or undue depends on all the  circumstances,  not
         merely the impact on the child or partner in the  given  case.   In
         the present context relevant circumstances  certainly  include  the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history."

32. The impact upon an individual must, no doubt, reach a  relatively  high
    threshold to be characterised as "harsh"  at  all  rather  than  merely
    producing a situation which is difficult,  inconvenient  or  disruptive
    but whether any particular impact is "undue" must take into account the
    public interest reflected in the deportee's  offending.   The  stronger
    the public interest reflected  in  the  individual's  criminality,  the
    greater the impact will need to be for it to be "undue" than where  the
    public interest is weaker and a comparatively lesser impact may suffice
    for it to be "unduly" harsh.

The Submissions

33. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Khan relied  upon  a  witness  statement
    from the appellant (at pages 1-2 of  the  FtT  bundle)  and  a  witness
    statement from his wife (at pages 3-6 of the FtT bundle).  Whilst  both
    the  appellant  and  his  wife  gave  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Ross merely recorded that they gave "oral  evidence  in
    accordance with witness statements adopted as  true".   There  was,  of
    course, no oral evidence given at the hearing before me.

34. Mr  Khan  first  addressed  the  issue  of  the  "seriousness"  of  the
    appellant's offence.  In addition, Mr Khan drew attention  to  passages
    in the OASys assessment dated 5 August 2014 (at pages 8-39 of  the  FtT
    bundle).  Mr Khan also placed  reliance  upon  a  number  of  documents
    dealing with courses undertaken by the appellant whilst in  prison  (at
    pages 88-108 of  the  FtT  bundle).   Mr  Khan  also  relied  upon  the
    sentencing  remarks  of  the  Crown  Court  Judge  (at  B1-B4  of   the
    respondent's bundle).

35. Mr Khan accepted that the appellant had been sentenced to a  period  of
    fifteen months' imprisonment but,  he  submitted,  on  examination  the
    offence was towards the "less serious end of the  scale"  reducing  the
    public interest  in  deporting  the  appellant.   He  relied  upon  the
    sentencing judge's remarks that the  appellant  was  a  "foot  soldier"
    within the organisation when the appellant used a false French ID  card
    to obtain money.  Mr Khan submitted that the appellant was not  someone
    who was involved in the planning or organisation of the offence.

36. In addition, Mr Khan pointed out  that  the  appellant  was  a  man  of
    previous good character.  He referred me  to  the  OASys  Report  which
    identified that the appellant was at a "low" risk of re-offending (page
    32), that the offence was "not indicative of serious  harm"  (page  15)
    and that the appellant had no adjudications or  write-ups  against  him
    whilst in prison (page 26).  Mr Khan submitted that the  appellant  had
    shown remorse and there had been no subsequent  offending.   He  relied
    upon the certificates at pages 88-108 of the bundle demonstrating  that
    the appellant had made efforts to reform.

37. In respect of the appellant's  relationship  with  his  wife,  Mr  Khan
    pointed out that they had been married since 2010.   The  evidence  was
    that his wife was in the middle of a degree course in childminding  and
    that she had just set up a business in childminding.  She would have to
    give these up if she was to move to the Cameroon.  Mr Khan also pointed
    out that the appellant's wife had an 18 year old daughter  who  was  in
    college and lived with her and the appellant.  She was still  dependent
    on the appellant's wife.  He  also  relied  on  the  evidence,  in  the
    statements, that the granddaughter of the  appellant's  spouse  visited
    and stayed with them on weekends.

38. Mr Khan submitted that the appellant's wife, who was a British citizen,
    had no links with the Cameroon and did not speak French, which  is  the
    main language in the Cameroon and that it would be unduly harsh for her
    to relocate there.  He further submitted that without the appellant  in
    the UK, it would be unduly harsh for  his  wife  to  remain  here.   He
    relied upon her evidence in her witness statement that she would not be
    able to continue her studies and business without him.

39. Mr Khan submitted therefore, that the appellant met the  "unduly  harsh
    requirement" in the Rules and  s.117C(5)  and  that  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances" to outweigh the public interest.

40. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards invited me to conclude
    that the appellant's offending  was  "serious".   He  relied  upon  the
    sentencing judge's remarks that  the  offence  was  "extremely  serious
    indeed".  Mr  Richards  acknowledged  that  the  sentencing  judge  had
    commented that the appellant's offence did not involve a "sophisticated
    forgery" but, Mr  Richards  submitted,  he  was  being  used  by  other
    criminals in order very possibly to launder money which was  a  serious
    offence.

41. Mr Richards submitted that the position of the appellant's wife had  to
    be seen in  the  light  of  the  seriousness  of  that  offending.   He
    submitted that the  likely  adverse  consequences  of  the  appellant's
    deportation, in particular to his wife were  not  "unduly  harsh"  when
    viewed against the seriousness of the appellant's offending.   Although
    the appellant's wife did not want to go to the Cameroon because she was
    studying and in business, it was inevitable that there  would  be  some
    disruption to their family life if the  appellant  were  deported.   Mr
    Richards submitted that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  her
    living in the Cameroon with the appellant.  The appellant  had  studied
    and  obtained  qualifications  which  would  no  doubt,   Mr   Richards
    submitted, stand him in  good  stead  in  the  Cameroon.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that there was no reason why his wife could not continue  her
    line of  business  in  the  Cameroon  and  the  difficulties  could  be
    overcome.  Likewise, Mr Richards submitted that as regards  her  family
    in the UK, contact could be maintained.

42. Mr Richards submitted that given the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
    offending, the difficulties faced by the  appellant  or  his  wife  and
    family did not reach the threshold of "unduly harsh".

Discussion

43. The appellant met his wife in Venice in  2008  and  they  were  married
    shortly thereafter on 31 October 2008.  They have, therefore, now  been
    married for seven years.  I accept that they have lived together in the
    UK since the appellant entered with leave as a spouse on 16 June  2010.
    They have a genuine and subsisting marriage.

44. I also appears from the witness statement of the appellant's wife  that
    she has two children (see para 4 of her statement).  Mr  Khan  was  not
    able to clarify the position with any certainty but one of the children
    (whom it is not suggested is  a  minor)  appears  to  live  in  Bristol
    although not with the appellant and his wife.  I will  proceed  on  the
    basis that there is a 'second' (albeit  adult)  daughter.   She  has  a
    child - the grandchild of the appellant's wife - and the  granddaughter
    visits and spends every other weekend with the appellant and his  wife.
    The other daughter of the appellant's wife is now 18 years of age.  She
    is in education but continues to live with the appellant and his wife.

45. The appellant's wife in her statement dated 15 May 2015 states that she
    has finished the first year of a three year degree course in childcare.
     That is a year ago and (in the absence of any updating evidence to the
    contrary) it is logical to conclude that she has now completed  two  of
    the  three  years  of  her  degree.   In  addition,  she  has  begun  a
    childminding business.

46. The home of the appellant and his wife, at least in part, is subject to
    a mortgage which his wife states, in her witness statement, as  at  May
    2015 had ten years remaining.

47. I accept the appellant's evidence that he has no close  family  in  the
    Cameroon.  Both his parents are dead and there is no evidence  that  he
    has any siblings there.  His aunt, in  the  Cameroon,  has  also  died.
    Nevertheless, the appellant is not without any family in the  Cameroon.
    His wife refers in her witness statement to a visit to the Cameroon  in
    2009 when they saw "very distant relatives".

48. I accept that there would be some difficulties for the appellant if  he
    were deported to the Cameroon.  It was not made  clear  to  me  at  the
    hearing either  in  submissions  or  by  evidence  when  precisely  the
    appellant left the Cameroon.  Prior to him coming to the  UK  in  2010,
    clearly he had been living in Italy for some years as he met  his  wife
    there in 2008.  He was resident there  (see  para  12  of  Judge  Ross'
    determination).  It was not  suggested  before  me,  and  there  is  no
    evidence supporting a contrary position, that the  appellant  has  lost
    all his cultural ties with the Cameroon.  It is not suggested  that  he
    no longer speaks French.

49. Nevertheless, I do not accept that the appellant would, as he  and  his
    wife claim, be destitute on return to the Cameroon.  He managed to live
    and reside without any apparent problems in Italy for some years and he
    has worked in the UK.  Further, as the many certificates in the  bundle
    illustrate, he has studied here and I am in no doubt that  he  has  the
    resources and wherewithal to  obtain  employment  and  support  himself
    (indeed himself and his wife) in the Cameroon.

50. The position of the appellant's wife is somewhat different.  She  is  a
    British citizen and has her roots in the UK even though originally  she
    came from Jamaica.  She  has  family  in  the  UK,  in  particular  two
    daughters and a grandchild.  I accept that she has a close relationship
    with her family and her one daughter lives with her whilst in education
    as an adult.  She has close contact with her grandchild who stays  with
    her and the appellant every other weekend and, as she sets out  in  her
    witness  statement,   she   also   has   other   involvement   in   her
    granddaughter's life, for example picking her up from nursery from time
    to time.

51. In addition, the appellant's wife is undertaking a  three  year  degree
    course of which she would appear to be completing her second year.  She
    also has a childminding business which she has commenced in the UK.

52. If the appellant's wife moved to the  Cameroon  with  the  appellant  I
    accept that there  would  be  a  significant  disruption  to  her  life
    including her current course of study and her work.  Likewise,  despite
    modern methods of communication  including  Skype,  there  would  be  a
    significant disruption to her  relationship  with  her  grandchild  who
    could not be expected to leave the UK.  No submissions were made to  me
    in relation to the "best interests" of that child but, it seems to  me,
    on the material before me that it would be  in  her  grandchild's  best
    interest to maintain her existing  relationship  with  the  appellant's
    wife.   Further,  there  would  undoubtedly  be  difficulties  for  the
    daughter who currently lives with the appellant and his wife if left in
    the UK without her mother.  It is far from clear that the appellant and
    his  wife  would  be  able  to  maintain  their  home  in  the  UK  and
    consequently, there is a risk that the daughter would have to find  her
    own accommodation.  There was no evidence of her ability  or  inability
    to do so but I note that  she  is  currently  a  student.   There  may,
    therefore, be difficulties for her but there was no evidence  that  she
    would not be able to support herself as a student.  She could  not,  of
    course, be expected to leave the UK and live with  her  mother  in  the
    Cameroon.  There was no material before me about the  circumstances  of
    the 'second' daughter.

53. I will turn shortly to deal with the "seriousness" of  the  appellant's
    offending which, following MM (Uganda),  I  must  balance  against  the
    impact upon the appellant's wife in determining  whether  it  would  be
    "unduly harsh" for her to continue her family life with  the  appellant
    in the Cameroon.  I have reached the conclusion that  the  impact  upon
    the appellant's wife of leaving the UK to live in the Cameroon would be
    of such significance that it would be "harsh"  and,  even  taking  into
    account the seriousness of  the  appellant's  offending,  it  would  be
    "unduly harsh".

54. That, however, is not sufficient for the appellant to succeed  in  this
    appeal.  In addition, he must establish that, if he were  deported,  it
    would be unduly harsh for his wife to remain in the UK.

55. As  I  have  already  indicated,  there  would  be  disruption  to  the
    appellant's relationships both with his wife and her family with  whom,
    I accept, he has contact including one daughter living with them  since
    he came to the UK in 2010.  I have no specific evidence concerning  his
    relationship with his step-daughters or  his  step-grandchild.   I  am,
    however, on the basis of the written statements of both  the  appellant
    and his wife content to accept that he has a  close  relationship  with
    them.  His deportation to the Cameroon would inevitably  disrupt  those
    relationships.  However, such disruption is the natural consequence  of
    the deportation of a foreign criminal in accordance with the  automatic
    deportation provisions of the 2007 Act.

56. I do not accept that, if the appellant is deported, his wife  will  not
    be able to continue to any significant degree her life in the UK.   She
    is currently studying and working and there is nothing in the  evidence
    to suggest she was unable to do so whilst the appellant was in  prison.
    No doubt his absence added some burden to her  life  but  she  survived
    both financially and practically without him.  I do not accept that she
    would be unable to continue to work and study if he were deported.  The
    impact upon her would not, in my judgment, be "harsh" despite the  loss
    of her husband's support and marital companionship.

57. Further, I do not accept that there are insurmountable obstacles to the
    appellant living in the Cameroon despite the absence of  close  family.
    The  threshold  for  that   is   high   requiring   "very   significant
    difficulties".  As I have already indicated, I see no reason  to  doubt
    that he is a sufficiently resourceful and educated man  that  he  could
    not financially survive and live in the Cameroon.   Any  disruption  to
    the relationship that he has  with  his  step-grandchild,  and  to  the
    extent that it is in her best interests to maintain a relationship with
    him,  cannot  in  my  judgment  prevent  his  deportation.   His  step-
    grandchild will  continue  to  live  with  her  mother  and  enjoy  her
    relationship with her grandmother in the UK.

58. Whilst, therefore, I accept that there will be some disruption  to  the
    appellant's family and private life on deportation, I am not  satisfied
    that that disruption is significant to be characterised as "harsh" and,
    in any event, as "unduly" harsh when seen in the light of his offending
    despite what was said  on  his  behalf  by  Mr  Khan  about  his  post-
    conviction circumstances.

59. I accept that the appellant was prior to his offending a person of good
    character.  He had no previous convictions.  I also accept,  albeit  on
    the limited evidence before me, that he is remorseful and that  he  has
    not committed any further offending.  I also  accept  that,  whilst  in
    prison, he had no adjudications or write-ups against him.

60. Nevertheless, as the sentencing judge stated the appellant's  offending
    was  "extremely  serious"  indeed.   His  offending  was  part  of   an
    activities of an organisation  as  the  sentencing  judge  made  clear.
    Whilst I accept that the appellant was not involved in the planning  or
    organisation of the criminal enterprise - the judge described him as  a
    "foot soldier" - his offending remained "serious" in itself.  I  accept
    that the OASys Report puts the risk of re-offending as  "low".   Whilst
    the offending, including the sentence of fifteen months'  imprisonment,
    did not put the appellant in the higher category of  offending  (namely
    imprisonment of four years or  more),  it  fell  within  the  automatic
    deportation provisions and, as the sentencing judge  pointed  out,  the
    money obtained could  be  used  "very  possibly  for  money  laundering
    purposes".

61. Applying the approach set out in MM (Uganda), I take into  account  all
    the circumstances of the appellant and the seriousness of his  offence.
    Section 117C(1) states that the deportation of foreign criminals is "in
    the public interest".  Section 117C(2) states that:  "the more  serious
    the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is the  public
    interest in deportation of the criminal."

62. Carrying out that balancing exercise,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    impact upon the appellant (and his wife and family) if he  is  deported
    would be "unduly harsh" for the purposes of para 399(b) and Exception 2
    in s.117C(5).

63. Consequently, the  appellant  can  only  succeed  if  there  are  "very
    compelling circumstances, over and  above  those"  in  Exception  2  in
    s.117C(5) and para 399(b) of the Rules (see s.117C(6)).

64. Mr Khan did not identify any aspects of the appellant's  case  specific
    to his claim that there were  "very  compelling  circumstances"  beyond
    those relevant to the issue of "unduly harsh".  In my  judgment,  there
    are plainly none.  I fully  take  into  account  all  the  circumstance
    including the circumstances (considered above) relevant to para  399(b)
    and s.117C(5) (see SSHD v JZ  (Zambia)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  116  and  NA
    (Pakistan) at [21]).  In NA (Pakistan) at  [32]  the  Court  of  Appeal
    explained the approach to the "very compelling circumstances" issue  as
    follows:

         "... in principle there may be cases in which ... an  offender  can
         say that features of his case of a kind described in  Exceptions  1
         and 2 have such great force for Article 8  purposes  that  they  do
         constitute such very compelling  circumstances,  whether  taken  by
         themselves or in conjunction with other factors relevant to Article
         8 but not falling within the factors described in Exceptions 1  and
         2.  The decision maker, be it the Secretary of State or a Tribunal,
         must look at all the matters relied upon collectively, in order  to
         determine whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh  the
         high public interest in deportation."

65. At [33] the Court of Appeal continued:

         "Although there is no 'exceptionality' requirement,  it  inexorably
         follows from the statutory screen  that  the  cases  in  which  the
         circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high
         public interest in deportation  would  be  rare.   The  commonplace
         incidents of family life, such as aging parents in poor  health  or
         the  natural  love  between  parents  and  children,  will  not  be
         sufficient."

66. In this appeal, nothing put  forward  by  Mr  Khan  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant falling within para 399(b) and Exception 2 is of "such  great
    force" to amount to  very  compelling  circumstances.   The  inevitable
    disruption to the appellant's family life with his wife,  step-children
    and step-grandchild cannot, in my judgment, amount to "very  compelling
    circumstances".

67. Mr Khan placed no reliance upon para 399A or Exception 1 in  s.117C(4).
    The focus of his submissions was on the  impact  upon  the  appellant's
    family life if deported.  He did not address me on  any  other  matters
    dealt with in s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.  The focus was, again, on the
    deportation context and the matters set out in s.117C and para  399(b).



68. For the above reasons, the appellant has failed to establish  that  the
    public interest in deporting him is outweighed by all the circumstances
    of his case.  He has failed to establish a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.



Decision

69. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  having  previously  been  set
    aside, I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  the
    basis that it has not  been  established  that  his  deportation  would
    breach Art 8 of the ECHR.


                                      Signed



                                      A Grubb
                                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                      28 July 2016
