
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01164/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2013                             |On 22nd October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before
                   MISS E E ARFON-JONES DL, VICE PRESIDENT
                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                           Mr LIBAN OSMAN WARSAME
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss V Hutton (instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Respondent  against  a
    Determination of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge Whiting and  Mrs  L  R
    Schmitt) promulgated  on  24th  July  2013  by  which  it  allowed,  on
    Humanitarian Protection grounds and  under  the  EEA  Regulations,  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  deport
    him.

 2. Although the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal are brought  by  the
    Secretary of State, for the sake of clarity  and  continuity  we  shall
    continue to refer to Mr Warsame as the Appellant and the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.

 3. The brief facts of this case are that the Appellant, born  in  December
    1990, is a citizen of Somalia. He entered the UK in 2004  as  a  family
    member of an EEA national, his mother. On 21st November 2011 (when aged
    21) he was convicted, on his Guilty Plea, at Wood Green Crown Court  of
    three counts of burglary and one of violent disorder. The offences were
    committed during the "London riots" in August 2011  and  the  Appellant
    was sentenced to 30 months imprisonment.

 4. As a result of that conviction the Secretary of State served him with a
    Notice of Decision to make a Deportation Order on 3rd April 2012 and  a
    Deportation Order was signed on 16th May 2012. The Appellant's  attempt
    to appeal against that decision was rejected as being out of time.

 5. The Appellant then claimed asylum in December 2012 and on 31st May 2013
    the Secretary of State refused his claim for asylum and issued a  fresh
    decision to deport him. The previous decision to deport was revoked.

 6. It is that decision of 31st May 2013 that  was  the  decision  appealed
    against in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The Appellant's claim for asylum was based on  a  fear  of  persecution
    upon return to Mogadishu on account of his absence from Somalia  for  a
    period in excess of 13 years and being westernised and also a  fear  of
    persecution by al-Shabaab. He also claimed to be a member of a minority
    clan.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant  and  various
    family members and concluded at paragraph 34 of the Determination  that
    the Appellant had not demonstrated a  real  risk  that  he  would  face
    persecution or severe ill treatment upon return to Somalia for  any  of
    the reasons under  the  1951  refugee  Convention  nor  would  he  face
    treatment which breached Article 3 of the ECHR. The First-tier Tribunal
    did not accept that al-Shabaab  would  be  interested  in  or  able  to
    specifically target him. It did not accept the Appellant was  a  member
    of a minority clan. Those findings are not challenged by the Appellant.



 9. The First-tier Tribunal  then  went  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    position as a family member of an EEA  national,  his  mother  being  a
    Dutch national. It noted that he could only be deported  in  accordance
    with the EEA Regulations. It concluded the Appellant had  not  acquired
    permanent residence in the UK under the EEA Regulations.  That  finding
    is not challenged.

10. The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  in  detail  the  nature  of  the
    offences, the risk of the  Appellant's  offending  in  future  and  the
    contents of the NOMS report. The Tribunal  concluded  at  paragraph  61
    that the Appellant's proposed deportation would be fully  justified  on
    serious grounds of public policy and  public  security,  the  Appellant
    presenting a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the interests of society. That finding, the Tribunal said, meant
    that  his  deportation,  considered  as  a  discrete  issue,  would  be
    justified on both the basic and the intermediate  level  of  protection
    from deportation afforded to an EEA family member. Again, that  finding
    is not challenged by the Appellant.

11. The Tribunal then turned their attention to Humanitarian Protection and
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.  The  Tribunal  referred
    itself to the authority  of  AMM  and  Others  (Conflict;  Humanitarian
    Crisis; Returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC). It found no
    reason to depart from the findings of AMM and  at  paragraph  65  found
    substantial grounds had been shown for  believing  that  the  Appellant
    would face a real risk of suffering serious harm if returned to Somalia
    in the present  circumstances  obtaining  in  Mogadishu  and  that  the
    Appellant's removal would cause the United Kingdom to be in  breach  of
    its obligations under the Qualification Directive.  That  finding,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  found,  meant  that  the   Appellant's   proposed
    deportation  to  Somalia  additionally  became  disproportionate  under
    Regulation 21 (5) of the Immigration (EEA) regulations 2006.

12. It is that finding that  the  Secretary  of  State  challenges  in  the
    grounds. In short the First-tier  Tribunal  is  said  to  have  made  a
    material error of law in failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  its
    finding that the Appellant would be at  risk  of  harm  falling  within
    Article  15(c) on deportation to Mogadishu. The Secretary of State  had
    argued before the First-tier Tribunal that the  country  conditions  in
    Somalia had changed to such an extent that there will be no  breach  of
    article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, and thus  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to depart from the guidance given in AMM. AMM was
    reported in November 2011 and took into account evidence to relation to
    the country situation as at October 2011.

13. The grounds refer to background evidence submitted by the Secretary  of
    State to the First-tier Tribunal which included a Danish/Norwegian Fact-
    Finding Report dated May 2013. The grounds submit that report  supports
    a finding that the situation in Mogadishu has been durable and that the
    risk in relation to Article 15(c) harm no longer exists.

14. The grounds then set out sections of that report and in particular:-

         "These days there are no armed  struggle  and  no  front  line  [in
         Mogadishu], people can move freely around in the  city  and  people
         have moved back from the Afgoye corridor and from elsewhere".  Page
         6 of the report.

         "Al-Shabaab mainly targets:  Government  officials;  African  Union
         Mission in  Somalia  (AMISOM);  People  working  for  international
         organisations; People they suspect to be spying  on  them  for  the
         government". Page 6/7 of the report

         "The international NGO (B), Mogadishu stated that  al-Shabaab  does
         not kill civilians indiscriminately". Page 7 of the report



         "UNDSS, Mogadishu, explained that there are no recent reports of al-
         Shabaab having attacked or killed  civilians  deliberately  through
         armed attacks. Actually this has not taken  place  for  some  years
         because al-Shabaab no longer  has  fixed  combat  positions  inside
         Mogadishu". Page 9 of the report

         "UNDSS, Nairobi,  stated  that  security  for  ordinary  people  in
         Mogadishu had improved since October 2012. Freedom of movement  for
         ordinary  people  living  in  Mogadishu  has  improved,   as   most
         checkpoints have now been removed. All illegal checkpoints had been
         completely removed". Page 20 of the Report

         "According  to  UNHCR-Somalia,  Mogadishu,  many  people  from  the
         Diaspora  have  returned  to  Mogadishu,  also,  because  they  see
         business opportunities". Page 51.

15. Before us Mr Saunders indicated that  that  report  was  a  substantial
    document and was one upon which  the  Secretary  of  State  relied.  He
    referred to the various passages which we have cited  above  that  were
    cited in the grounds. He argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
    have done more than it actually did in the determination.  He  did  not
    suggest that the First-tier Tribunal  had  ignored  that  evidence  but
    submitted that it should have done more  to  demonstrate  that  it  had
    given it proper consideration.

16. Miss Hutton sought to defend the  determination  referring  us  to  the
    Danish report itself, AMM and the other documents  that  the  Appellant
    had produced at the hearing.

17. Turning to the Determination itself, the First-tier Tribunal listed the
    pieces of evidence before it at  paragraph  21  and   at  paragraph  32
    referred to the Appellant's acknowledgement that al-Shabaab had  either
    been  driven  out  or  withdrawn  from  Mogadishu  although  al-Shabaab
    inspired  attacks  on   security   forces   and   government   agencies
    spasmodically continued to occur.  The  First-tier  Tribunal   accepted
    that al-Shabaab would not be in a  position  to  target  the  Appellant
    specifically

18. At paragraph 64 the First-tier Tribunal referred to evidence  submitted
    by the Respondent seeking to demonstrate that conditions  in  Mogadishu
    had improved to such an extent that it should be able  to  depart  from
    the Country Guidance case of AMM. The  Tribunal   stated  that  it  had
    examined that evidence in detail  but was not persuaded that conditions
    in Mogadishu had improved to such an extent to mitigate the risks found
    to exist for vulnerable returnees in AMM such as to enable it to depart
    from the relevant conclusions of that Country Guidance case.

19. It is true that the First-tier Tribunal did not set out in  detail  the
    contents of the Danish Report relied on  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    However, even if that was an error it would only be relevant  if  doing
    so could  have  led  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  reach  a  different
    conclusion.

20. Turning to Danish Report itself it is our view that the passages  cited
    by the Secretary of State in the  grounds  "cherry  pick"  those  parts
    which favour the Secretary of State's argument  whilst  ignoring  those
    parts that do not.





21. At page 5 the Report states:-

         "Regarding armed conflict  UNDSS,  Mogadishu,  explained  that  al-
         Shabaab's partial combat withdrawal from Mogadishu in  August  2011
         this withdrawal was only completed by the end of  May  2012.  Since
         then there have been no more al-Shabaab troops holding fixed combat
         positions in Mogadishu, but there continue to  be  underground  al-
         Shabaab cells and terrorism. The district of Daynile was  the  last
         district of Mogadishu to be liberated from al-Shabaab. Since  then,
         i.e. end of May 2012, there were approximately 6 weeks of  calmness
         and no fighting in Mogadishu. However, following this period  there
         have been armed  attacks  again,  against  targets  in  the  city's
         outlying districts such as  security  forces'  patrols  and  police
         stations. Al-Shabaab undertake these hit-and-run attacks with small
         arms  and  occasionally  slightly  heavier  weapons   like   rocket
         propelled grenades. Al-Shabaab is not trying to  retake  Mogadishu,
         not even the outlying districts of the city, but  it  instead  uses
         the attacks as a form of  harassment  and  is  a  reminder  of  its
         presence."

22. Further on at page 5 of the report it states:-

         "Elman Peace and Human Rights Centre, Mogadishu, is  hopeful  about
         the SNG, but it was emphasised that there are still  a  lot  to  be
         done before the SNG will function as a genuine  government.  People
         are talking freely about what the SNG should do, but the main issue
         at the moment is peace and security."

23. On page 6 it is stated:-

         "These  days  there  are  no  armed  struggle  and  no  front  line
         [Mogadishu], people can move freely around in the city  and  people
         have moved back from the Afgoye corridor and elsewhere."

    This is one of the passages relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  in
    her grounds. The report then however goes on to say:-

         "However, according to the international NGO (B), Mogadishu,  there
         are still threats  in  the  city.  Different  kinds  of  improvised
         explosives, hand grenade attacks  and  assassinations  create  fear
         among people, and  al-Shabaab  still  has  influence  that  affects
         people's lives. Checkpoints have been removed, but when people  are
         moving around, they must constantly be careful. For example,  since
         people started to go to Lido beach  there  have  been  two  attacks
         there, one car bomb and one suicide  bomber.  On  the  other  hand,
         there are clear improvements."

24. The following paragraph indicates that al-Shabaab members can be  found
    everywhere and it is not possible to identify an al-Shabaab by the  way
    he looks.

25. Further on page 6 it is stated that  the  influence  of  al-Shabaab  in
    Mogadishu is not visible, but it is able to undertake attacks all  over
    the city.

26. On page 7 the Report indicates  that  al-Shabaab  has  infiltrated  the
    police, the  intelligence  and  the  military  where  they  have  their
    informants.

27. It then states that in Mogadishu al-Shabaab also exerts  its  influence
    by calling people and threatening them and that this is still going on.
    It then states that assassinations have  increased  from  the  previous
    year and that the numbers went up and down periodically.

28. On page 8 the Report indicates that the present security  situation  in
    Mogadishu will most likely continue if the international community does
    not seize the time.

29. At page 9 of the  Report  there  is  a  section  headed  -"Al-Shabaab's
    capacity to undertake attacks" referring to them usually being hit-and-
    run attacks as well as hand grenade attacks and targeted  killings.  It
    refers to a number of attacks that have taken  place  during  the  year
    examined (2012/2013). It indicates that during  the  first  quarter  of
    2013 IED attacks had been going up compared with the  last  quarter  of
    2012 and that whilst such attacks tended to  target  AMISOM,  SNAF  and
    convoys they sometimes resulted in the killing of civilians.

30. The overall tenor of  the  Report  is  that  while  there  are  clearly
    significant improvements from the previous situation, matters  are  far
    from secure. The most telling section is on page 20 of the Report where
    it states:-

         "Although the security situation  in  Mogadishu  steadily  improved
         there is still a lot of uncertainty. The situation  is  not  stable
         and it is not just serenity and peace  in  Mogadishu.  The  overall
         context in Somalia is still  fragile,  in  spite  of  the  security
         improvements and progress that have been made since August 2011".

31. All of this, in  our  view  means  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    entirely justified in finding that there was no evidence before  it  to
    justify a departure from the findings of AMM and  we  therefore  reject
    the Secretary of State's suggestion that the First-tier  Tribunal  made
    an error of law. The First-tier Tribunal's determination is upheld  and
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 18th October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

