
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01185/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18th May 2015                              |On 22nd June 2015            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                             SAHR FAYIA MANINGO
                            (No anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr A Mackenzie, counsel, instructed by Coram
                    Children's Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was convicted of two counts of rape and sentenced to five
    years concurrent on each count on 14th December 2012. On 11th June 2014
    a deportation order was made by virtue of s32 (5) UK Borders Act  2007.
    His appeal on Article 3 and 8 grounds was  heard  and  dismissed  in  a
    determination promulgated on 3rd September 2014. Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by UT Judge Chalkley on  Article  8  grounds;  he  did  not
    refuse permission to appeal on  Article  3  grounds  and  Mr  Mackenzie
    confirmed that he wished to pursue the appeal on Article 3  grounds  in
    addition to that on Article 8 grounds  although  he  did  not  seek  to
    pursue the appeal on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal  had  not
    applied the correct test as regards Article 3 in failing to follow  the
    guidance in GS & EO [2012] UKUT 00397 (IAC).

    Background

 2. The appellant, a national of Sierra Leone born in 1990, arrived in  the
    UK on 5th July 2007 aged 16 as a dependant of his mother who had  leave
    to remain in the UK. He was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on
    arrival. On 10th August 2010 he received a caution for travelling on  a
    railway without paying a fare. On 10th December 2012 he  was  convicted
    of two counts of rape and on 14th December 2012 he was sentenced to two
    periods of five years imprisonment to run concurrently.

 3. He has a partner, Alana (who is a British citizen), with  whom  he  has
    never lived; they have a son born in the UK on 9th November 2012.

    Grounds seeking permission

 4. The grounds seeking permission to appeal are essentially

          i) that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law on Article 3 grounds
             in its approach to the psychiatric evidence  in  going  behind
             the uncontroverted finding  of  the  expert  psychiatrist  who
             concluded that the appellant presented a risk  of  potentially
             fatal self harm;

         ii) that there was no evidence entitling  the  judge  to  conclude
             that the appellant would have access to counselling in  Sierra
             Leone on an out patient basis; and

        iii) when considering Article 8 the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
             in separating the effect of removal on the appellant's  health
             from the effect on his private life.

    Law

 5. The appellant has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment in  excess
    of four years. In so far as Article 8  is  concerned  he  falls  within
    s117C (6) Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 namely  that  the
    public  interest  requires  his  deportation  unless  there  are   very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    or 2 (s117C (4) or (5)) This is  reflected  in  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC395 as amended.

 6. In so far as Article 3 is concerned, the recent case of GS [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 40 sets out the relevant jurisprudence applicable to  what  can  be
    termed 'health' cases and in particular  those  with  a  mental  health
    element, as here.




    First-tier Tribunal determination

 7. The First-tier Tribunal determination sets out the evidence  both  oral
    and documentary and the  submissions.  The  judge  made  the  following
    findings:

          i) He accepts the explanation for having denied having a child in
             the past [25];

         ii) He accepts the appellant is the father of  a  British  Citizen
             child born on 9th November 2012 [25];

        iii) That such family life as there is at  present  is  'embryonic'
             [25];

         iv) The best interests of the child lie with having the  appellant
             around as he grows up [25];

          v) It would not be in the best interests of the child to relocate
             with his father and mother to Sierra Leone due  to  the  lower
             standard of living he would enjoy there [25];

         vi) The child's half brother and the appellant's half  sister  and
             brother enjoy him visiting them and given that  continuity  is
             preferable to disruption it is in their  best  interests  that
             the appellant remains in the UK [26];

        vii) In November 2013 the appellant was  suffering  from  PTSD  and
             depression [28];

       viii) Any risk of suicide, if it exists, would be adequately managed
             by the respondent both on removal and in transit;

         ix) He has an uncle, aunt and possibly a sibling in Sierra  Leone;
             family support would be available.

          x) There was no reason why the appellant could not  benefit  from
             remittances sent to him by his mother;

         xi) On return he would be able to live with family members;

        xii) Family life in the Kugathas sense does not exist  between  the
             appellant and his mother and he has only limited  family  life
             between him and his half siblings.

 8. The challenged findings include:

          i) that the conclusion of Professor Katona that  in  his  opinion
             there was a  "significant  risk  that  [the  appellant]  would
             develop suicidal thought which could in turn spill  over  into
             (potentially fatal) self harm" conflicts with the lack of  any
             evidence of self  harm  having  occurred  to  date,  that  the
             appellant had denied any suicidal intent and that there was  a
             lack of objective country-based evidence to suggest  that  the
             appellant would  on  return  be  faced  with  the  images  and
             experiences that had upset him as a young child"[28];

         ii) that the First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that a risk  of
             suicide exists [31];

        iii) having specifically denied  any  thoughts  of  self  harm  and
             although he had received two adverse decisions no instances of
             self harm had been recorded or suspected; that  his  low  mood
             has not translated into anything more serious;

         iv) At its highest the appellant is not someone who  requires  in-
             patient treatment and if he were  to  require  counselling  on
             return, as to which the judge was not satisfied, the judge was
             not satisfied that it would not be available in Sierra Leone;

          v) There are not very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
             those in s117C (4) and (5);

    Article 3

 9. Mr Mackenzie submitted, in essence, that in the absence of good  reason
    then the expert evidence  was  to  be  accepted.  He  referred  to  the
    experience and expertise of Professor Katona who expressed  a  reasoned
    and  sustainable  view  that  the  appellant's  mental   health   would
    deteriorate. The approach by the First-tier Tribunal to the  assessment
    of  future  mental  health,  based  on  past  mental  health,  was,  he
    submitted, erroneous in the light particularly  of  Professor  Katona's
    report. He referred to the treatment the appellant had  been  receiving
    in prison and that although  a  previous  suicide  attempt  may  be  an
    indicator of future risk it was not a pre requisite. He submitted  that
    the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for disagreeing with  the
    expert and had  misunderstood  Professor  Katona's  report  as  to  re-
    traumatisation, which was not based upon seeing  atrocities  but  on  a
    return to the place where he had previously witnessed atrocities and on
    separation from his family.

10. Mr Mackenzie submitted that the findings of the judge that he would  be
    able to access adequate treatment was not supported  by  the  evidence;
    there was no evidence that counselling or  out  patient  treatment  was
    available. He submitted that the only treatment  available  was  as  an
    inpatient; there was no evidence to  the  contrary  and  there  was  no
    serious possibility of any treatment other than  as  an  inpatient  and
    that treatment as an inpatient would amount to a breach of  Article  3.
    The First-tier Tribunal judge had,  he  submitted,  failed  to  make  a
    finding on that because he had failed to find that treatment  was  only
    available as an inpatient.

11. Although Mr  Mackenzie  accepted  that  the  appellant  denied  current
    suicidal  ideation  he  submitted  that  the  references  in  Professor
    Katona's report to the appellant's mental health for example looking at
    the floor most of the time were matters upon which Professor Katona was
    best qualified to pronounce; the appellant was not the  best  judge  of
    his own mental health and an experienced professional was  best  placed
    to know how a person would react in the future.

12. Mr Walker submitted, in essence, that the First-tier Tribunal judge had
    considered Professor  Katona's  report;  that  the  appellant  had  not
    required counselling under the care of the prison authorities;  he  had
    denied any suicidal thoughts either now or in the future; he had family
    support available if suicidal ideation became apparent,  and  that  the
    medical evidence had been adequately considered and dealt with  by  the
    judge.  The  judge  had  found  that  the  appellant  would  not   need
    counselling but had considered the availability of  facilities  in  the
    event that he did; his findings as to that were adequate.

    Article 8

13. In so far as Article 8 is concerned Mr  Mackenzie  submitted  that  the
    approach of the judge was incorrect in  separating  consideration  into
    two separate tranches -  one  considering  the  appellant's  moral  and
    physical integrity and the  other  his  private  and  family  life.  He
    submitted  that  the  consideration  should  have   been   a   holistic
    consideration and drew attention to findings that had been  made  which
    were favourable to the  appellant  and  that  these  should  have  been
    considered with the appellant's health as a whole.

14. Mr Walker accepted  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  an  appalling
    immigration history  as  referred  to  in  the  Rule  24  response.  He
    submitted that the judge had considered family  and  private  life  and
    that although the judge had formulated the conclusions in  the  way  he
    had, given the findings as regards his health there  was  nothing  that
    would have led to a different conclusion.

    Consideration

15. The appellant was examined by Professor Katona,  in  English,  on  14th
    October 2013. He had before him  the  appellant's  prison  health  care
    notes and his  Home  Office  Subject  Access  file.  He  was  asked  to
    specifically comment upon three issues: whether he was  suffering  from
    any mental health condition; if so did it relate to his experiences  in
    Sierra Leone and finally whether he would be at risk of  self  harm  or
    suicide if deported to Sierra Leone.

16.  In  response  to  a  question  put  by  Professor  Katona  during  the
    examination as to whether he ever felt life was  not  worth  living  he
    said he "sometimes just sits and looks at the floor". Professor  Katona
    confirmed his clinical impression using a psychological rating that  he
    had moderate depressive symptoms and that his score for the severity of
    his trauma related symptoms was indicative  of  severe  trauma  related
    symptoms.

17. In his report of 14th October 2013 Professor Katona recommends a course
    of 8-12 CBT one-to-one sessions with a trained therapist.  He  comments
    that it is unclear from the notes whether he has received such a course
    and notes he has not been prescribed anti- depressants.  He  refers  to
    the NICE emphasis that CBT be considered as first  line  treatment  and
    medication as second line. He then recommends a combination of both CBT
    and medication. He concludes that the appellant's symptoms of PTSD were
    relatively mild whilst living in the community but that the "stress  of
    imprisonment together with the threat of deportation to  Sierra  Leone,
    has however resulted in marked worsening of his PTSD symptoms."

18. Professor Katona concludes that the appellant

         "...is not currently at significant risk of suicide.  However  PTSD
         is associated with increased suicidality (Foote  et  al  2008).  Mr
         Maningo's PTSD symptoms would be likely to worsen under the  stress
         of deportation to Sierra  Leone  because  of  separation  from  his
         partner and son, his separation from his mother, and  the  strength
         with which he associates Sierra Leone with fear and  threat.  As  a
         result of his worsening PTSD there is in my view a significant risk
         that Mr Maningo would develop suicidal thoughts which could in turn
         spill over into (potentially fatal) self harm."

19. The First-tier Tribunal judge held as follows:

         28. This case does not involve someone who is  "close  to  death".
             Professor Katona found in November 2013 that the appellant was
             suffering from PTSD and depression, and there is no specialist
             evidence indicating that his condition has changed since then.
             However, when Professor Katona concluded that in  his  opinion
             there was a "significant risk that Mr  Maningo  would  develop
             suicidal  thoughts  which  could  in  turn  spill  over   into
             (potentially  fatal)  self  harm",  I  find  this   conclusion
             conflicts with the lack of evidence of any  self  harm  having
             occurred up until now and the fact that the  appellant  denied
             any  suicidal  intent  when  he  was   interviewed   for   the
             professor's report. There is also a lack of objective country-
             based evidence to suggest that the appellant would  on  return
             be faced with the sort of images and experiences  which  upset
             him as a very young child - namely, scenes of fighting and  of
             someone he knew being shot. In addition, I take  into  account
             that an adult is better placed to cope with such images than a
             child, and the appellant is now an adult.

         ...

         31. In this case, I am  not  satisfied  that  a  risk  of  suicide
             exists.  The  appellant  has  specifically  denied  any   such
             thoughts and although he received adverse decisions in January
             2013 (the notification of liability to deportation)  and  June
             2014 (the deportation decision), no  instances  of  self  harm
             have been recorded  or  even  suspected.  As  referred  to  in
             section 6 of Professor  Katona's  report,  the  appellant  has
             complained to the prison authorities of difficulty in sleeping
             and this has been found to be due to his low  mood  and  worry
             about his future. However that low  mood  has  not  translated
             itself into anything more serious and the  appellant  has  not
             been assessed by the prison authorities as requiring any  form
             of medication for his mental health state.

         32. Accordingly I find that any risk of  suicide,  if  it  exists,
             would be adequately managed by the respondent both on  removal
             and while in transit. On arrival in Sierra Leone he would  not
             have to live on his own, in view  of  the  evidence  that  his
             uncle and aunt are still there- and despite what the appellant
             said, his mother said that her other son was  also  in  Sierra
             Leone living with her brother. With family  support  available
             to the appellant on return, and in view of the changed country
             conditions since the time the appellant was present during the
             civil war, I am not satisfied that substantial  grounds  exist
             for believing there is a real risk of suicide in Sierra Leone.

20. The submission that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting Professor Katona's report is not  made  out.  The  judge  was
    faced with conflict in the information before him - that  according  to
    Professor Katona his PTSD symptoms "would be likely to worsen",  "as  a
    result...there  is...a  significant  risk"  that  he  "would   develop"
    suicidal thoughts which "could" in turn spill over to  potential  fatal
    self harm.  On the other hand there had  been  no  previous  self  harm
    attempts; despite Professor Katona linking the risk  of  self  harm  to
    adverse decisions, there had been no such  instances  or  even  concern
    about the possibility of  such  instances  after  the  receipt  of  two
    adverse decisions  and  that  although  the  prison  records  indicates
    reports of difficulty in sleeping  and  low  mood  this  has  not  been
    considered to translate into anything more  serious.  Whilst  accepting
    that  a  lack  of  previous  suicide  or  self  harm  attempts  is  not
    necessarily indicative of a  lack  of  future  risk,  the  fact  of  no
    previous incidents in the  circumstances  where  Professor  Katona  has
    indicated there may be such attempts, is a matter that  the  judge  was
    entitled to take  into  account.   Furthermore  although  Mr  Mackenzie
    submitted that Professor Katona  was  better  placed  to  identify  the
    appellant's mental health than the  appellant,  the  appellant  himself
    says he has not had thoughts of self harm and there is nothing  in  the
    report to suggest that such an assertion from the appellant himself was
    not safe to be relied upon. The response to  that  assertion  that  the
    appellant spends  a  lot  of  time  "looking  at  the  floor"  was  not
    translated by Professor Katona to indicate  suicidal  ideation  and  it
    cannot be credibly suggested that such behaviour can have  that  result
    without more analysis - such  analysis  being  missing  from  Professor
    Katona's report.

21. Professor Katona records the appellant's description  of  the  incident
    that led to his conviction. He does not record that the  appellant  was
    convicted after a trial and, from the description  given  to  Professor
    Katona, that he continues to deny  he  had  committed  any  offence  (a
    denial which  continued  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).  Professor
    Katona does not incorporate into  his  assessment  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was convicted for offences he denied committing and that as a
    result of that he was separated  from  his  partner,  child  and  other
    family members for a lengthy prison sentence. He makes  no  comment  or
    assessment on the effects this may have had on his PTSD and depression.



22. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the appellant did not  require
    counselling - he had not received any since being in the UK,  but  that
    in any event any such counselling would be available albeit not to  the
    same standard as in the UK. The judge referred to the extreme  lack  of
    mental health facilities in Sierra Leone and  the  submissions  by  the
    appellant that there were  no  out  patient  facilities.   Mr  McKenzie
    referred to the lack of outpatient facilities and  that  therefore  the
    appellant would, in order to receive treatment, be required  to  be  an
    inpatient and the  facilities  for  such  treatment  were  inhuman  and
    degrading and amounted to a breach of Article 3.

23. The First-tier Tribunal judge  referred  to  the  lack  of  counselling
    received by the appellant during the time he had been in the UK. He did
    not receive any such counselling after his arrival in the UK  or  after
    conviction or after separation from his partner  and  child  and  other
    family members or after receipt of adverse  immigration  decisions.  He
    has not been prescribed any  medication  to  deal  with  mental  health
    issues. Professor  Katona,  although  concluding  the  appellant  would
    benefit from counselling and  medication  has  not,  in  reaching  that
    conclusion factored into his diagnosis the failure of the appellant  to
    acknowledge his guilt and the resulting  lengthy  prison  sentence  for
    something he claims he did not do. Despite this, which on the  face  of
    it one would have  expected  to  have  a  considerable  impact  on  the
    appellant's mental health, the appellant has  not  been  considered  to
    require mental health treatment since his incarceration other  than  in
    Professor Katona's report. The finding of the judge that the  appellant
    does not require treatment was a finding open to him  on  the  evidence
    before him.

24. In so far as the facilities available in Sierra Leone should he require
    treatment, there are some outpatient and counselling facilities run  by
    NGOs, private and religious based organisations - see for  example  the
    references to these organisations in the appellant's bundle  Section  D
    pages 27, 39, 41, 45, 81, 85, 96 and 99. These  are  very  limited  but
    they do exist. It does not follow, as submitted by Mr  Mackenzie,  that
    the appellant would have to be treated  as  an  inpatient  were  he  to
    require counselling or medication. He  may  have  difficulty  accessing
    treatment but that difficulty does  not  translate  into  a  breach  of
    Article 3; particularly because the finding of the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge that the appellant does not require counselling was a  conclusion
    that was plainly open to him on the evidence before him.

25. I am satisfied that there is no error of law  in  the  finding  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge that there is no breach of Article 3  if  the
    appellant is deported to Sierra Leone.

26. In so far as the possible breach of Article 8, the appellant  does  not
    challenge any of the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  as
    regards his  family  and  length  of  residence,  the  challenge  being
    restricted to the separation of consideration into two headings and the
    failure to consider the  appellant's  health  holistically  with  other
    matters and, it was submitted, had that been done, the  high  threshold
    of very compelling circumstances could have been met.

27.  The  judge  separated  his   consideration   into   two   headings   -
    physical/moral   integrity   and    private/family    life.    Although
    consideration of the possibility of a breach of  Article  8  should  be
    considered holistically and take into account all the evidence, in this
    instance that error, such as it is, is not such as  to  result  in  the
    setting aside of the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    consideration of the appellant's circumstances was  undertaken  on  the
    basis of the information provided and the judge had  particular  regard
    to his integration in to British  society,  his  language,  employment,
    partner and child, other family members. Although the  judge  does  not
    factor into his assessment of the impact on private and family life the
    appellant's health and the effect on that of removal, in the  light  of
    the findings of the judge in relation to the lack of suicide  risk  and
    the lack of a need for counselling such omission is not significant.

28. The First-tier Tribunal judge accepted that the appellant was suffering
    from PTSD and depression but did not accept he required  the  treatment
    suggested by Professor Katona. Those findings were open to him. Even if
    the judge had not separated his consideration into the two headings, it
    is inconceivable that the appellant's health  as  found  by  the  judge
    after consideration of the medical evidence, would  sustain  a  finding
    that reached the high threshold of very compelling circumstances.

29. There is no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  determination  in
    its consideration of Article 8 such that the decision be set aside  and
    remade.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision be  set
    aside.

    I do not set aside the decision



     Date 8th June 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
