
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01973/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ISMAIL MOHAMED OLOL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Layne of Counsel instructed by Portway
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    appellant, a citizen of Somalia born on 25 June 1987, as the  appellant
    herein.

2.   The Secretary of State appeals the determination of a First-tier  Judge
    who allowed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision on
    28 August 2014 to refuse to revoke a deportation order made against the
    appellant on 22 April 2008.  This followed a request by  the  applicant
    on 12 February 2009.  The deportation order  followed  the  appellant's
    conviction in July 2005 of robbery for which he was  sentenced  to  two
    years' imprisonment.

3.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his  mother.   The
    judge also heard from a friend of the appellant who had been  convicted
    on the same occasion for the robbery.  He  apparently  had  been  given
    indefinite leave to remain after a successful challenge to the decision
    to deport him

4.    The  judge  summarises  the  submissions   made   before   him.    The
    respondent's representative relied on the refusal letter and submitted,
    with reference to paragraph 399A of the  Immigration  Rules,  that  the
    appellant had not culturally integrated into the United Kingdom to such
    an extent that he could not be deported.  The  fact  that  he  had  not
    reoffended  since  the  burglary  offence  could  only   be   a   minor
    consideration.   The  appellant  could  be  returned   to   Somaliland.
    Reference was made to the country guidance case MOJ [2014]  UKUT  00442
    (IAC).

5.   The appellant's representative (not Mr Layne) relied  on  her  skeleton
    argument and it was apparently her main point that paragraph 391 of the
    Immigration Rules had  not  been  raised  by  the  respondent  and  was
    therefore not an issue  before  the  Tribunal.   The  First-tier  Judge
    however took the view that it was an issue because it formed  the  core
    of the decision made by  the  Secretary  of  State.   In  addition  she
    focused on human rights issues and paragraph 399A which considered "the
    essential elements of length of residence and  obstacles  to  returning
    and reintegration".

6.   The determination concludes as follows:

         "15. The Tribunal notes the contents of paragraph 398 of the  Rules
             which states 'where a person  claims  that  their  deportation
             would be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of
             the Human Rights Convention, and (b) the  deportation  of  the
             person from the UK is conducive to the public good and in  the
             public interest because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
             of less than four  years  but  at  least  twelve  months;  the
             Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

         16.  Paragraph 399A of the Rules states:

             "(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
                  of his life; and

             (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported."

         17.  The Tribunal notes that there has been considerable passage of
             time since the deportation  was  made  and  that  during  this
             period of time  the  appellant  has  shown  that  he  has  not
             reoffended and he has also further  integrated  into  life  in
             this country.  The country to which  the  appellant  could  be
             returned to the Tribunal accepts as  being  Somalia  and  that
             there is no evidence before the Tribunal to  suggest  that  he
             could be returned elsewhere such as Somaliland.  The appellant
             has not however been in Somalia for a variety of reasons since
             the age of 1, the Tribunal notes paragraphs 70 to  74  of  the
             case of Maslov [2009] INLR  47  and  it  is  accepted  by  the
             Tribunal that the appellant is a young man who has yet to form
             his own family  life  in  this  country.   He  is  living  and
             dependent on his mother who was present at the hearing and who
             also gave evidence on his behalf.  The Tribunal therefore take
             the view that the Maslov criteria do apply to this case.   The
             appellant pleaded guilty at his  hearing  in  respect  of  the
             offence and  this  shows  a  certain  amount  of  remorse  and
             acceptance of his role.  He has done all that has  been  asked
             of him in relation to  rehabilitation  and  the  Tribunal  has
             taken this into consideration positively  on  the  appellant's
             behalf.  In Maslov the court was mindful of circumstances such
             as these which are before the Tribunal in the present case, in
             that where a person has spent all or the major part of his  or
             her childhood and youth in the UK then there needs to be  very
             serious reasons for there to be a justifiable expulsion.   The
             Tribunal accepts the submissions of Ms Ofei-Kwatia in that the
             appellant has turned his life around and  that  he  has  shown
             that his circumstances in this country are such  that  he  has
             fully integrated and that it would be difficult for him if  he
             were to be returned to Somalia.

         18.  The Tribunal accepts that the Appellant has  little  knowledge
             of Somalia since he left there at the age of 1 and  also  that
             he has no known relatives to him who could  help  him  in  his
             reintegration back into life into that country.  For this very
             good reason the Tribunal is of the view that  the  deportation
             order under paragraph 391 of the Rules  should  not  stand  in
             light of the present  circumstances  and  the  factual  matrix
             which has been presented to  the  Tribunal.   Furthermore  the
             Tribunal is also of the view that the appellant's claim  under
             paragraph 399A has also been established in that he has  spent
             the most and significant part of  his  life  in  this  country
             where he  has  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  this
             country.  The Tribunal accepts the evidence of his mother  and
             also of his friend in this respect.  The Tribunal accepts that
             he is a person who  would  find  it  difficult  to  adjust  to
             circumstances in Somalia.   Therefore,  there  would  be  very
             significant obstacles to his integration into the country  for
             which he is proposed to be deported.

         19.  The Tribunal also accepts the  submissions  of  the  appellant
             where they rely on the case  of  MOJ  and  Others  (Return  to
             Mogadishu) [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) where it is said that if it
             is accepted that the person facing a return to Mogadishu after
             a period of absence and there is no nuclear  family  or  close
             relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself
             on return, there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all
             of  the  circumstances.   The  Tribunal  finds  that  in  this
             particular case the appellant because of the significant lapse
             in time since he was in that country would find  it  difficult
             to reintegrate back into  his  clan  and  resettling  in  that
             country.  The appellant would find it difficult to obtain clan
             support due to the fact that he was last in that country  when
             he was aged 1.

         20.  For all of these reasons the  appellant's  appeal  is  allowed
             under paragraph 399A of the  Rules.   The  Tribunal  has  also
             found that  it  would  be  in  the  public  interest  for  the
             appellant  not  to  be  deported  and  this  is  in  light  of
             consideration of Section 117 of the Immigration Act 2014."

7.   The respondent applied for permission  to  appeal  and  permission  was
    granted on 30 March 2015 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pooler.   Judge
    Pooler found that it was arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate  reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  by  reference   to   the
    Immigration Rules or in respect of Section 117B of the  2002  Act.   It
    was arguable that he had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  finding
    that the appellant had socially and culturally integrated into  the  UK
    and had misdirected himself when considering  whether  there  were  any
    very significant obstacles to integration into Somalia.  Permission was
    given to argue all grounds.  As a preliminary matter, Mr Avery,  having
    been given the opportunity of taking  instructions,  acknowledged  that
    the respondent had erred in referring to paragraph 391 in  the  refusal
    letter.  This was because the appellant had not been removed  from  the
    UK as Mr Layne pointed out.  I offered Mr Avery the opportunity  of  an
    adjournment to consider the matter further but he submitted  the  error
    was not material in the circumstances of this case.

8.    As  a  matter  of  general  concern,  Mr  Avery  submitted  that   the
    determination was extremely short and while brevity was to be applauded
    the grounds had raised concerns with the judge's decision.   There  had
    been no reference to the actual offence or immigration history.   There
    had been no careful assessment of all the relevant circumstances.   The
    judge had not given adequate reasons for finding the  appellant  to  be
    socially and culturally integrated  in  referring  to  the  appellant's
    difficulty in adjusting to  circumstances  in  Somalia  the  judge  had
    misdirected himself in failing to refer to very significant  obstacles.



9.   The judge had erred in paragraph 20 in his reference  to  Section  117.
    It was not clear what he was trying to say.

10.  The judge's reasoning was very scanty in paragraph 18.   The  appellant
    was 28 and although close to her mother could be expected to look after
    himself and exercise the internal relocation option.

11.  Mr Layne submitted that the  judge  had  referred  to  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument which  had  set  out  the  immigration  and  criminal
    history.

12.  In relation to Section 117C the relevant Immigration Rules were in  all
    material respects identical and the judge  had  set  them  out  in  the
    determination at paragraph 16.

13.  The judge had heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  mother  and  the
    appellant's friend and it was open to him to accept that evidence as he
    had done in paragraph 18 of  the  decision.   The  appellant  had  left
    Somalia at the age of 1.  He had lived in a camp  for  five  years  and
    then had come to the UK when he was aged 6.  The judge had applied  the
    criteria in Maslov and he pointed out that the respondent had not taken
    issue with the applicability of the Maslov criteria in the  grounds  or
    in oral argument.

14.  The judge had found that the appellant had no family to  return  to  or
    to help with integration.  The family were refugees in the UK.

15.  It had been open  to  the  judge  to  accept  that  the  appellant  had
    expressed some remorse by virtue of his plea of guilty.

16.  The appellant had had the deportation order hanging over him  for  many
    years.  His co-defendant's deportation order had been set aside.

17.  In reply Mr Avery submitted that the judge should have referred to  the
    respondent's bundle rather than the skeleton argument and  should  have
    set out the statute correctly.  Reference should be made to  the  Rules
    rather than Maslov.  Paragraph 3 of the grant of  permission  by  Judge
    Pooler identified the main concerns.

18.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the judge's decision  if  it  was
    materially flawed in law.

19.  Dealing with the factual issues, the judge  heard  oral  evidence  from
    the appellant and his mother  and  a  friend  of  the  appellant.   The
    witnesses were cross-examined.  It is plain from the decision that  the
    judge essentially accepted what  he  had  been  told  as  appears  from
    paragraph 18 of the decision.

20.  The judge also sets out the competing submissions of  the  parties  and
    it was submitted, for example, that the appellant  had  not  culturally
    integrated - the judge was referred to paragraph 399A.  The appellant's
    representatives relied on paragraph 399A as well.  It  is  unsurprising
    in these circumstances that the judge identifies paragraph 399A of  the
    Rules as a principal feature of the representations  before  him.   The
    judge is criticised for only referring to Section 117 at the conclusion
    of the determination but his reference to paragraph 398 in paragraph 15
    of the decision makes it abundantly clear that he was well  aware  that
    the deportation of the appellant was conducive to the public  good  and
    in the public interest in the light of the offence  for  which  he  had
    been convicted.  While it is possible that the determination could have
    been  structured  differently  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the   judge
    materially misdirected himself in the circumstances of this case.

21.  In this context it is perhaps apposite to note a submission by  Counsel
    then appearing for the appellant in relation  to  paragraph  391.   The
    judge considered that paragraph 391 formed the  core  of  the  decision
    made by the respondent and therefore was an issue before  him.   It  is
    understandable that the judge identified the  issue  as  a  core  issue
    raised by the respondent since it features heavily  on  the  first  two
    pages of the respondent's decision.  Unhappily, as Mr  Avery  conceded,
    the respondent appears to have been in error in referring to  paragraph
    391 and no doubt this did not render the judge's task any easier.

22.  Among the points taken  by  the  respondent  was  that  the  judge  had
    applied the wrong burden of proof but it appears from  paragraph  8  of
    the decision that the judge had directed himself correctly that it  was
    the appellant who bore the burden of proof.

23.  The grounds take issue with the judge's reference  to  the  appellant's
    remorse.  This appears to me to  be  no  more  than  an  expression  of
    disagreement with what the judge said in paragraph 17 of the  decision.
    The sentencing  judge  certainly  accepted  the  guilty  pleas  by  the
    appellant and his co-defendants as an expression  of  remorse  for  the
    purposes of sentencing them.

24.   The  reference  by  the  judge  to  difficulties   in   adjusting   to
    circumstances in Somalia which is the subject of criticism in ground  4
    of the respondent's initial grounds is again in my view no more than an
    expression of disagreement with the judge's decision and he was plainly
    looking at the test in the Rules when the determination is  read  as  a
    whole.  Adequate reasons have been given for finding that the appellant
    is socially and culturally integrated and I do not  consider  that  the
    judge gave  weight  to  immaterial  matters  or  otherwise  misdirected
    himself as suggested in the grounds.

25.  The grounds feature a  reasons  challenge  and  Mr  Avery  started  his
    submissions by referring to the brevity  of  the  decision.   It  could
    perhaps have been expanded a little and reference could have been  made
    to the appellant's conviction.  However the determination does set out,
    albeit in a short compass, the salient points and the determination  is
    adequately reasoned. Brevity is not to be discouraged.

26.  I am not satisfied that the grounds as summarised by  Judge  Pooler  or
    as argued by Mr Avery demonstrate a material error of law on  the  part
    of the First-tier Judge.

27.  For the reasons I have given, the appeal of the Secretary of  State  is
    refused.  The decision of the First-tier Judge stands.

28.  There was no anonymity direction in this case and I make none.

Fee Award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 15 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr

