
DA 01095 2012
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2013                               |On 26 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AP
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett, of counsel, instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb, solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal but  for  convenience  I  will
      refer to the original appellant as the appellant herein. The appellant
      is a citizen of Thailand born on 18 December, 1964. He arrived in this
      country on 15 September, 1978, age 13, on a settlement  visa  to  join
      his mother and sister. His mother had left Thailand for the UK to work
      in the Embassy when the appellant was four years  old.  The  appellant
      has not been back to Thailand since 1997. His father in Thailand  died
      two years ago.
   2. The appellant's background was briefly summarised by the Secretary  of
      State in the refusal letter of 13 November, 2012. It is recorded  that
      in 1990 the appellant was admitted to hospital under section 37 of the
      Mental Health Act 1983 after the appellant admitted hearing voices. On
      15 May 1998 the appellant killed a friend of his after  having  a  few
      drinks and some cannabis. On 18 September, 1998 he pleaded not  guilty
      to murder but guilty to manslaughter  on  the  grounds  of  diminished
      responsibility. On 11 November, 1998 at the Central Criminal Court the
      appellant was sentenced and placed on a restriction  order  under  the
      Mental Health Act. He was admitted to the Three Bridges Medium  Secure
      Unit. He was conditionally discharged on 5 May, 2008. However  he  was
      recalled to hospital on 14 December, 2010 due  to  a  relapse  in  his
      mental health. He was released again on  conditional  discharge  on  4
      March, 2011 and resided in 24-hour supported accommodation.

   3. The Secretary of State decided to deport the  appellant  on  21  June,
      2012. It was noted that the appellant had admitted stabbing  a  friend
      to death with a knife in an unprovoked attack  on  15  May  1988.  The
      appellant had got a knife from his home and had  attacked  his  victim
      stabbing him three times in total. Some people had attempted to disarm
      the appellant. He had dropped the knife but  had  then  picked  it  up
      again and walked off  along  the  road.  In  the  refusal  letter  the
      Secretary  of  State  considered  the  appellant's  case   under   the
      immigration  rules.  Reference  was  made  to  paragraph  398  of  the
      immigration rules:

        "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
        the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
        Convention, and


        a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
           public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
           which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
           least 4 years;


        b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
           public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
           which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
           less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or


        c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
           public good because, in the view of the Secretary of State,
           their offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
           offender who shows a particular disregard for the law, the
           Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
           paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only
           be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in
           deportation will be outweighed by other factors."


   4. The Secretary of State considered that paragraph 398(c) applied in the
      appellant's case because his offending had  caused  serious  harm  and
      showed a particular disregard for the laws of the United Kingdom.  The
      terms of paragraph 399 were found not to apply to  the  appellant  and
      the Secretary of State turned to consider the position under paragraph
      399A:

           "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if
        -


        a) the person has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
           years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
           (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no  ties
           (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which
           he would have to go if required to leave the UK; or
        b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half of
           his life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding the
           date of the immigration  decision  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) and he has no ties (including social, cultural  or
           family) with the country  to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
           required to leave the UK."

   5.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  lived
      continuously in the UK for at least 20 years immediately preceding the
      date  of  the  immigration  decision  (discounting   any   period   of
      imprisonment). However the Secretary of State was not  satisfied  that
      the appellant had no ties to Thailand. He  had  spent  his  youth  and
      formative years in Thailand and would be able to speak  the  language.
      He had returned to Thailand on holiday on two occasions  in  1991  and
      1992 and his father lived in Thailand. He had accordingly got  social,
      cultural and family ties in Thailand.

   6. The Secretary of State also  found  that  there  were  no  exceptional
      circumstances  which  would  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   the
      appellant's deportation.

   7. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before a panel on 16 April,
      2013. The appellant was represented then as he is now by Mr Burrett.

   8. The panel found the appellant was 48 years of age and had entered  the
      United Kingdom legally on a settlement visa on 15 September,  1978  to
      join his mother. Clearly he had  spent  his  formative  years  in  the
      United Kingdom and had significant ties to the United Kingdom. He  had
      a support network here consisting of his family, medical professionals
      and his peers. He had a job in a day centre in Chelsea.  In  assessing
      whether the appellant had ties in Thailand the panel found it  had  to
      determine whether  there  were  any  meaningful  ties.  It  noted  the
      appellant had been living in this country for over 30  years  and  had
      visited Thailand on three occasions, the latest in 1997. The appellant
      had not spoken to his father or seen him since 1995. He did  not  know
      where his father was and had never had a relationship  with  him.  His
      father had another family, he could not stay there even if he did find
      him. There  was  no  relationship  to  build  upon.  The  people  most
      important to him were his mother and sister. In his witness  statement
      he had said he had no connections left in Thailand and his father  had
      died. The evidence that his father had died was not challenged at  the
      hearing by the presenting officer. The panel concluded:

           "We are satisfied that the passage of time since  the  appellant
           entered the United Kingdom has extinguished any  ties  that  the
           appellant may have had with Thailand. He has lost  contact  with
           extended family there and given his mental disorder there is  no
           possibility of establishing contact. His father is dead and even
           when he was living contact between the appellant and his  father
           ceased 18 years ago."

   9. The panel accordingly found that the requirements  of  paragraph  399A
      were met.

  10. The panel went  on  to  consider  in  the  alternative  the  issue  of
      exceptional  circumstances.  Taking  into  account   the   appellant's
      circumstances and the medical evidence and his mother's poor health it
      concluded that adjusting to life  in  Thailand  was  likely  to  be  a
      significant challenge for the appellant after 36 years in  the  United
      Kingdom. He was vulnerable to stress and the social impact of  a  move
      to Thailand  was  likely  to  destabilise  his  illness.  The  factors
      combined amounted to exceptional circumstances. The appeal was allowed
      under the rules.


  11. The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal  contending
      that the view that the Tribunal took was unbalanced and failed to have
      due regard to the public interest. Reference is made to  paragraph  28
      of the determination and the finding by the tribunal that  exceptional
      factors outweighed the public interest. However  at  no  part  of  the
      assessment did the Tribunal acknowledge that the appellant had  killed
      someone and that he  continued  to  be  a  risk  to  the  public.  The
      tribunal's findings were irrational and no balancing exercise had been
      undertaken.

  12. Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Judge on 14 May 2013.
      It was said to  be  arguable  that  a  balancing  exercise  was  still
      required notwithstanding that the appeal had been  allowed  under  the
      immigration rules.

  13. A response was filed  drafted  by  Mr  Burrett  0n  31  May  2013.  He
      submitted that the panel had been right to consider the  appeal  under
      the immigration rules and he referred to paragraph A362 of HC 395:

           "Where Article 8 is raised in the context of  deportation  under
           Part 13 of these rules, the claim  under  Article  8  will  only
           succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 9 July, 2012
           are met, regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or
           the deportation order, as appropriate, was served."

  14. The panel had also correctly interpreted and applied  paragraph  399A.
      There was no evidence that the appellant posed a risk to the public in
      any event. The panel had also made findings in the  alternative  under
      paragraph 398 and the grounds did not establish the findings should be
      interfered with. The findings of the panel did not  indicate  that  an
      appeal under Article 8 would not have been allowed.

  15. Mr Deller acknowledged that  he  was  in  difficulty.  The  panel  has
      allowed the appeal under the immigration  rules  and  had  also  found
      exceptional circumstances. The grounds were cast as  an  irrationality
      challenge. No issue had been taken with the panel's conclusions  about
      the appellant's lack of ties with Thailand.

  16. The Secretary of State had  effectively  decided  in  the  immigration
      rules the weight to be accorded to past  offending:  the  balance  was
      struck there. It would not be right for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
      persuade the Tribunal, the case succeeding apparently under the rules,
      to adopt a second stage approach  under  article  8  and  revisit  the
      conclusions under the rules. The case of MF (Nigeria) [2012] UKUT  393
      (IAC) was concerned with the  different  situation  where  the  appeal
      failed under the rules.

  17. Mr Deller said he was in an impossible position given that the  appeal
      had been allowed on the basis that had not been challenged.  He  could
      not challenge the decision. I  did  not  trouble  Mr  Burrett  in  the
      premises.

  18. This was a case that was allowed by the panel  under  the  immigration
      rules. As Mr Burrett submitted in his response the case  can  only  be
      allowed under the rules on Article 8 in a deportation case  where  the
      requirements of the rules are met.

  19. There was no challenge to the findings of fact made by  the  panel  on
      the lack of ties to Thailand and accordingly, the issue of  length  of
      residence having been conceded, the panel  was  entitled  to  conclude
      that the appellant succeeded given the terms of  paragraphs  398c  and
      399A.

  20. The grounds contend that the panel's decision was irrational. However,
      there was nothing irrational in following and applying the rules.

  21. In the grant of permission to appeal the First-tier  Judge  refers  to
      the arguable need to consider  the  public  interest.  This  point  is
      misconceived. The Secretary of State takes into account the  interests
      of the public in the rules. The rules make it  quite  plain  that  the
      Secretary of State takes a more serious view of offences dependent  on
      the length of sentence imposed (paragraph 398(a) and (b)) or where, as
      in this case, the appellant's removal is conducive to the public  good
      for other reasons.

  22. The rules take a gradated approach to matters. Different  consequences
      flow from different circumstances. It may be the  Secretary  of  State
      took the view that the public interest lay in making clear rules  from
      which departure would only be possible in  exceptional  circumstances.
      The Secretary of State's  position  was  stated  in  paragraph  81  of
      Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC):

           "The Secretary of State submits that the tribunal is required to
           determine the issue of whether the appellant's deportation would
           lead to a breach of Article 8 ECHR by reference  principally  to
           whether he meets the requirements of the  'new'  rules.  It  was
           asserted that, if he does meet the requirements of those  rules,
           then his appeal ought to be allowed because those rules  reflect
           where the public interest lies; however, if he does not meet the
           requirements of the new  rules  then  his  appeal  ought  to  be
           dismissed."

  23. The view of the Tribunal in MF that a two stage approach  is  required
      is not accepted by the Secretary of State and  the  matter  is  to  be
      considered by the Court of Appeal.  However, whichever way  that  case
      is decided does not appear to impact on the position in  the  converse
      case where an appeal is allowed under the rules.


  24. Accordingly I find the panel did not arguably err in law  in  allowing
      the appeal under the immigration rules as the appellant was  found  to
      fall within paragraph 399A and the panel's findings  of  fact  on  the
      question of the appellant's ties to Thailand have not been challenged.
      It is not argued, for example that  the  panel's  approach  conflicted
      with the guidance in Ogundimu in paragraphs 123 to  125.  It  was  not
      necessary to consider the issue of  exceptional  circumstances  though
      there appears  to  be  no  flaw  in  the  panel's  analysis  of  those
      circumstances.

  25. The Secretary of State's challenge fails. The panel's decision was not
      flawed in law and I direct that it shall stand.

      Appeal of Secretary of State dismissed
      Anonymity Direction made by First-tier Tribunal to continue


                               Signed




                               20 June 2013
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
