

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01922/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19th April 2016                            |On 9th May 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                    V O A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, Counsel instructed by University of Law
                 Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin ,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant was born  on  19th  October  1964  in  the  Democratic
       Republic of  Congo  to  Nigerian  parents.  He  arrived  in  the  UK
       illegally in January 2000. He has not had  permission  to  enter  or
       remain at any point, but has been continuously resident  since  this
       time.

    2. In December 2012 the appellant made a human  rights  application  to
       remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of  his  having  four  biological
       children,  two  step-children  and  a  partner  in  the   UK.   This
       application was refused and appeal  lodged,  but  the  decision  was
       later withdrawn by the respondent.

    3. In February 2013 the appellant was convicted of a  number  of  fraud
       offences relating to a  false  instrument,  a  driving  licence  and
       statements  to  obtain  benefits  and   sentenced   to   16   months
       imprisonment.  On  12th  September  2013  the  respondent  issued  a
       decision to deport and the appellant appealed. A  deportation  order
       was signed against him on 2nd September 2013. His appeal against the
       deportation decision was dismissed by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Panel
       consisting of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pullig  and  Dr  P  L
       Ravenscroft (non-legal member) in a determination promulgated on the
       15th September 2014.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  on
       the basis that it was arguable that the Panel had erred in law as it
       was arguable that it had not been considered whether  the  appellant
       could meet paragraph 399 (a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  For  the
       reasons set out in my decision appended at Annex A of this  decision
       I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis  of
       errors of law with no findings preserved.

    5. The primary question for this  Tribunal  is  whether  the  applicant
       falls to be deported as a foreign criminal or whether in  accordance
       with paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules  his  deportation  is
       not required in the public interest as it would be unduly harsh  for
       his four biological children and two step-children to remain in  the
       UK without him. It is accepted by the respondent that  it  would  be
       unduly harsh for all the children to have to live with the applicant
       in Nigeria.  It is accepted on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  he
       cannot succeed on the basis of the Immigration Rules relating  to  a
       partner at paragraph 399(b) as the  appellant  had  not  lived  with
       valid leave in the UK  for  15  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the
       immigration decision. The appellant equally cannot fall  within  the
       private life exception at paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules as
       he has not lived lawfully in the UK for most  of  his  life.  It  is
       however argued by the appellant in the alternative  that  there  are
       very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  described  in
       paragraph 399 and 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  enabling  this
       appeal to succeed under paragraph 398 of the Immigration  Rules,  if
       the Tribunal finds that the argument under paragraph 399(a)  of  the
       Immigration Rules does not succeed.

    6. The test for "unduly harsh" in MAB (para 399,  "unduly  harsh")  USA
       [2015] UKUT 00435 is said to  be  one  of  inordinate  or  excessive
       severeness or bleakness for the children remaining in the UK without
       the appellant, and that this test focuses on the children alone.  In
       KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 the Upper
       Tribunal  holds  that  unduly  means  that  regard  is  had  to  the
       seriousness of the offences committed by the foreign  criminal  when
       considering if the impact on the child is excessively harsh.  In the
       decision of AB (paragraph 399(a)  [2015]  UKUT  657  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Gill opted to follow KMO. The respondent submits that this  is
       the correct approach, and those representing  the  appellant  submit
       that he can succeed on either test. I  indicated  that  I  would  at
       least primarily follow KMO in determining this appeal.

    7. Since the hearing of this appeal the Court of Appeal in MM  (Uganda)
       v  SSHD  2016  EWCA  heard  on  20th  April  2016  held  that:  "The
       Immigration Rules were a complete code for assessment  of  an  art.8
       claim with regard to deportation, LC (China) v  Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1310, [2015] Imm.  A.R.  227
       followed. In both appeals, the issue  was  the  meaning  of  "unduly
       harsh". The reference to "unduly harsh" in s.117C(5) and  r.399  had
       the same interpretation. It was an ordinary English expression,  and
       its meaning was  coloured  by  its  context.  That  context  invited
       emphasis on two factors: the public interest in removal  of  foreign
       criminals, and the need for a proportionality art.8 assessment.  The
       importance of removing a foreign criminal in the public interest was
       emphasised in s.117C(1). Under s.117C(2), it was clear that the more
       serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater the
       public interest in deportation. That steered  the  court  towards  a
       proportionality  assessment.  Accordingly,  the  more  pressing  the
       public interest in removal, the harder it was to  show  its  effects
       would be unduly  harsh.  The  relevant  circumstances  included  the
       deportee's criminal and immigration  history.  The  UT  had  wrongly
       decided MAB, MAB overruled. In determining whether  deportation  was
       unduly harsh, a court or tribunal had to  have  regard  to  all  the
       circumstances, including the  deportee's  criminal  and  immigration
       history. Further, in M's case,  the  tribunals  had  not  considered
       s.117C(4), namely whether M had been lawfully resident in the UK for
       most of his life and was socially and culturally integrated  in  the
       UK."



    8. The appellant, his current partner MM and his sister  LO  gave  oral
       evidence to the Tribunal. At the end of the hearing  I  reserved  my
       determination.

Evidence - Remaking

    9. The evidence is, in summary, as follows.

   10. The appellant claims his true name is JRN. He says that he gave  the
       name VA when stopped by police in 2004 when he  was  driving  a  car
       owned by this man, and was misunderstood to be that  gentleman  when
       convicted of driving with excess alcohol in  2004.  He  was  unaware
       about reference to the name VA as  an  "aka"  on  the  human  rights
       application made in  November  2012  by  solicitors  as  he  was  in
       detention at that time. The name M had become  associated  with  him
       after his use of the name V A later in 2004 as  he  had  been  given
       this as an additional name to his true names on an improperly issued
       Refugee Convention travel document (as it was issued on the basis he
       was spouse of Ms T M a person recognised as a refugee in the UK  but
       not someone known to the appellant) by a corrupt UK Border  Agency's
       member of staff. This is the matter which  led  to  the  appellant's
       index convictions set out below. As the name M  was  on  the  travel
       document he used for identity purposes from 2004 it was also entered
       on his children's (JN, AN  and  ZN)  birth  certificates  after  his
       correct name.

   11. The appellant was arrested  on  9th  November  2012  for  the  index
       offence of having an improperly  issued  Refugee  Convention  travel
       document and a driving licence in the name of J M. He was convicted,
       following a guilty plea, in the name  of  J  R  of  making  a  false
       statement / false representations to obtain  a  false  document  and
       false benefits claims for child benefit and  child  tax  credit  and
       sentenced to one year and four months in prison. In  her  sentencing
       remarks her honour Judge Williams said: "Since  the  year  2003  you
       have been living a lie in the United Kingdom". The appellant pleaded
       guilty to the offences, and behaved well in prison  using  his  time
       well through education and work whilst in custody. The appellant was
       in custody as a result of his criminal conviction from 9th  November
       2012 until 23rd July 2013, but was  then  held  in  detention  under
       Immigration Act powers until mid January 2015, at which point he was
       released on bail. He accepts he also has  previous  convictions  for
       driving offences: in August 2004 he was convicted  of  driving  with
       excess alcohol and in November 2012 of driving without a licence and
       insurance  and  with  excess  alcohol.  He  received  a   fine   and
       disqualification from driving for each of these offences.

   12. The evidence in  the  prison  visiting  documentation  is  that  the
       appellant was visited by MM (his current partner) and  his  daughter
       with MM, ANM; and also by RS (his previous partner) and his children
       by RS, JN, AN and ZN; and also  by  JA  the  pastor  of  the  church
       attended by the appellant and RS; and the  appellant's  half  sister
       LO.  Prison phone records show calls by the appellant to MM on  both
       a mobile and landline, and also to RS.   There are  also  emails  to
       the appellant from his partner MM and former partner  RS  whilst  he
       was in prison. The appellant did  not  have  the  facility  to  send
       emails himself whilst in prison. There are also letters and cards to
       and from the appellant and MM whilst he was in prison.

   13. The  documentation  relating  to  the  appellant's  time  in  prison
       includes five  character  references  and  eleven  certificates  for
       educational achievements

   14. The appellant states that he believes he was born in the  Democratic
       Republic of Congo.  He  knows  little  about  his  father  (whom  he
       believes was a citizen of Nigeria) who died when he was  young,  but
       his mother was a citizen of Nigeria  and  he  returned  to  live  in
       Nigeria when he was about 6 years  old,  and  he  then  grew  up  in
       Nigeria. He has a maternal half-brother who now lives in the USA. He
       has a paternal half-sister (whom he did not know well whilst he  was
       growing up in Nigeria as his mother was estranged from his  paternal
       family), LO, who now lives in Romford  with  her  family  and  is  a
       British citizen. He lived in Nigeria with his mother until she  died
       in 1993. He completed his schooling and studied for most of  an  HND
       in administration there at university. He also worked in a hotel. He
       has been interviewed by officials from the Nigerian High  Commission
       and the DRC Embassy on at least four occasions whilst  in  detention
       but neither  have  been  able  to  document  him  (and  confirm  his
       citizenship) to his knowledge. He has not obtained any documentation
       regarding his true identity as he has no relatives left  in  Nigeria
       to assist with this process.

   15. After the appellant's mother's death he left  Nigeria  in  1993  and
       travelled to Italy, and then  Holland  and  arrived  in  the  UK  in
       January 2000 on false  documentation.  He  worked  in  the  security
       industry in the UK, and relied upon the false  travel  document  for
       this purpose from 2004. He worked until his arrest in 2012.

   16. In 2007/8 the appellant met his partner R S, a Nigerian citizen  who
       had been brought up in the UK, and they started to cohabit in  2009.
       She had a daughter born in 2005 called H F.  The  appellant  and  RS
       have three children JN born in 2010 and twins  AN  and  ZN  born  in
       2011. These  children  have  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  are
       entitled to register as British citizens.  The  appellant  played  a
       full role in the life of  his  children  (although  his  twins  were
       conceived at a time when he had already started a  new  relationship
       with MM), and looked after them every morning until he went to  work
       at 11am until his arrest in November 2012. His former  partner,  RS,
       was and remains angry that he left her and that since his arrest  he
       has not been able to provide for  her  and  his  children  with  her
       financially.

   17. After his arrest RS lost the accommodation which the  appellant  had
       been  paying  for,  and  had  to  be   accommodated   in   temporary
       accommodation by the local authority until she was re-housed by them
       in Chatham, Kent. JN was two and a half years old when the appellant
       was first imprisoned. RS visited him on eight occasions when he  was
       in prison, each time  bringing  the  children.  When  he  was  first
       released RS was still  living  in  London  and  he  took  the  three
       children to school and sometimes brought them to his home  with  MM.
       They spoke on the phone every day; would visit them  at  their  home
       three times a week; and he would see them at  church  every  Sunday.
       The appellant denied that he had told the previous Tribunal in  2014
       that he had not seen the  children  since  2012:  the  prison  visit
       evidence showed this to be untrue and he  had  not  said  this,  for
       instance RS and the children visited him on  his  50th  birthday  in
       prison on 19th October 2014 in Brook House.

   18. In November 2015 RS moved to Chatham. Since this time the  appellant
       speaks regularly to the children on the telephone  (at  least  three
       times a week), but  only  sees  them  once  a  fortnight  at  church
       facilitated by the pastor for an hour and sometimes at RS's sister's
       house for a period of  up  to  two  hours.  The  appellant  and  the
       children are very distressed by their limited contact, but he is not
       working so cannot afford to visit them more, and if  he  has  travel
       money from his charity work for the church he uses it  to  buy  them
       things. If the appellant is allowed to remain in the UK he plans  to
       help RS rent a property in London near her sister, which is what she
       would like, and then see his children from her more  frequently.  He
       has recently had calls from his son JN's teacher as he  is  refusing
       to go into class as he wants to see his father.  The  appellant  has
       convinced his son he should go  into  class  on  the  telephone.  He
       believes that RS does support him staying in the UK, even though she
       is angry with the appellant and often frustrates  visits  or  limits
       their time, because of her fears for the impact on JN.  However  she
       has refused to be involved with the case before the Tribunal.

   19. As set out above at the end of  2010  the  appellant's  relationship
       with RS broke down and he started to cohabit with a new partner,  MM
       who is a British citizen born and brought up in the UK  of  Jamaican
       parentage. She is a community nursery nurse working  with  a  health
       visiting team in London. She had  a  previously  relationship  which
       ended  in  domestic  violence  with  a  man  called  JA.  From  this
       relationship she has two British citizen  children:  a  daughter  MA
       born in 1997 and a son AA born in 2002. MM and the appellant have  a
       daughter ANM born in 2012.  MM and the appellant  have  an  on-going
       committed and happy relationship, and are engaged to be married. The
       appellant currently deals with the household tasks and  looks  after
       ANM when she is not at nursery (she currently attends nursery  three
       days a week). MM believed the appellant was lawfully in the UK until
       2012 when he was stopped for a driving offence.

   20. By the time the appellant was  arrested  both  MM's  older  children
       regarded the appellant as  a  father  figure,  and  had  a  trusting
       relationship with him. MM and the appellant did not tell  her  older
       children that he had been sent to prison, but said that  he  was  in
       Nigeria. The appellant continued  to  talk  to  MA  and  AA  on  the
       telephone during  his  time  in  prison/detention.  MM  visited  the
       appellant in prison every two weeks, and she would always  take  ANM
       with her on these visits.

   21. When the appellant was released from prison he resumed  living  with
       MM and the three children (MA, AA and ANM).  His  relationship  with
       his two step children remains very strong.  MA  is  studying  for  A
       level examinations in 2017, and is hoping to go  to  university  and
       become an architect. AA is at school, and does sports together  with
       the appellant. ANM is very attached to  her  father  as  he  is  her
       principal carer. He does not believe that MM would be able  to  cope
       on her own if he were forced to return  to  Nigeria.  The  appellant
       says it is impossible for him to express how much he had missed  all
       of his children in detention, and the joy  at  being  reunited  with
       them.

   22. The appellant gave evidence that Mr Horrocks, the social worker, had
       been with the family for about 4 hours from about 10am on 22nd March
       2016. He had only spoke to MM, and seen ANM as  the  older  children
       (MA and AA) were at school. Mr Horrocks had  spoken  to  RS  on  the
       telephone but not the children, ZN, AN and  JN,  who  were  also  at
       school.

   23.  MM  adds  in  her  evidence  the  following  information.  She  had
       understood the appellant was lawfully present when she commenced her
       relationship but she knew that M was not his true  name,  and  as  a
       result they went to solicitors to investigate and for legal  advice.
       It was after the second visit to the solicitor  that  the  appellant
       was arrested. Whilst the appellant was  detained  this  had  a  deep
       affect on her older children. At that time they just existed day  to
       day but now they are content and able to focus on their school work.
       She struggled emotionally and with financial matters too.  MM  could
       not relocate her family to Nigeria as she looks  after  her  mother,
       who is elderly and lives in the UK and has a  secure  job  with  the
       NHS. If she remained  in  the  UK  with  the  children  without  the
       appellant it would be traumatic for  them.  She  believes  it  would
       affect her older children and prevent them doing well at school when
       currently they are high flyers. MA had repeated a  sixth  form  year
       whilst the appellant was in prison, which she  partially  attributed
       to the appellant's imprisonment because of the stress and  emotional
       upset. She says the appellant is a good role model for them all. She
       is afraid that her son AA might turn to gangs without the  appellant
       with them in the UK as there is a shortage of male  role  models  in
       her family. ANM is very close to  her  father  and  his  deportation
       would have a terrible  impact  on  her  emotional  well-being.   She
       believes that relations between the appellant and RS are worsened by
       the fact that he cannot support her financially at the current time.
       MM would be happy for the children with RS  to  resume  visiting  at
       their home as they used to  do  if  RS  were  to  permit  this.  She
       believes that the appellant had contact with  RS  and  his  children
       with her during his period of detention and imprisonment because  he
       told her this and saw pictures taken with them on his birthday.  JN,
       AN and ZN had come to her house twice in 2015 and stayed for  a  few
       hours on each occasion. They had not been to the house in  2016.  Mr
       Horrocks had attended at their home for 3 hours from 10.30am for the
       social work report.

   24. The appellant's half-sister, LO, (they have the same  father),  gave
       evidence confirming the bond between the appellant and his children,
       and current partner. She had visited the  appellant  in  prison  and
       detention on lots of occasions, including some with MM,  and  spoken
       to him on the telephone during this time. She believed  RS,  JN,  AN
       and ZN had visited the appellant in prison  and  whilst  he  was  in
       detention centres. She was aware that there had been contact between
       the appellant and these children but currently  there  was  conflict
       with RS. She had remained in close contact since the appellant  came
       out of detention, and spent Christmas with the appellant and MM, and
       both their families.

   25. LO also gave evidence that the appellant's true name is J R  N,  and
       that N was her maiden name. (At the end of  the  hearing  Mr  Melvin
       confirmed that her naturalisation certificate, which he found in the
       appellant's file, showed N as her maiden name.)  LO  explained  that
       the appellant had been born  from  an  extra  marital  affair  their
       father, a Nigerian citizen, had with his mother.  Their  father  had
       died when she was young, in 1971, and she had  had  limited  contact
       with the appellant as her paternal grandmother, with whom she lived,
       refused to acknowledge him due to his illegitimacy. She did not know
       the appellant's mother but understood she was dead.  She  no  longer
       has any significant family (except for family from her  husband)  in
       Nigeria, as she had no other siblings. She knew the  appellant  went
       to school in Nigeria but lost contact with  him  in  1985  when  she
       travelled to the UK, and only remade contact by chance in 2004.

   26. MA and AA provide a signed letter about  how  they  would  be  heart
       broken if the appellant were to be forced to leave the UK,  and  how
       they see him as vital to their educational success. There is also  a
       letter from a JA, presiding  minister  at  the  appellant  and  RS's
       church confirming that he facilitates contact between the  appellant
       and the appellant's three children with RS,  and  that  he  believes
       they have a close bond and the  appellant's  removal  would  have  a
       negative impact on their emotional well-being.  There  is  a  letter
       from RS dated December 2013 supporting the appellant's appeal on the
       basis that the appellant had a loving relationship with all of their
       children, JN, AN and ZN, and that it had been very difficult for all
       of them coping without him.

   27. There are also photographs of the appellant with  RS  and  her  four
       children (JN, ZN, AN and her older daughter HF) taken on HF's  tenth
       birthday which would be in 2015, and of the appellant with  JN,  ZN,
       AN on his  fiftieth  birthday  in  October  2014.  There  are  other
       photographs on other occasions of the appellant with JN, ZN  and  AN
       some of them in school uniforms, some clearly  at  home  eating  and
       playing and others in casual clothes. There is also a letter from  a
       Ms A A with  a  passport  copy  stating  that  she  lived  with  the
       appellant and RS and their children  and  confirms  that  he  has  a
       loving relationship with his children, paid bills and  provided  for
       his children.  Other photographs show  the  appellant  with  MM  and
       their daughter ANM, and with the other older  half-siblings  MA  and
       AA. There are also receipts for the appellant  giving  money  to  RS
       whilst in detention, and transfers to her  from  the  appellant  and
       MM's joint bank account.

   28. The opinion of Mr Peter Horrocks, independent social worker is  that
       the appellant has strong emotional bonds to all six children and  is
       fully committed to being a positive father figure.

   29. He assesses all  of  the  children  as  having  the  same  physical,
       emotional and educational needs as children of their age.  He  notes
       that JN, AN, ZN, MA and AA have all had to  deal  with  relationship
       breakdown in their lives, MA and AA as a result of the breakdown  of
       the relationship with their biological father  in  circumstances  of
       domestic violence  which  research  shows  can  have  a  significant
       psychological impact.

   30. Mr Horrocks is concerned that MA and AA have taken on a  significant
       degree of responsibility for their  mother,  MM's,  emotional  well-
       being and function as young carers. It is only the presence  of  the
       appellant in their mother's lives which alleviates this  burden.  Mr
       Horrocks is of the opinion that for  the  appellant  to  be  removed
       would be likely to mean that both father  figures  in  MA  and  AA's
       lives would have been proven  to  be  untrustworthy  and  unreliable
       figures which would be likely to impact on their ability to  develop
       strong and loving relationships in the future, and might lead to  AA
       turning to the gang culture in  his  local  area.  He  believes  the
       removal of the  appellant  would  cause  them  emotional  harm.   He
       believes that ANM would be "severely distressed and traumatised" and
       suffer "emotional harm" by the appellant's removal as she would lose
       one of her primary carers and would  also  have  to  deal  with  her
       mother's loss. JN has already demonstrated a degree of  distress  by
       his separation and this  could  be  compounded  by  the  appellant's
       permanent removal, he is also of  the  opinion  that  the  permanent
       separation of the appellant and JN,  ZN  and  AN  would  cause  them
       emotional harm.

   31. Additional documentation confirms the appellant drops ANM at nursery
       and MM's employment with the NHS, the appellant's previous work  for
       security  firms  including  a  letter  confirming  his   ten   years
       employment in November  2010  and  payslips.  There  are  also  bank
       statements, health letters, HMRC correspondence  and  utility  bills
       showing MM and the appellant sharing a common address.

 Submissions - Remaking

   32. Mr Melvin relied upon the refusal letter, his skeleton argument  and
       oral submissions. In summary he submits as follows.

   33. In relation to the identity of the appellant he maintained that  the
       appellant is VOA as when arrested for driving offences in  2004  the
       appellant had given this name, and maintained  this  history  at  an
       interview with the UK Border Agency in the same year.  Reference  to
       this name also appeared as an "also known as" on  his  human  rights
       application made in 2012. Mr Melvin  maintained  the  appellant  had
       failed to provide any  documentary  evidence  of  his  claimed  true
       identity JRN which he could have done. Mr Melvin did however  accept
       that LO, the appellant's half-sister, was  a  credible  witness  and
       that the interview with the UK Border Agency from 2004  was  not  in
       the respondent's bundle and could not be located in his file.

   34. Mr Melvin submits that  the  appellant  should  not  be  seen  as  a
       credible witness given  his  criminal  convictions  for  fraud;  his
       immigration history of entering unlawfully and failing  to  lawfully
       regularise his stay; his illegal working; his lack of clarity as  to
       whether he is a citizen of the DRC or Nigeria; his failure to  fully
       accept that he had acted unlawfully in taking the Convention  Travel
       document issued by a corrupt UK  Border  Agency  staff  member  when
       clearly it did not have his correct  name  on  it;  the  appellant's
       contradictory evidence on contact with the children he has  with  RS
       today and before the Tribunal in 2014; and because  he  had  claimed
       the social worker had spent longer with the family than his partner,
       MM had recalled. He accepted that  MM  and  LO  should  be  seen  as
       credible witnesses, whilst noting that LO had not produced  evidence
       herself of her maiden name  and  that  her  evidence  regarding  the
       appellant's contact with his children with RS was second hand.

   35. The refusal letter identifies that in accordance with s.32 of the UK
       Borders Act 2007  it  is  in  the  public  interest  to  deport  the
       appellant as a foreign criminal. It  follows  that  the  appellant's
       deportation is conducive to the public good under paragraph 398  (b)
       of the Immigration Rules as he has been sentenced  to  a  period  of
       imprisonment between twelve months and four years. Consideration  is
       then given as to whether the appellant deportation is  not  required
       in the public interest because paragraph 399(a) of  the  Immigration
       Rules applies due to the appellant's  relationship  with  qualifying
       children.

   36. In this letter, written in September 2013,  it is stated that it  is
       accepted by the JN cannot reasonably be expected to leave the UK but
       that he can be cared for by his mother RS and  it  is  not  believed
       that the appellant has had recent contact with JN. JN  can  maintain
       contact with the appellant from abroad and his  best  interests  are
       simply to be looked after by his  mother.  ZN  and  AN  also  cannot
       reasonably be expected to leave the UK however they can be cared for
       in this country by their mother RS and have no recent  contact  with
       the appellant and so it would be in their best interests  to  simply
       be looked after by their mother. In relation to ANM it  is  accepted
       that it would not be reasonable to  expect  her  to  leave  the  UK.
       However it is noted that the appellant has limited contact with her,
       and that her best interests are simply to remain in the  UK  and  be
       cared for by her mother. In relation to MA  and  AA  they  have  not
       shown to be dependent on the appellant, and whilst  they  cannot  be
       reasonably expected to leave the UK, their mother is  their  primary
       carer and they can keep in touch with  the  appellant  using  modern
       means of communication.

   37. In the skeleton argument and oral submissions  Mr  Melvin  submitted
       that the situation for the six children could  not  be  said  to  be
       unduly harsh as it did not reach the necessary degree  of  severity.
       The children coped well enough when the appellant was in prison  and
       this would not be appreciably worse for them. It was not accepted by
       the respondent that the appellant currently plays an active role  in
       the upbringing of RN, ZN and AN, or that he is the primary carer for
       ANM. Both the mothers (MM and RS) were  able  to  cope  without  the
       appellant whilst he was in detention and would do so in the  future.
       If the families were financially a little  worse  off  (as  MM,  for
       instance, would not be able to extra bank  nursing  and  would  just
       have to do her 3 day contract) this was not sufficient  to  say  the
       impact on the children was unduly harsh. The best interests  of  the
       children should not be seen as something that  had  to  be  promoted
       through the legislation, but just were a factor  to  be  considered,
       and in this  context  something  far  greater  was  needed  for  the
       appellant to succeed.

   38. The evidence of the social worker should be given little  weight  as
       he had only actually met the child ANM and not spoken to any of  the
       other children, and a number of his conclusions were  not  based  in
       fact but simply on material supplied by the appellant. There was  no
       evidence  AA  was  likely  to  turn  to  gang  culture  without  the
       appellant. Further the appellant could not be seen as a  role  model
       for children when he was a man with criminal convictions for deceit.
       There was no proper evidence the appellant was ANM's  primary  carer
       as she attended nursery three days a week, and he was only carer  on
       the other two work days. There was no evidence if the appellant  was
       allowed to remain that RS would move  close  to  the  appellant  and
       allow more contact.

   39. Finally Mr Melvin  submitted  that  there  are  no  very  compelling
       circumstances over and above those in paragraphs  399  and  399A  on
       which to allow this appeal.

   40. Ms  Capel  made  oral  submissions  and  relied  upon  her  skeleton
       argument.  She  submitted  that  with  respect  to  the  appellant's
       identity that the respondent had not provided  the  interview  notes
       which were the basis on which they contended the appellant had  said
       that his name was VOA, and the appellant had provided an explanation
       that  it  had  been  a  misunderstanding,  and  the   human   rights
       application in 2012 was made principally in the  name  of  JRN.  The
       appellant is recorded as specifically correcting his name to JR from
       VA during his index offence  proceedings.  He  has  been  consistent
       about his history of nationality: he was born in the DRC of Nigerian
       parentage. His half sister, LO,  had  given  corroborating  evidence
       that his true identity is JRN,  and  she  has  been  accepted  as  a
       truthful witness by the respondent. The appellant had not failed  to
       provide evidence in support of this as he had cooperated  with  many
       interviews  from  the  Nigerian  High  Commission  and  DRC  Embassy
       investigating this issue.

   41. In relation to the issue of the best interests of the children it is
       submitted that this falls very simply: it is in the  best  interests
       of all of the children that the appellant remain due to  his  loving
       relationship with them all and active role as parent. There  are  no
       countervailing factors in this case. There is  substantial  evidence
       of the appellant's relationship with MM before, during and after his
       period of imprisonment and his role as father to ANM and  his  step-
       children AA and MA. MM has been found to be a credible  witness  and
       she gives evidence of significant current contact with the  children
       the appellant has with RS, which is also  supported  by  the  letter
       from the pastor at the appellant's church, prison phone records  and
       prison/ detention centre visit  materials.  RS  is  angry  with  the
       appellant, and for this reason she has decided not  to  be  involved
       with the Tribunal hearing. The evidence of  the  social  worker,  Mr
       Horrocks, cannot be said to be irrational. RS  comes  frequently  to
       London and clearly would like to be near her sister, and would  like
       the appellant to contribute financially to her and the children.  In
       these circumstances it was  reasonable  to  assume  that  she  would
       accept the appellant assisting her with renting  a  home  in  London
       when she had only been moved  out  of  London  by  social  services.
       Further the CV of Mr Horrocks shows he has great expertise  in  this
       area and would clearly only draw conclusions  that  were  reasonable
       based on his experience.

   42. The appellant could also show he could  meet  the  higher  threshold
       that his removal would be unduly harsh for the  children.  They  had
       all  suffered  detrimentally  when  the  appellant  was  in  prison/
       detention, and the negative  financial  impact  of  the  appellant's
       absence was a factor to be added in if not something  which  can  be
       seen as determinate. If the appellant were removed  there  would  be
       long term adverse effects on their emotional wellbeing,  educational
       performance, their ability to form relationships,  and  possibly  in
       the case of AA his safety. This view was supported by MM, the pastor
       at the appellant's church, RS, LO and Mr Horrocks.  The  appellant's
       offending was at the lower end of the automatic  deportation  scale.
       It was significantly  less  serious  than  that  of  KMO  where  the
       appellant was involved with the large scale professional  production
       of  false  documents.  It  was  relevant  that  the  appellant   had
       rehabilitated himself and must be seen as posing a low level risk of
       reoffending. He has glowing references from staff from  prisons  and
       immigration removal centres and has used his time in prison usefully
       through work and education. He has not had been arrested or  in  any
       way been involved  with  criminal  activity  since  his  release  on
       Immigration Act bail fifteen months ago.

   43. Ms Capel submitted that there are also very compelling circumstances
       over and above those in paragraphs 399 and 399A on  which  to  allow
       this appeal as this appellant has no ties with Nigeria to  help  him
       reintegrate; he has close family ties with his half-sister  and  her
       family (husband and six children) in London; and he has a vulnerable
       partner (MM) who was previously the victim of domestic violence with
       caring obligations to her mother, and who has a child AA growing  up
       in an environment where gang culture prevails  and  another  MA  who
       whilst no longer a minor remains a child of the  family  who  is  in
       full time education and living at home.

Conclusions - Remaking

   44. The legal framework is as follows:


   Sections 32 and 33 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  provide,  so  far  as
   material:

           "32. Automatic deportation

           (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

           (a) who is not a British citizen,

           (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

           (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

           (2) Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a  period  of
           imprisonment of at least 12 months.

           (3) Condition 2 is that-

                 (a) the offence is specified by order of the  Secretary  of
                 State  under   section   72(4)(a)   of   the   Nationality,
                 Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (serious criminal), and

                 (b) the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

           (4) For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act
           1971 (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive
           to the public good.

           (5) The Secretary of State must  make  a  deportation  order  in
           respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33). ...'

           33. Exceptions

           (1) Section 32(4) and (5)-

           (a) do not apply where an  exception  in  this  section  applies
           (subject to subsection (7) below), and

           ...

           (2) Exception 1 is where removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in
           pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

           (a) a person's Convention rights, or

           (b)  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
           Convention."

   Para 396 of the immigration rules provides the following presumption:
           396. Where a person is liable  to  deportation  the  presumption
           shall be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in
           the public interest to deport where the Secretary of State  must
           make a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK
           Borders Act 2007.

      And paras 397 and A398 make clear that  the  rules  aim  to  encompass
      rights protected by the ECHR:

           397. A deportation order  will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
           removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  the  Human  Rights
           Convention. Where deportation would not  be  contrary  to  these
           obligations, it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
           the public interest in deportation is outweighed.

           A398. These rules apply where:

              a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation  claims  that  his
                 deportation would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                 obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;



              b) a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order  made
                 against him to be revoked.

   That ambition is reinforced by the heading that follows  of  "Deportation
   and Article 8" under which the framework of the rules is set out:
           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and



                 (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good and in the public interest because  they
                 have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been
                 sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

                 (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good and in the public interest because  they
                 have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been
                 sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4  years
                 but at least 12 months; or

                 (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good  and in the public interest because,  in
                 the view of the Secretary of  State,  their  offending  has
                 caused serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who
                 shows a particular disregard for the law,




           the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does  not,  the
           public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by  other
           factors where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and
           above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.




      399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies  if
      -



           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and

                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                 (ii) the child has lived in  the  UK  continuously  for  at
                 least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the
                 immigration decision; and in either case

                 (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live  in  the
                 country to which the person is to be deported

                 (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
                 UK without the person who is to be deported   or




           (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled  in
           the UK and

                    (i) the relationship was  formed  at  a  time  when  the
                    person (deportee)  was in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their
                    immigration status was not precarious; and

                ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
                    country to which the person is to be  deported,  because
                    of  compelling  circumstances  over  and   above   those
                    described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

               iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain  in
                    the UK without the person who is to be deported.

   These rules must be seen in the context of the  statutory  framework  now
   found at s117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. S.117A
   sets out, in mandatory terms, what is expected of a court or Tribunal:


           117A Application of this Part

               . (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is
                 required to determine whether a decision made under the
                 Immigration Acts-

                     . (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private
                       and family life under Article 8, and

                     . (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of
                       the Human Rights Act 1998.

               . (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court
                 or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                     . (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in
                       section 117B, and

                     . (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                       criminals, to the considerations listed in section
                       117C.

               . (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question"
                 means the question of whether an interference with a
                 person's right to respect for private and family life is
                 justified under Article 8(2).

           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases

               . (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
                 in the public interest.

               . (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who can
                 speak English-

            [pic] [pic]  [pic]
               . (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

               . (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

               . (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                 interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                 that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-
                 ?(a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and?(b) are better able
                 to integrate into society.

               . (4)  Little weight should be given to- (a) a private life,
                 or ?(b) a relationship formed with a qualifying
                 partner,?that is established by a person at a time when the
                 person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

               . (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
                 established by a person at a time when the person's
                 immigration status is precarious.

               . (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to
                 deportation, the public interest does not require the
                 person's removal where-

                     . (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                       relationship with a qualifying child, and

                     . (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child
                       to leave the United Kingdom.

           117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
           foreign criminals

               . (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                 interest.

               . (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                 criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation
                 of the criminal.

               . (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not
                 been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or
                 more, the public interest requires C's deportation unless
                 Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

               . (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                     . (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United
                       Kingdom for most of ?C's life,

                     . (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the
                       United Kingdom, and

                     . (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                       integration into the country to which C is proposed
                       to be deported.

               . (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and
                 subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a
                 genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                 qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                 partner or child would be unduly harsh.

               . (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been
                 sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four
                 years, the public interest requires deportation unless
                 there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
                 those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                 (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
                 taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering
                 a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent
                 that the reason for the decision was the offence or
                 offences for which the criminal has been convicted.


   45. As stated at the start of this decision I will  adopt  the  approach
       taken by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern in KMO to the decision-making
       in the light of the support for this by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in
       AB, the unequivocal support for this approach by the respondent  and
       fact that the appellant principally relies upon this approach too in
       the submissions made and the recent decision of the Court of  Appeal
       in MM (Uganda). This  approach  means  that  I  will  consider  that
       whether the deportation of the appellant  is  unduly  harsh  to  the
       children in accordance with  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration
       Rules factoring in the level of criminality of  the  appellant,  and
       the impact this has on the weigh to be given to the public  interest
       in deportation. Both KMO and MAB adopt a unified approach to what is
       harsh, see paragraph 26 of KMO citing MAB as follows:



           "Whether the consequences of deportation will be "unduly  harsh"
           for   an   individual   involves   more   than   "uncomfortable,
           inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome  or  merely  difficult  and
           challenging"  consequences  and  imposes  a  considerably   more
           elevated or higher threshold.




           The consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if  they  are
           "severe" or "bleak" and they will be "unduly"  so  if  they  are
           "inordinately" or "excessively" harsh taking into account all of
           the circumstances of the individual."


   46. The respondent accepts that it would be unduly harsh for all of  the
       children to have to leave the UK and return with  the  appellant  to
       Nigeria.

   47. The respondent does not accept that  the  appellant  is  a  credible
       witness and does not accept that  weight  should  be  given  to  the
       social worker's report of Mr Horrocks.

   48. I am however satisfied that the appellant is a credible witness  for
       the following reasons. Whilst  I  give  full  consideration  to  his
       criminal history of offences of dishonesty, obtaining a false travel
       document which enabled him to live, work and claim benefits  in  the
       UK, and his very poor immigration history I am  satisfied  that  the
       evidence he gave to the Tribunal was  heartfelt,  detailed  and  the
       truth to the best of his knowledge  and  belief.  His  evidence  was
       consistent with that of the other two witnesses whom the  respondent
       conceded, and I find, to be credible witnesses. I do  not  find  the
       fact that the appellant assessed the social worker as being  present
       for an hour longer than his partner MM or the fact  that  his  half-
       sister LO did not know about a maternal half-brother of his  in  the
       USA who is unrelated  to  her  affects  my  assessment.  Whilst  the
       evidence recorded as given by  the  appellant  to  the  Tribunal  in
       2013/2014 is that he had last seen JN, AN and ZN in  September  2012
       at paragraph 46 (although he spoke to them on the phone every day) I
       accept that this was  a  misunderstanding  as  clearly  evidence  of
       prison visit by them to the appellant was before that  Tribunal  and
       submissions made that they have seen  him  in  detention  (where  he
       remained at the time of that hearing) at paragraph 98. I  find  that
       the appellant has given the fullest information he is able about his
       nationality: he has provided the nationalities of  his  parents  and
       his place of birth. In the context of the apparently refusal by both
       the DRC and Nigeria to document him he is right to be cautious as to
       whether either country acknowledges him as a  citizen  and  thus  to
       claim a citizenship.

   49. I am also satisfied that the appellant's true name is JRN. The other
       two names VOA and M arose in the context of criminal matters and the
       appellant has provided a coherent explanation as to how. There is no
       advantage in the appellant saying that JRN is his true name. Further
       it is undoubtedly the maiden name of his half-sister  as  Mr  Melvin
       has confirmed it is recorded on her naturalisation certificate;  and
       it is the evidence of his half-sister LO, found  to  be  a  credible
       witness, that this is his name. It is also a name which  appears  on
       the birth certificates of JN, AN and ZN  with  the  addition  of  M,
       which was necessitated by  the  false  Refugee  Convention  document
       under which the appellant lived at the time of their births.  It  is
       regrettable that the appellant has not tried to obtain documentation
       to support his true identity but I accept his evidence that  he  was
       not  fully  advised  on  this  point  as  his  representatives  (The
       University of Law Legal Advice Centre have written to  the  Tribunal
       in relation to issues with other documents stating that: "We act pro
       bono for the Appellant and we are  currently  under  resourced.")  I
       also accept that it would not be easy or straight  forward  for  the
       appellant to find evidence of his citizenship given his birth  in  a
       country where he has no family connections  and  the  death  of  his
       parents and the fact he has no siblings in Nigeria.

   50. The respondent does not accept that weight should be  given  to  the
       social work report of Mr Peter Horrocks. I  have  no  hesitation  in
       accepting that Mr Horrocks has appropriate qualifications to provide
       the report as he worked as a social  worker  in  the  voluntary  and
       local authority child care sectors for 20 years prior to becoming an
       independent social worker  and  also  has  appropriate  social  work
       qualifications. It is also clear that he was provided with  all  the
       documents that were before the First-tier Tribunal and  conducted  a
       lengthy interview with the appellant, MM and was able to observe the
       appellant with MM and ANM. It is  clear  from  the  report  that  Mr
       Horrocks was not able to speak to RS, AN,  ZN,  JN,  AA  or  MA.  Mr
       Horrocks  therefore  relies  upon  information   gained   from   the
       documents, interviews, social work research and observations of  the
       family members he does meet to draw his conclusions. I do  not  find
       any of the conclusions  irrational  as  has  been  contended  by  Mr
       Melvin: I find to the contrary that they are reasonable,  clear  and
       appropriately measured. For instance at paragraph 4.16  in  relation
       to AA and the possibility  of  his  involvement  with  gangs  is  (a
       concern raised by his mother MM) Mr Horrocks says this "could" occur
       given his understanding of the research into gang culture and  Afro-
       Caribbean boys, citing two sources on  the  issue.   So  whilst  the
       report has less value than a report where all of  the  children  had
       been interviewed I do assess that it is one which  properly  can  be
       given weight in the determination of this appeal with the provenance
       of the information being born in mind.

   51. I find that the appellant has a strong  parental  relationship  with
       all five minor children and that it is in their best interests  that
       the appellant remains in the UK.  As stated in EA (Article 8 -  best
       interests of the child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 it is in the  best
       interests of a child to live with and be brought up by both  of  his
       or her parents subject to any very  strong  contra-indications.  All
       the evidence  leads  me  to  conclude  that  there  are  no  contra-
       indications for this appellant. This  is  clearly  the  view  of  Mr
       Horrocks who has been provided with full information concerning  the
       appellant's criminal convictions and  imprisonment.  It  is  clearly
       relevant in this regard that the appellant's convictions are not for
       violence or drugs.

   52. The committed caring parental relationship of the appellant with ANM
       is supported by overwhelming evidence from the appellant, MM and the
       social worker Mr Horrocks who observes her with her parents.  It  is
       also supported by photographs, the evidence  of  LO  and  of  prison
       visits. I find that the appellant is caring for her alone two days a
       week when MM has extra work. In this context it is accurate  for  Mr
       Horrocks to find that the appellant is a primary carer and a  secure
       attachment figure. Mr Horrocks also makes the same finding  that  MM
       is a primary carer and a secure attachment figure.

   53. AA has provided a joint letter with his older  sister  in  which  he
       refers to the appellant as his "father" and as  a  kind  and  loving
       man, who assists with their education and without whom  things  were
       difficult and hard. He also signs cards to the appellant,  which  he
       received in prison with his own personal notes and best  wishes  and
       there are family pictures of him  with  the  appellant.  It  is  the
       evidence of the appellant and MM that the appellant has  a  parental
       relationship with AA, in which he  provides  a  positive  male  role
       model  involving  AA  positively  in  things  such  as  sports   and
       deflecting any interest in this thirteen year old Afro-Caribbean boy
       from south London local gangs. AA is unaware that the appellant  has
       been in prison for a criminal offence, being given to believe by  MM
       that the appellant was abroad not in prison during his  absence.  Mr
       Horrocks assesses that whilst it may ultimately have been an  unwise
       decision not to tell AA the truth about his  step-father's  absence,
       from the material provided to  him,  AA  sees  the  appellant  as  a
       positive father figure in particularly as he is not  a  violent  man
       who rarely shows an interest in  him  like  his  birth  father,  and
       because he makes his mother MM happy. Mr  Horrocks  was  in  a  good
       position to assess the role of AA's birth father and the  nature  of
       his relationship with MM as he had reliable detailed testimony  from
       MM on these issues.

   54. I am satisfied that the appellant has provided a truthful account of
       his history of his involvement with his children from RS, namely ZN,
       AN and JN, and that he has a close and loving parental  relationship
       with these children. His account is support by the testimony  of  MM
       whom is accepted by all as being a  credible  witness.  It  is  also
       supported by the prison visit material, the letter from  the  pastor
       who facilitates the fortnightly contact of the appellant at  church,
       the telephone records from prison, and the photographic evidence. It
       is  clear  that  the  appellant,  RS,  ZN,  AN  and  JN  had  family
       celebrations for the appellant's 50th birthday in October  2014  and
       for  RS's  oldest  daughter's  10th  birthday  in  2015   from   the
       photographs, as well as it being clear that the appellant  had  seen
       the children on a number of different occasions / contexts in recent
       times from the places and clothing of the children. It is also clear
       from the bank statements and prison money transaction  records  that
       the appellant has provided  funds  to  RS  in  2012  and  2014,  and
       purchased school uniform in September 2015 (evidenced  by  receipts)
       in quantities very likely to relate to RS's children.

   55. Mr Horrocks observed the emotional distress of  the  appellant  when
       talking about ZN, AN  and  JN  and  the  current  difficulties  with
       contact. I am satisfied that the appellant wishes the contact to  be
       more than it has been since RS was forced to move  to  Chatham,  and
       that if the appellant is permitted to remain he will, on the balance
       of probabilities, be in a position to provide financially for  these
       children once again. Whether RS ultimately moves to  London  or  not
       the appellant will be able to afford to  visit  these  children  who
       still live relatively near to London (it is a 45 minute train ride),
       and RS will not feel a need to withdraw contact to  try  to  extract
       financial support. I accept the appellant's account of JN expressing
       distress at his separation from the appellant when  at  school,  and
       see this as indicative of the best interests of all  three  siblings
       maintaining their relationship with their father.

   56. However ZN, AN and JN are not actually  British  citizens  (although
       they are lawfully present and entitled to register as such) and none
       of these children have lived in the UK continuously for seven  years
       preceding the date of the immigration  decision  as  they  are  only
       currently five (ZN and AN) and six (JN) years  old.  As  such  these
       children cannot assist the appellant to remain  in  accordance  with
       paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules.

   57. As Ms Capel rightly observes a  finding  that  it  is  in  the  best
       interest of these children for the appellant to  remain  in  the  UK
       does not mean it would be unduly  harsh  for  them  to  remain  here
       whilst he is deported as this is a  significantly  more  challenging
       test. I ultimately conclude for the reasons set  out  below  however
       that the situation of the two qualifying minor children ANM  and  AA
       would be unduly harsh,  in  the  sense  of  being  inordinately  and
       disproportionately bleak without the appellant.

   58. I reach my conclusion in part  because  ANM  and  AA  have  suffered
       previous emotional upsets in their lives. ANM  clearly  had  limited
       contact with her father, the appellant, due to his imprisonment  and
       detention during the first three years of her life  and  lived  with
       the stress and upset this caused her mother  and  step-siblings  for
       these first years. She has only over the past year  settled  into  a
       situation where she has her father normally available to  her  on  a
       day to day basis and a happy, contented  and  emotionally  supported
       mother. AA, as described by MM to Mr Horrocks the social worker, has
       witnessed up to the age of  5  years  his  biological  father  being
       violent towards his mother,  the  intervention  of  the  police  and
       finally a  court  order  preventing  his  biological  father  having
       contact with his mother. His biological father  continues  to  makes
       promises he does not keep and to be an inconsistent parent who  sees
       him only four times a year.  For  each  child  there  are  therefore
       reasons why they do not face the deportation of the appellant from a
       position of strength which I find enhances the bleakness of the loss
       of the appellant.

   59. The loss of the appellant would in each case be all the  more  acute
       because the appellant is an active and committed parent whose loving
       care is a necessary part of the children's  upbringing  contributing
       to their development.

   60. It would also be  specifically  excessively  harsh  for  AA,  as  Mr
       Horrocks has observed from discussions with MM, as AA and his sister
       MA take on inappropriate emotional responsibility for their  mother,
       MM, when the appellant is not present (as happened during his period
       of imprisonment and detention) and to an extent become young carers.
       This responsibility would seem likely to fall more heavily on AA  as
       his sister is older and is planning to go to university in 2017, and
       thus potentially to leave the family home or  at  least  be  heavily
       committed to  studies.  It  would  be  clearly  the  case  that  the
       deportation of the appellant would lead AA to lose a  second  father
       in his short life, and as Mr Horrocks has argued to AA  suffering  a
       probable significant loss of trust in  the  adult  world,  having  a
       detrimental impact on his trust enabling him to  form  secure  adult
       relationships in the future. There is also the concern that the lack
       of other male relatives in the family (testified  to  by  MM)  could
       lead AA,  who  is  just  entering  his  teenage  years  (making  the
       situation quite different to the point when  the  appellant  was  in
       detention/prison), turn to local gang culture for  role  models  and
       thus to subject himself to physical danger and  negative  influences
       which would affect his school work. This concern  raised  by  MM  is
       shown to be a real possibility when the social work research, as set
       out by Mr Horrocks, is considered,  and  clearly  would  also  be  a
       development contrary to the public interest in reducing crime.

   61. For ANM it would be particularly excessively harsh as  she  is  very
       young and unable to understand any explanation given to her for  her
       father's disappearance and because the appellant is now one  of  her
       primary carers and a secure attachment figure, providing for her  at
       least equally  with  MM,  her  mother.  Clearly  the  situation  was
       different for ANM compared to the  period  when  the  appellant  was
       previously imprisoned/detained as she was born at a  time  when  the
       appellant was in prison and thus did not experience the breaking  of
       such a  bond.   If  the  appellant  is  removed  this  will  in  all
       probability, according to the  social  work  research  cited  by  Mr
       Horrocks,  cause  her  significant  distress  and  trauma:  a  truly
       profoundly bleak prospect.

   62. I therefore find, for all of the reasons set  out  above,  that  the
       removal of the appellant would on the balance of probabilities  lead
       to permanent emotional harm to these two children, and that this  is
       a highly significant factor in the assessment as to whether it would
       be unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK without the  appellant.



   63. However I now move on to  place  the  appellant's  poor  immigration
       history and criminal offending in the balance in considering whether
       the removal of the appellant would be unduly  harsh.  The  appellant
       has remained in the UK for  the  past  16  years  without  leave  to
       remain, having entered unlawfully and worked without  permission  in
       the UK. Clearly his criminal offence relates to this lack of status,
       and was an attempt to  circumvent  immigration  controls.  The  only
       thing  that  could  be  said  in  his  favour  in  relation  to  his
       immigration history is that he had  attended  lawyers  to  start  to
       regularise his stay on the truthful basis of his  relationship  with
       MM prior to his arrest for the index offence.

   64. It is clear  that  the  appellant  has  been  convicted  of  serious
       offences of dishonesty as he was given  a  16  month  sentence.  His
       criminal behaviour led to the loss to the public purse of 14,000 of
       child related benefits to which the appellant's children by RS  were
       not entitled, and to  legitimising  his  illegal  work  in  the  UK.
       However in his favour is that he entered a guilty plea and that  his
       sentence is at the lower end of the spectrum  of  cases  in  the  12
       month to 4 years bracket at  paragraph  398(b)  of  the  Immigration
       Rules. His crime was not a professional planned fraud  (as  in  KMO)
       but one in which he wrongly took advantage of the opportunity to  be
       provided with false documentation by a corrupt Home Office official.
       He has never been convicted of any offences of violence or  relating
       to drugs.

   65. The appellant has clearly used his  time  in  prison  and  detention
       well: working, studying and obtaining qualifications.  He  has  five
       glowing references from chaplains,  managers  and  officers.  He  is
       noted to be hardworking,  polite,  reliable,  friendly,  respectful,
       committed to detainees being treated fairly and equally, as having a
       positive behaviour record and having made 100% effort  to  make  his
       time in prison productive. In HMP Elmley he  was  made  a  "Violence
       Reduction Representative" which is described by Officer  R  Crowther
       as a very important role. The Reverend Nicky Startin  believes  that
       he will continue in the changed way of life he has  demonstrated  in
       prison and detention and states: "From my knowledge of  him  he  has
       committed himself utterly to the standards of  the  Christian  life,
       and puts the Christian values into practice in his  thoughts,  words
       and deeds." The appellant has not been  arrested  for  any  offences
       since being released on Immigration Act bail 15 months ago, and  has
       abided by the conditions of his bail. Given the facts of  his  crime
       and the information about his behaviour since his release I conclude
       that he is at low risk of re-offending if permitted to remain in the
       UK lawfully. This  is  clearly  a  factor  relevant  to  the  public
       interest, see OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  694  at  paragraph
       15, particularly as the appellant's criminal record is  not  one  of
       the most serious crime.

   66. Whilst giving very significant weight to the public interest in  the
       need to deter foreign nationals from committing serious  crimes;  to
       maintain confidence from the public in  the  system  of  immigration
       control;  and  the  need  to  deport  such  individuals  to  express
       society's  revulsion  against  those  foreign  citizens  who  commit
       serious crimes I find in all the circumstances  of  the  appellant's
       case, conducting a proportionality exercise which  includes  a  full
       assessment of his criminality and offending and the public  interest
       as well as the impact of living in the UK without their  father  for
       AA and  ANM,  that  in  accordance  with  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
       Immigration it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's  qualifying
       children to remain in the UK whilst he is deported.

   67. In these circumstances  I  do  not  need  to  consider  whether  the
       appellant is able to succeed under paragraph 398 of the  Immigration
       Rules.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  do  not
      preserve any findings so the remaking will take place de novo.

   3. I remake the appeal allowing it under paragraph 399(a) the Immigration
      Rules.


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to avoid a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the appellant's children.




[pic]


Signed:                                            Date:  3rd May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    Introduction



     1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 19th October 1964. He
        arrived in the UK  illegally  in  January  2000.  He  has  not  had
        permission  to  enter  or  remain  at  any  point,  but  has   been
        continuously  resident  since  this  time.  In  December  2012  the
        appellant made a human rights application to remain in  the  UK  on
        the basis of his having four biological children, two step-children
        and a partner in the UK. This application was  refused  and  appeal
        lodged, but the decision was later withdrawn by the respondent.  In
        February 2013 the appellant was convicted  of  a  number  of  fraud
        offences relating to a false  instrument,  a  driving  licence  and
        statements  to  obtain  benefits  and  sentenced   to   16   months
        imprisonment. On 12th September the respondent issued a decision to
        deport  and  the  appellant  appealed.  His  appeal   against   the
        deportation decision was dismissed by a First-tier  Tribunal  Panel
        consisting of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pullig and  Dr  P  L
        Ravenscroft (non-legal member) in a  determination  promulgated  on
        the 15th September 2014.

     2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on
        the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had  erred
        in law as it was arguable that it had not been  considered  whether
        the appellant could meet  paragraph  399  (a)  of  the  Immigration
        Rules.

     3. The matter came before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had erred in law.

     4. It was agreed at the start of the hearing  that  there  were  clear
        errors of law by the First-tier Tribunal. The  First-tier  Tribunal
        had applied the wrong Immigration Rules as they applied  the  Rules
        as they stood prior to 28th  July  2014  rather  than  the  amended
        version from that date, although the decision  was  promulgated  on
        15th September 2014. The First-tier Tribunal  had  also  failed  to
        appreciate that the  Immigration  Rules  are  a  complete  code  in
        relation to Article 8 ECHR in  deportation  matters,  following  MF
        (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and thus that  no  assessment
        outside of the Immigration Rules should have taken place.

     5. Mr Kandola had no file so it was agreed that there would be a short
        adjournment so he could read  the  summary  bundle  of  papers.  Mr
        Kandola said on resumption of the hearing that whilst errors of law
        existed in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal he contended for
        the respondent that the errors were not material given safe factual
        findings of the Tribunal which meant that the appellant  could  not
        have succeeded in any case in his appeal.

     6. It was agreed that the central plank of the  appellant's  case  was
        that he was entitled to succeed in this appeal  because  he  argued
        that if properly determined his appeal could have  succeeded  under
        paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  in  essence
        involved him showing he had genuine  and  subsisting  relationships
        with his children in the UK who were British citizens, and that  it
        would be unduly harsh for the appellant's children to remain in the
        UK without him. The Tribunal accepted that  none  of  the  children
        could reasonably be expected to accompany the appellant to Nigeria,
        as does the respondent in  the  refusal  letter,  and  the  hearing
        proceeded on the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made
        findings tantamount to accepting that it would be unduly  harsh  to
        require the children to live with the appellant in Nigeria.

     7. I was alerted to the fact  I  need  to  be  aware  that  there  was
        potentially a problem of interpretation of the meaning  of  "unduly
        harsh", a key concept in paragraph 339(a) of the Immigration Rules,
        as there are currently two significantly different decisions of the
        Tribunal as to how this test should be interpreted.  This  conflict
        of approach was likely to be resolved fairly shortly however  as  a
        Presidential Panel was hearing a case to resolve  the  matter  next
        Tuesday.

Submissions

     8. Ms Capel relied upon the grounds of appeal.  She  argued  that  the
        errors of law by the First-tier Tribunal were material. In  summary
        she said that the assessment of the best interests of the  children
        was flawed, and this was central  to  looking  at  whether  it  was
        unduly harsh for the children to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
        appellant. She argued that  evidence  of  the  appellant's  partner
        about telephone contact with  children  had  not  been  taken  into
        consideration without proper reasoning. No reasons had  been  given
        why it would be in the best interests of children with family  life
        relationships with the appellant not  to  have  contact  with  him.
        There had been a failure  to  consider  what  future  relationships
        between the appellant and the children would be likely  to  consist
        of if he were allowed to remain. Further there  was  a  failure  to
        factor in the relatively low-end offending that the  appellant  had
        been convicted of, which on one view was part of the  unduly  harsh
        test. There had been a notable lack of reference in the decision of
        the First-tier Tribunal to evidence regarding the risk of harm  and
        re-offending in the future in the form of letters which should have
        been  considered  in  the  absence  of  an  OASys  report  and  any
        substantial sentencing remarks.

     9. Ms Capel also argued that there had been no proper consideration of
        whether there were very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
        those in paragraph 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

    10. Mr Kandola argued, in summary, that there were clear findings,  not
        affected by errors of  law,  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal which showed that there  was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
        parental relationship between the appellant and  his  children.  In
        these circumstances  the  errors  of  approach  by  the  First-tier
        Tribunal did not result in material errors of law. Further even  if
        there were potentially such  relationships  the  evidence  was  not
        there to show that it could be "unduly harsh" for those children to
        remain in the UK without the appellant as they all had mothers  who
        would  care  for  them  here.  There  was  certainly  nothing  very
        compelling  over  and  above  paragraphs  399  and  399A   of   the
        Immigration  Rules  which  outweighed  the   public   interest   in
        deportation.

Conclusions

    11. The appellant has four biological children in the  UK  and  two  he
        regards as step-children. It is clear that his  step-children  from
        his partner/ fiance Ms M and his daughter with her are all British
        citizens. It appears that his three biological  children  from  his
        past relationship with Ms S who has indefinite leave to remain  are
        also British citizens as their mother  holds  indefinite  leave  to
        remain and they were born in the UK.

    12. The First-tier Tribunal made conclusions about the relationship  of
        these children with the appellant  at  paragraphs  131-133  of  the
        decision as follows. In relation to the three children  from  Ms  S
        "there  is  no  functioning  family  life";  in  relation  to   his
        biological daughter with Ms M "There is no  evidence  of  bonding";
        and in relation to the step-children again no  "functioning  family
        life". It follows that if these findings are sound then the  errors
        of law by the Tribunal are not material  as  clearly  the  Tribunal
        would not  have  found  he  had  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationships with the six children, and thus paragraph  339(a)  of
        the Immigration Rules could not  have  provided  a  basis  for  the
        appeal to be allowed.

    13. However I am not satisfied that  these  conclusions  were  lawfully
        made. I accept the submission of Ms Capel that the evidence of Ms M
        regarding the relationships of the appellant with the children  was
        discounted with insufficient reasons. She gave  evidence  that  her
        older children spoke to the appellant daily in prison/detention and
        gave examples of their bonding prior to this  in  her  written  and
        oral evidence. She also gave evidence about regular  contact  prior
        to imprisonment with  his  children  by  Ms  S.  Her  evidence  was
        discounted only on the basis that it was  said  to  be  "vague"  at
        paragraph 114 of the decision. This is not factually correct and is
        insufficient reasoning for discounting the evidence, especially  as
        it would appear to have been consistent with  documentary  evidence
        that Ms S visited the appellant with her children  in  prison,  and
        the prison evidence of telephone calls  which  showed  evidence  of
        telephone contact with Ms M's number.

    14. I also accept Ms Capel's submission that the best interests of  the
        children have not been assessed in a rational fashion by the First-
        tier Tribunal. It was unclear how it  could  have  been  rationally
        found at paragraph 132 of the decision that  it  was  in  the  best
        interests of Ms M's child with the appellant to have  contact  with
        the appellant but not for his three older  biological  children  to
        maintain contact, as is done at paragraph 131, in the context of an
        overall finding that family life existed with all of these children
        at paragraph 139, and given similar findings  about  the  level  of
        contact between the appellant and all of  these  children.  As  was
        said in EA (Article 8 -best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT
        00315: "The correct starting point in consideration the welfare and
        best interests of a young child would be that it  is  in  the  best
        interests of a child to live with and be brought up by his  or  her
        parents, subject to any very strong contra-indications." There  are
        no  contra-indications  in  this  context  with  respect  to   this
        appellant  as  a  parent  to  his  children,  particularly  as  his
        offending does not relate in any way to drugs or violence.

    15. It is also clear  from  the  judgement  of  Baroness  Hale  in   ZH
        (Tanzania)v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4  that  she  approved  the  UNCHR
        Guidelines on Determining the Best Interests of the Child, which in
        turn make clear that the best interests include  the  child's  need
        for security, continuity of care and affection and the  opportunity
        to form long term attachments based on mutual trust  and  respect",
        see paragraph 21 of MK (best interests of child) India [2011]  UKUT
        00475,  which  I  find  means  that  consideration  of  the  future
        development of the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
        children was needed. I find that such consideration cannot be found
        in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  am  therefore
        satisfied that the assessment of the best interests of the children
        is further incomplete in this respect.

    16. However even if the appellant remaining in the UK had been found to
        be in the best interests of his children this does not  suffice  to
        show  that  he  would  succeed  under  paragraph  399(a)   of   the
        Immigration Rules. It is clear that the test of unduly  harsh  goes
        considerably beyond requiring it to be shown that  removal  of  the
        appellant whilst they remain in the UK would not  be  in  the  best
        interests of the children.

    17. The test for "unduly harsh" in MAB (para 399, "unduly  harsh")  USA
        [2015] UKUT 00435 is said to be  one  of  inordinate  or  excessive
        severeness or bleakness  for  the  children  remaining  in  the  UK
        without the appellant, and that this test focuses on  the  children
        alone. In KMO (section 117 -  unduly  harsh)  Nigeria  [2015]  UKUT
        00543 the Upper Tribunal holds that unduly means that regard is had
        to the  seriousness  of  the  offences  committed  by  the  foreign
        criminal when considering if the impact on the child is excessively
        harsh. I accept that on the KMO test an analysis of the appellant's
        criminality is required (an example of which is set  out  in  their
        remaking at paragraph 36 of  that  decision),  and  that  the  five
        letters from prison and removal centre staff, ought  to  have  been
        considered by the First-tier Tribunal on this basis particularly in
        light of the absence of an OASys report and any detailed sentencing
        remarks. It is clear that this was not done at paragraph 142 of the
        decision as there is no  reasoned  assessment  of  the  appellant's
        criminality.

    18. Whilst  the  evidence  going  to  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
        departure being unduly harsh on the children is  a  long  way  from
        conclusive I find that it would not be possible to be certain  that
        the appeal could not succeed on this  basis,  particularly  in  the
        light of the indicators of the appellant's level of risk of  future
        reoffending and harm in society, and the evidence of the impact  of
        his deportation on his children from his partner.

    19. For all these reasons I find that the  errors  with  regarding  the
        lack  of  specific  consideration  of  paragraph  399(a)   of   the
        Immigration Rules to be material ones.


          Decision:

   4. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   5. I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  do  not
      preserve any findings so the remaking will take place de novo.

   Directions


     1. The appeal should be listed before me for a 'for  mention'  hearing
        on 17th November 2015 at 10am when it is hoped that  it  should  be
        clear when the Presidential Panel will issue their decision, if  it
        has not taken place by that date, on the meaning of "unduly  harsh"
        for  the  purposes  of,  inter  alia,  paragraph  399(a)   of   the
        Immigration Rules.
     2. The respondent should be ready to inform the Tribunal at  the  'for
        mention' hearing whether it is accepted for  the  remaking  hearing
        that it would be unduly harsh for all or any  of  the  children  to
        live in Nigeria with the appellant.
     3. The bundles provided  to  date  are  chaotic  and  in  part  poorly
        photocopied. It is asked that at the 'for mention' hearing  Counsel
        for the appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State's  representative
        identify what of the material supplied to date is  relied  upon  at
        the remaking hearing and put it in order.
     4. The appellant should give careful consideration to  obtaining  more
        detailed statements  from  all  witnesses  and  a  report  from  an
        appropriate  qualified  independent  social  worker  on  the   best
        interests of the children and the impact on all of the children  if
        the appellant is removed to Nigeria. I make this directions in  the
        light of the finding in JO and Others  (section  55  duty)  Nigeria
        [2014] UKUT 00517 that being adequately  informed  is  one  of  the
        elementary prerequisites of identifying the best interests  of  the
        child and in this case also  in  identifying  whether  or  not  the
        impact or removal of the appellant/ their having to live in Nigeria
        would be that of severe harshness on all or any of the children.
     5. The appellant should also endeavour to  obtain  evidence  regarding
        the citizenship of the three children from Ms  S  or  alternatively
        supply evidence of their right to remain in the UK.
     6. Any evidence either party wishes  to  rely  upon  in  the  remaking
        hearing which has not already been  filed  with  the  Tribunal  and
        sorted into the agreed bundle at the 'for mention'  hearing  should
        be filed in accordance with Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 with the Tribunal  and  served  on  the
        other  party  10  prior  to  the  full  hearing  date  along   with
        chronologies and skeleton arguments.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to avoid a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the appellant's children.




[pic]


Signed:                                            Date:  21st October 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley














