
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01648/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates' Court        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2014                           |On 28 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                    D OA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr J Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The appellant who is a national of Ghana  born  in  1970  appeals  with
    permission the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hollingworth
    and Mrs J Holt (the Tribunal) who, for reasons given in a determination
    by Judge Hollingworth dated  5  November  2013,  dismissed  the  appeal
    against  the  decision  dated  1  August  2013  refusing  to  revoke  a
    deportation order dated 15 July 2011.

 2. The deportation order had been made  pursuant  to  s.32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 on the basis of the appellant being a foreign criminal
    as defined by s.32(1) of that Act.  It followed his  conviction  on  15
    December 2010  of  sixteen  counts  of  possession  of  false  identity
    documents with intent, the possession of  apparatus  for  making  false
    identity documents with intent, making or supplying articles for use in
    frauds for which he was sentenced to four  years'  imprisonment  on  22
    December 2010.

 3. An appeal against the deportation order was dismissed by a judge of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  determination  dated  21  December   2011.
    Following the grant of permission to appeal, error  of  law  was  found
    pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules.   The
    decision was re-made by UTJ  Hanson  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  who  for
    reasons given in a  determination  dated  29  May  2012  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The Court of Appeal  refused  permission  to  appeal  (and  an
    extension of time to do so) on 26 January  2012.   The  respondent  set
    removal directions on 25 February 2013 which were  cancelled  following
    application for judicial review.

 4. On 23 April 2013 the appellant made an application  for  revocation  of
    the deportation order. The respondent gave reasons why she would not do
    so in a letter dated 1 August 2013.   The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Tribunal against the decision refusing to revoke the deportation  order
    relied on Articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention  although  it
    was only the latter which was particularised.

 5.  The  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  wife,  the
    appellant's  sister,  his  cousin  and  an  additional  witness   whose
    relationship to the appellant is not identified in  the  determination.
    In addition the Tribunal had before them an independent social worker's
    report  by  Ms  Justice  dated  April  2013  and  an  independent  risk
    assessment and risk management plan by Ms  Marshall  dated  22  and  23
    November  2012.   There  were  also  reports  by  Ms  Peacock  who  had
    counselled  the  appellant's  son   and   Ms   Bove,   an   integrative
    psychotherapist to whom the appellant's  daughter  had  been  referred.
    None of these reports  had  been  before  UTJ  Hanson  in  the  earlier
    proceedings.

 6. In essence the Tribunal dismissed the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    evidence provided subsequent to UTJ Hanson's  determination  outweighed
    the factors in favour of the respondent and  that  the  rights  of  the
    appellant's wife and two children did not outweigh the public  interest
    in his deportation.

 7. The Tribunal made a direction regarding  anonymity.   I  continue  that
    order.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant or any member of  his  family  as  children  are
    involved.  The appellant is to be referred to as in the title  to  this
    determination, his wife as Mrs A and the children as H and D.  They are
    twins born 27 December 2001.  Mrs A  is  an  Australian  national  born
    1995.  The children are British  citizens.   Mrs  A  has  retained  her
    Australian citizenship.

 8. Unfortunately the  tribunal  file  had  not  been  sent  to  Nottingham
    Magistrates' Court but nevertheless with the assistance of the parties,
    it was possible to proceed based  on  a  core  bundle  which  had  been
    provided in advance together with copies of the reports detailed above.
     In the absence of any response to the directions by UTJ Southern  sent
    with the grant of permission to appeal, the parties were content for me
    to re-make the decision based  on  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    taking account in addition of the witness statements  and  the  further
    submissions.  I reserved my decision.

Grant of Permission to Appeal

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Three grounds were relied on.  The first is a failure by the
    Tribunal to give  reasons  or  any  adequate  reasons  for  finding  on
    material matters, in particular the effect upon the  children.   It  is
    argued that no determination was reached as to the  best  interests  of
    either child  and  yet  their  Article  8  rights  were  deemed  to  be
    insufficient to outweigh the public interest.

10. The second ground argues perverse or irrational findings arising out of
    conflation of the reports by Ms Marshall and Ms Justice.   This  ground
    was amended by Mr  Holt  withdrawing  an  assertion  of  perversity  or
    irrationality but instead he argued inadequate reasons  were  given  by
    the Tribunal for its conclusion on the reports applying the same reason
    to both yet they had been for different purposes, one being  an  impact
    and one being a risk report.

11. The third ground argues a failure by the Tribunal to refer to  s.55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 with  regard  to  the
    best interests of the children.

12. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  considered
    it arguable that the Tribunal had erred by failing to make findings  in
    relation to the best interests of the children, that its  reasons  were
    arguably inadequate, that the public interests outweighed the rights of
    the children and their mother and it seemed that the Tribunal may  have
    carried over the inadequacies in one expert report  for  giving  little
    weight to another report.

Did the Tribunal err in law?

13. In his submissions, Mr Holt accepted the degree of overlap between  the
    grounds and, in respect of the first, argued that despite the length of
    the determination, an answer  could  not  be  found  why  the  Tribunal
    considered the rights of the parties affected were  outweighed  by  the
    public interest.  He considered there had been an over reliance on  the
    earlier determination of UTJ Hanson although did not advance this as  a
    separate ground.  He nevertheless accepted that the criticisms made  by
    the Tribunal of the evidence of Ms Bove and Ms Peacock were valid.  The
    assessment of the best interests  by  the  Tribunal  had  been  in  the
    negative having regard to the Tribunal's observation  that  UTJ  Hanson
    had found that it was not in the best interests for the children to  be
    removed from the United Kingdom.

14. With regard to  the  conclusion  by  the  Tribunal  that  the  evidence
    provided subsequent to the determination of UTJ Hanson  outweighed  the
    factors in favour of the respondent, the answer could either have  been
    the Tribunal considered that the best  interests  lay  in  the  parents
    being together in the United Kingdom but nevertheless  the  seriousness
    of the offence required the appellant to be removed.  It might also  be
    that the Tribunal had in mind that the appellant should not be with the
    children.

15. As to the second ground, this lay  in  the  Tribunal  having  the  same
    criticism  of  both  reports  by  Marshall  and   Justice.    Mr   Holt
    distinguished those reports with reference to Marshall being  the  risk
    assessment  and  that  by  Justice  analysing  the  relationships   but
    nevertheless the Tribunal had applied criticism to the  Justice  report
    at [87] in these terms:

         "At page 22 of her report the author states that  she  thinks  that
         the appellant can now demonstrate  to  his  children  that  he  has
         changed and to set them an example by not offending again.   We  do
         not accept that assertion.  The author of the report has failed  to
         particularise, as we have stated  above,  that  the  appellant  has
         actually accepted as to the nature and extent of his offending."

16. As to the third ground, in the light of the Justice  report  containing
    the opinion that the effect on the family would be devastating,  unless
    the Tribunal had reached a conclusion otherwise, the obligations  under
    s.55 had not been met.

17. By way  of  response,  Mr  Singh  argued  that  the  determination  was
    sustainable and if there was an error to be found it was  not  material
    as the Tribunal had carried out what it had  been  asked  to  do.   The
    Tribunal was not obliged to give its reasons based on all the  evidence
    that it had heard but instead on the central issues which it  had  done
    with reference to the Marshall and Justice reports.  He  accepted  with
    reference to the devastating impact analysis by Justice,  the  Tribunal
    had not rejected that evidence; it was an important  factor  which  the
    Tribunal did not seem to have grappled with. I observe  at  this  point
    that despite this  acknowledgement,  Mr  Singh  did  not  withdraw  his
    opposition to the appeal.

18. By way of reply Mr Holt argued  with  regard  to  the  content  of  the
    Justice report it was arguable  that  it  had  probably  dismissed  the
    report but its  reasoning  was  inadequate  and  it  was  difficult  to
    understand why it had done so particularly with reference to paragraphs
    [96] and [97].

19. As to submissions in the event that I found error of law and  proceeded
    to re-make the decision, Mr Holt relied on  the  Marshall  and  Justice
    reports with the best  evidence  coming  from  the  latter  as  to  its
    description of the family unit.  The effect would be one of devastation
    and it can only be in the best interests of the children not to  suffer
    such devastation.  With reference to paragraph 44 of SS (Nigeria) there
    was a need to look at the risk of harm from the offences committed.  Mr
    Holt contended that the risk was low having regard to the type of  harm
    which was not of a type that should outweigh the  best  interests.   He
    acknowledged that none of  the  exceptions  to  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules applied and so therefore  the  test  was  whether  in
    exceptional circumstances the public interest would  be  outweighed  by
    other factors.

20. For his part, Mr Singh argued that the best interests of  the  children
    were for the appellant to be removed based on his previous conduct.

21. The Tribunal's determination has in parts a discursive style but in  my
    view it is broadly  coherent  and  understandable.   The  determination
    needs to be read  as  a  whole.   The  determination  begins  with  the
    evidence given at the hearing by  the  witnesses  described  above  and
    thereafter  with  a  detailed  account  of  the  submissions  from  the
    Presenting Officer and Mr Holt.

22. At paragraph 41 the Tribunal directed itself that  the  starting  point
    was the determination of UTJ Hanson and referred to developments  since
    then which are set out in the account of submissions between  [21]  and
    [40].  There is no suggestion that the Tribunal was wrong to take  this
    approach.  Thereafter the Tribunal set out what  it  understood  to  be
    conclusions of UTJ Hanson and here again there is no challenge  to  the
    accuracy of that exercise in [42] to [63] of its determination.

23. At [65] the Tribunal turned to the new evidence beginning with that  by
    Marshall and concluded that they found it "... of profound concern that
    the appellant still fails to recognise the significance  or  nature  of
    his conduct".  This led them to conclude that the  author  Ms  Marshall
    had not provided a sufficient  analysis  of  the  significance  of  the
    extent of the disparity referred to in relation to the risk assessments
    and that the findings of UTJ  Hanson  in  this  respect  had  not  been
    undermined.

24. Once again, there is no challenge to this.

25. At [72] the Tribunal begins with its  analysis  of  the  report  by  Ms
    Justice, a core aspect of Mr Holt's challenge.   The  contents  of  the
    report are set out over thirteen paragraphs in  some  detail  including
    the wishes of the children and their sentiments about  the  appellant's
    circumstances.  The Tribunal noted that in summary:

         "...the author refers to the children presenting to  her  as  being
         normal, intelligent and well brought up  and  that  they  had  been
         deeply affected by their father's actions  which  resulted  in  his
         imprisonment.  They clearly love their father and wished  to  be  a
         complete family again."

26. One of Mr Holt's arguments is that the report had been criticised for a
    purpose for which it had not been written.  I do not consider  this  to
    have any foundation as one of the questions put to Miss  Justice  ([7])
    was: "Please  also  comment  on  the  reference  to  the  OASys  Report
    regarding our client's likelihood of re-offending?"  This  was  in  the
    context of an invitation to comment on a statement made by  UTJ  Hanson
    that it could not be said the appellant was providing a good role model
    for his children and that it could  be  argued  the  children  did  not
    deserve to be in such a  household.   It  was  therefore  open  to  the
    Tribunal to comment on this aspect.

27. Faithful to the report, the  Tribunal  observed  that  the  author  had
    considered that both children would be devastated if the appellant were
    to be deported and explained this in more detail.

28. The only real criticism of Ms Justice's report by the Tribunal  relates
    to its understanding that Ms Justice believed  the  appellant  can  now
    demonstrate to his children that he has changed and set them an example
    by not offending again.  This  was  specifically  in  response  to  the
    question Ms Justice was asked.

29. Thereafter the Tribunal examined Ms  Justice's  disagreement  with  the
    conclusion of UTJ Hanson that the children would be better off  without
    their father setting out  the  reasons  why  she  came  to  that  view.
    Criticism is made of the absence of  a  sufficient  explanation  by  Ms
    Justice for the need for counselling having regard to the then  lengthy
    period of the appellant's absence from the  family.   This  counselling
    had begun recently and was on a weekly basis.  I consider that this was
    a valid criticism open to the Tribunal bearing in mind  the  length  of
    time the appellant had already been in custody.  It was  also  open  to
    the Tribunal to observe that Ms Justice  had  not  explored  the  nexus
    between the consequences of separation to date set against the level of
    contact maintained with the consequences as the result of deportation.

30. It may be that this aspect of the Tribunal's criticism at [96] and [97]
    might have been better expressed, but it is clear that the Tribunal was
    questioning the adequacies of the assessment of  matters  to  date  and
    what was likely to be the case  in  the  future.   Examination  of  the
    report shows that of the questions Ms  Justice  had  been  asked,  none
    specifically enquired what would be the effect on the children were the
    appellant to be  deported.   Her  view  that  both  children  would  be
    devastated if their father were to be deported arises in the context of
    the first enquiry which relates  to  the  interaction,  attachment  and
    bonding between the parents  of  each  of  the  children.   By  way  of
    explanation of that analysis, Ms Justice believed the son would  be  at
    risk of performing poorly at school and that the daughter would want to
    hide her  feeling  of  hurt  and  would  feel  an  increased  sense  of
    responsibility. The Tribunal was correct to note the  qualification  to
    the report that Ms Justice had not carried out an  in-depth  assessment
    of the family due to time constraints in the context  of  its  concerns
    over the adequacy of the reasons for the conclusions reached.

31. Otherwise the Tribunal concerned itself with  its  conclusions  on  the
    evidence of the appellant and  his  wife  and  that  of  the  witnesses
    Peacock and Bove referred to above.  There is no criticism  of  any  of
    that.  The Tribunal also took account of  the  courses  undertaken  and
    certificates obtained by the appellant as well as a medical report from
    a Mr Selim, a locum consultant neurologist identifying a  small  volume
    low grade prostrate disease.

32. After correctly directing itself in accordance with the principles in R
    (Razgar) v SSHD UKHL [2004] INLR 349 and  Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11,  the
    Tribunal proceeded with its proportionality exercise.  It  referred  to
    the weight to be attached to the reports of Marshall and Justice  being
    limited for the reasons previously given.   The  Tribunal  acknowledged
    the further light shed on the effect of deportation on Mrs  A  and  the
    children by the reports and went on to confirm that the analysis by the
    Upper Tribunal Judge had been "confirmed by that work".  At this  point
    I note that UTJ Hanson accepted at [84] of his  determination  that:  "
    ... removal of the appellant from  the  UK  will  have  the  effect  of
    splitting the family and I accept that this will cause a great deal  of
    heartache within the immediate family....".

33. I am therefore satisfied that despite what is alleged in the grounds of
    application, the  Tribunal  gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that
    despite the new evidence, it did not come to a different decision  from
    that of UTJ Hanson. Its conclusion was a permissible  one  based  on  a
    correct understanding of the  law  with  none  of  the  evidence  being
    overlooked.

34. The best interests of the children were clearly at the  heart  of  this
    appeal indicated  by  the  way  in  which  the  Tribunal  analysed  the
    evidence.   Ultimately,  the  reasons  challenge  is  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the Tribunal's conclusions.  Although it is  asserted
    that no determination was reached as to the children's best  interests,
    in fact, the Tribunal found that those interests lay as  found  by  UTJ
    Hanson despite the new evidence.

35. As to the  second  ground  which  Mr  Holt  sensibly  diluted  from  an
    assertion of perversity or irrational findings to inadequate reasoning,
    it  is  not  arguable  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  understand  the
    difference between the two reports.   Its  criticism  of  Ms  Justice's
    report was warranted having regard to the reference which she had  made
    to re-offending.

36. The third ground echoes the first.  I am  satisfied  that  although  Ms
    Justice  identified  the  impact  of  removal  on   the   children   as
    devastating, this is not well-analysed in  her  report  on  a  clinical
    basis.  That is not to say that the  Tribunal  was  not  aware  of  the
    serious impact removal would have nor can it be said that  it  was  not
    aware that it was charged with determining  whether  the  new  evidence
    required a re-assessment of the best interests of the children.   I  am
    not persuaded it failed in that exercise.

37. Ultimately the appeal failed because of the greater pull of the  public
    interest considerations due to the serious offending by  the  appellant
    as reflected in his sentence. I am satisfied that the Tribunal came  to
    a permissible conclusion on proportionality without legal error.

38. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed

[pic]                                   Date 27 March 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
