
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/01376/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 September 2017                     |    On 19 December 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     DF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khubber instructed by Turpin & Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Upper Tribunal found an error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and set that decision aside with directions in a document
    dated 8 June 2017, a copy of which appears at Annex A of this decision.



Background

2.   A number of findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  are  preserved  which
    form the starting point for this decision.
3.   In relation to the appellant's immigration history; it is not  disputed
    the appellant is a national of Jamaica who was granted indefinite leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom on 14 July 2003.  It  is  not  disputed
    that the appellant is subject to an order for his deportation from  the
    United Kingdom as a result of the sentence imposed on 31  October  2012
    referred to below.
4.   It is not disputed that the appellant has committed  criminal  offences
    in the United Kingdom as follows:

         i.   On 7 July 2007 the appellant was bound over for 12 months  and
             fined following a conviction for breach of the peace.
         ii.  On 30 March 2010  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  criminal
             damage, ordered to pay costs and compensation and made subject
             to a two-year restraining order - protection  from  harassment
             order.
         iii. On 31 October 2012 the appellant  was  sentenced  to  4  years
             imprisonment the being  knowingly  concerned  in  fraudulently
             evading  prohibition/restriction  on  the  importation  of   a
             controlled Class A drug. The appellant acted as a  drugs  mule
             carrying a case with 850g of cocaine to the UK from Jamaica.

5.   In relation to procedural aspects; the Secretary  of  States  certified
    the appellants asylum claim pursuant to section 72 of the 2002 Act,  in
    relation to which the First-tier Judge  made  the  following  preserved
    findings:

         14.  The first  issue  that  I  must  deal  with  is  whether  this
             Appellant has  rebutted  the  presumption  that  arises  under
             Section  72.  The  Appellant  was   sentenced   to   4   years
             imprisonment. The offence was that of drug  smuggling  and  as
             noted by the sentencing judge  the  terrible  harm  caused  by
             drugs is only  too  clear  from  the  Appellant's  own  family
             experiences and the tragic consequences of  [Ms  N]  addiction
             for her children. The gravity  of  his  offence  must  not  be
             underestimated. Although he accepted full  responsibility  for
             the offence when he was caught, he has in my  view  sought  to
             make excuses for himself by  stating  variously  that  he  was
             depressed, stressed due to relationship  difficulties,  having
             money problems, being threatened and that his family was being
             threatened. He had previously had the protection  of  the  law
             and the Courts in the UK when his assailants in  the  stabbing
             incident were given a lengthy prison term. I do  not  find  it
             credible  that  he  would  not  seek  the  protection  of  the
             authorities in the UK if  his  family  including  [Ms  N]  the
             children, were being threatened as he claims.


         15.  I have taken the reasons for the attaching of the  certificate
             fully  into  account.  Despite  the  assessment  of  risk   of
             reoffending as being low the Respondent states that  the  risk
             could escalate  if  the  Appellant  is  faced  with  financial
             problems.  The  Respondent  points  out  that  the   Appellant
             travelled to Jamaica on a number of occasions.  The  Appellant
             has never explained how he managed  to  pay  for  those  trips
             given that he was unemployed for long periods of time and  the
             household income largely consisted of disability benefits (for
             Ms N) and child benefits. It is  also  pointed  out  that  the
             Appellant  had  family  members  in  the  UK  and  that  their
             influence did not prevent him from offending. Nor did the fact
             that he had dependent children and a vulnerable partner.


         16.  I note that in his report dated 29 October 2016 Dr  Basu  does
             not mention financial  pressure  as  a  risk  factor  for  the
             Appellant. He refers to lack  of  employment  but  apart  from
             saying that the Appellant has the  temperament  to  engage  in
             employment and has training  and  work  experience  that  will
             assist him in getting it, he merely concludes  that  "Allowing
             [DF] to engage in  meaningful  employment  will  help  him  in
             numerous ways.." I take this to be a  reference  to  the  fact
             that the Appellant is not currently allowed to work in the UK.




         17.  Dr Basu assessed the risk of reoffending  over  the  next  two
             years as low. He does refer  to  social  networks  as  a  risk
             factor and notes that the  Appellant  is  relatively  socially
             isolated at the current time. He says that this "may"  improve
             if the Appellant is allowed to work. Dr  Basu  says  that  the
             Appellant's history suggests that he has found himself  around
             those who have exerted a  negative  influence  on  him  either
             through drug misuse or  violence  and  states  "in  future  he
             should be mindful of this and ensure that it does not surround
             himself  with  potentially  negative  influences  that   might
             increase his chance of reoffending".


         18.  The Appellant has allowed  himself  to  lose  control  of  his
             temper  when  his  ex-partner  stole  his  Criminal   injuries
             compensation monies and he attended at her property and caused
             criminal damage, breaking a window there. He has been both the
             victim and the perpetrator of domestic violence.


         19.  Having considered the evidence before me I am  satisfied  that
             despite the  low  risk  of  reoffending,  the  potential  harm
             involved in future offending by  this  Appellant  is  not  low
             because of the risk factors that have been identified above. I
             am not satisfied that the s72 presumption has been rebutted by
             the Appellant. But even if I am wrong on this I do not, having
             considered all of the evidence before me, find  the  Appellant
             credible in his claim that he is at real risk of  persecution,
             being killed or subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment on
             his return to Jamaica from gang members.


6.   Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  states
    that a person shall  be  presumed  to  have  been  convicted  by  final
    judgement of a particularly serious crime and constitute  a  danger  to
    the community the UK if he is convicted in the UK  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years. It is  not
    disputed the appellant received  a  four-year  prison  sentence  for  a
    particularly serious crime, drug importation, and  has  been  found  to
    constitute a danger to the community of the UK.
7.   In relation to family composition; The First-tier  Tribunal  found  the
    appellant entered into a relationship with Ms N in 2008. Ms N has given
    birth to two children, the eldest of which it  was  found  has  ongoing
    contact with her natural  father  and  does  not  have  a  father/child
    relationship with the Appellant. The second child C is described  as  a
    middle child born  only  weeks  before  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and Ms N started. The appellant is not  the  child's  natural
    father but is said to have taken on the role of father  from  the  time
    the child was only a few weeks old. The appellant and Ms N had a  child
    of their own, B, born on 5 February 2011.
8.   It is not disputed that as a result of issues that arose following  the
    appellant's  release  from  prison,  when  the  couple  resumed   their
    relationship, Social  Services  had  to  intervene  in  the  family  in
    November 2013 as a result of which the children were placed with  their
    maternal grandmother and have remained in her care since in a placement
    that is now permanent since. The First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    intervention was triggered by concerns about emotional neglect after it
    became apparent that Ms N was using Class A drugs. It is also  recorded
    that she has no contact with the children at the present  time  and  is
    not in contact with the Appellant or Social Services although the First-
    tier Tribunal were advised that Ms N was living with a relative.
9.   It was found the appellant is not in a relationship with Ms  N  and  is
    living with members of his extended family in the  UK  and  that  as  a
    result of a contact application the appellant currently has contact  on
    an unsupervised bases once a week with no concerns for the  welfare  of
    the children arising as a result of this contact.

The evidence and submissions

10.  A supplementary bundle had  been  prepared  for  the  purposes  of  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal. Clear directions had been  made  for
    the filing of such documents no  later  than  4  PM  16  June  2017  in
    relation to the bundle and 14 July 2017 in  relation  to  the  skeleton
    argument. The appellant's representative comprehensively failed to meet
    these deadlines although the evidence was admitted as Mrs Aboni  raised
    no objection and was not prejudiced by the failure of Turpin Miller LLP
    to comply with a direction of the Tribunal.
11.  The evidence in the statements was not contested  enabling  the  matter
    to proceed by way of submissions only.
12.  In his updating statement, the appellant confirmed  that  he  sees  the
    children B and C on at least a weekly basis and describes  the  contact
    sessions as being enjoyable for him and  the  children.  The  appellant
    also refers to seven cousins all of whom are living in Birmingham, whom
    he claims to be close to, and his hope that those family  members  will
    be able to get to know the  children.  The  appellant  claims  that  if
    deported the children will not only lose their  contact  with  him  but
    also the connection with their family as the  family  members  are  too
    busy with their own lives and a  number  of  them  have  not  had  much
    contact with other family members. The appellant claims he is the  only
    person who will be able to arrange contact between the children and the
    extended family.
13.  The appellant claims that if he was able to secure permission  to  work
    he will work and that if he had more  money  he  will  be  able  to  do
    different  things  with  the  children  and  also  be  able  to  obtain
    accommodation of his own and have the children stay with him.
14.  The appellant speaks of the children's grandmother, M,  who  he  states
    he can see how happy she is when she sees that he is happy because  the
    children are with him. The appellant claims M needs his help to do more
    as she has the two young children and he claims to have  been  able  to
    provide the help they need and to have helped with  things  around  the
    house, and that it would be best for M and the  children  if  he  could
    have his children over at the weekend which would  allow  him  to  have
    quality time with his children and provide M with a rest.
15.  The appellant also state that he speaks to B and C occasionally on  the
    telephone but that that is limited.
16.  A further statement by the grandmother, M, confirms the  appellant  has
    been increasingly involved with his children and she describes  him  as
    having proven that he is a capable and confident  father.  Any  initial
    hesitation at not seeing their parents together is said  to  have  been
    replaced by the children being relaxed and happy to see their father on
    his own. M states that the children's mother has her own  flat  in  the
    West Midlands and tries to visit the children every weekend or when she
    can but remains on a methadone programme and has a support network both
    within the family and from practitioners. The opinion of M is  that  it
    would be "wonderful" if in the near future the children's  mother  will
    be in a position to spend time on her own with the two  young  children
    and to have them stay  over  although,  at  the  moment,  this  appears
    unlikely.
17.  M describes her  family  as  being  all  white  British  and  that  the
    cultural heritage of the children is important to  their  identity  and
    the question of having a positive identity can only  be  reinforced  by
    their father and in turn by him being happy and  settled.  M  describes
    the involvement of the  appellant  in  the  children's  lives  and  the
    positive benefit to the children of such contact and  states  that  she
    remains 100% supportive of the appeal; stating it will  be  devastating
    for the children to lose their father. It is stated the  children  have
    been through prolonged period of upheaval which has  impacted  on  them
    both socially and emotionally and the continuation of the expansion  of
    the status quo will continue to provide stability as the children  grow
    up which, it is M's opinion, can only be achieved if the  appellant  is
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom permanently.
18.  A further witness statement has been provided by the appellant's  uncle
    FF supporting the appellants appeal.
19.  A letter dated 11 September 2017 written by a  Social  Worker  employed
    by Walsall Council Children's Services  addressed  to  the  appellant's
    solicitors has been provided written in the following terms:

         Thank you for contacting me regarding the forthcoming court hearing
         in respect of [DF]. As I'm  sure  you  will  be  aware  it  was  of
         significant concern to learn that DF's stay within the country  has
         been appealed and I do need to stress my worries around the  impact
         that this will have on his son  B  and  stepdaughter  C,  who  also
         identifies Mr F as a father figure.


     From the perspective of Children's Services, over the last nine  months
         Mr F's contact with  children  has  developed  significantly,  with
         planned contact now taking place on a weekly  basis,  unsupervised,
         within the community. Mr F has been committed to this  contact  and
         has provided the children with significant memories of trips to the
         park and the cinema. Having gained the children's wishes and  views
         I must say the children thoroughly enjoyed  this  contact  and  are
         happy to have their father as a regular  feature  in  their  lives!
         This  view  is  also  shared  by  the   children's   carer/Maternal
         Grandmother, who speaks openly of the positive relationship Mr F, B
         and C continue to share. As you will  be  aware,  throughout  their
         lived experiences the children have experience a lot of change  and
         inconsistency. From the perspective of the family,  they  have  now
         reached a stage where the children are settled into a  routine  and
         as an agency we are planning to withdraw our  services  within  the
         coming weeks. If a decision is made to deport Mr F, I envisage that
         this will impact significantly on the emotional well-being  of  the
         children and direct work will have to be offered  to  the  children
         around this. I should note that at this time we have not  made  the
         children aware of the tribunal, as on balance it was not felt to be
         in their best interests.

     From my experience of working with Mr F, he has presented  as  an  open
         and honest individual, who has a genuine motivation to  maintain  a
         positive relationship with his children. Through contact  not  only
         does he provide the children with a good sense of identity, he  has
         also been able to provide the  children  with  support  around  the
         cultural needs, as children of dual heritage.

     If Mr F is deported I fear that  the  relationship  that  the  children
         have been encouraged to build with their father over the last three
         years will be diminished, as realistically the children will not be
         able  to  maintain  any  meaningful  contact  with  their   father.
         Particularly as financially the family would not be in  a  position
         to support the children to visit his native country.

     I do hope  the  views  of  the  children  will  bear  strongly  on  the
         tribunal's decision.

20.  It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that apart  from  the  family
    life the appellant has with his children there are a  large  number  of
    extended family members in the UK which form an important aspect of his
    private life. It is also stated on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  the
    appellant has not had any adverse criminal or  immigration  convictions
    his release on bail in 2014.
21.  It was not disputed that the best interests  of  the  children  are  to
    continue in their current environment with  their  grandmother,  M,  in
    light of the fact they are unable to live  in  the  same  household  as
    their mother and father/father figure. It is suggested  that  the  best
    interests of the children are being met by the current arrangements for
    contact between their mother and father/father  figure  being  able  to
    continue. Contact with the children's mother will  continue  as  before
    and develop as and when further progress can be made in  light  of  her
    current situation and previous dependency issues.
22.  The statement in relation to contact between the children  and  members
    of the appellant's extended family and the importance of the children's
    dual heritage and recognition of their cultural origins is  noted,  but
    it is not made out that this can only be established if  the  appellant
    remains in the United Kingdom. There appears to  be  a  large  extended
    family in Birmingham and it has not been made out that  if  members  of
    that family unit wish to maintain contact with the children, to  enable
    the children to know them and aspects of their cultural heritage,  that
    this could not be arranged without the appellant.
23.  On behalf the Secretary  of  State,  it  was  submitted  the  appellant
    committed a serious offence for which he received a four-year custodial
    sentence. It was accepted the children are British nationals and cannot
    be removed as to do so would be unduly harsh and that all the  children
    are to remain in the United Kingdom.
24.   The  respondent  does  not  dispute  the  fact  the  appellant  has  a
    relationship with both B and C and that they welcome  his  presence  in
    their lives; but it was submitted that is not  sufficient  to  outweigh
    the public interest in the appellants deportation. It is also submitted
    that the fact the best interests of the children are for the  appellant
    to remain with them was not sufficient to outweigh the public interest.


25.  It was submitted on the Secretary of State's behalf that  although  the
    evidence indicates there will be some negative impact on  the  children
    it is not made out that it will have such  a  devastating  effect  upon
    them that the impact on their well-being and future development will be
    such as to  make  the  decision  disproportionate,  especially  as  the
    children will remain in the current stable environment  in  which  they
    reside.
26.  It was submitted the assertion made on the appellant's behalf that  the
    children would experience a chaotic lifestyle without their father  had
    not been made out especially as the children were  in  a  settled  home
    environment and not in a chaotic lifestyle.
27.  It was submitted it was not made out that contact  could  not  continue
    on an indirect basis from Jamaica meaning the  children  would  not  be
    denied ongoing contact with their father.
28.  It was submitted on the respondent's behalf that there was  nothing  so
    compelling  on  the  facts  to  enable  the  appellant  to  avoid   his
    deportation from the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the  public  interest
    required his deportation.
29.  On the appellant's behalf, it was submitted that he met  the  threshold
    of this being a truly compelling case. It was accepted the  core  issue
    in the case was the tension between the public interest  requiring  the
    deportation of a person sentenced  to  4  years  imprisonment  and  the
    public interest in his removal and  the  adverse  impact  on  the  best
    interests of the children.
30.  Submissions were made in relation to domestic statutory provisions  and
    the provisions of the Immigration Rules and the decision of  the  Court
    of Appeal in MA (Pakistan). It was submitted on the appellant's  behalf
    that matters had moved on since the appellant  committed  the  offences
    and that all relevant factors had to be considered.
31.  Submissions were made relating  to  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  It  was
    submitted  it  is  accepted  that  face-to-face  contact  between   the
    appellant and the children is in their  best  interests  and  that  the
    impact of removal was the issue and that fracturing that life which the
    children now have on a stable and settled basis with their grandmother,
    enjoying contact with their father, is in their best interests. It  was
    submitted it is in the best interests of the children  to  have  direct
    contact due  to  their  unsettled  past  and  that  the  children  need
    stability which will be lost as a result of the impact of  the  removal
    of the appellant through deportation.
32.  It was submitted, inter alia, that the appellant had stood in  to  meet
    the needs of the children when their mother was not able  and  has  had
    protracted involvement  with  the  children  as  recognised  by  social
    services.
33.  It was submitted the fact the social worker had  been  decided  not  to
    tell the children about the ongoing proceedings as it may  be  damaging
    to their welfare was indicative of the  concerns  in  relation  to  the
    children if the appellant was deported.
34.  It was further submitted on the appellant's behalf  that  the  lack  of
    post offence conduct was relevant, that there was no need to remove the
    appellant as he had not reoffended, and that has positive conduct meant
    that the public interest was reduced. It was argued that there had been
    a long period from May 2014 when the appellant was granted bail without
    further offending
35.  It was submitted there is a need to look at the impact of  all  aspects
    of the case in this case with a complex history of events that  led  to
    suffering in the past which is the extra  dimensional  that  makes  the
    matter compelling.
36.  It is argued that the law has moved on since the legislative  framework
    when the decision was made in 2014 and that this  is  a  decision  made
    three years ago. It was argued that in 2017 the current situation means
    that there is no need for protection and that there are  more  involved
    issues relating to the adverse impact upon the children.

Discussion

37.  No protection issues arise in relation to this appeal as the  exception
    claimed on the basis of an entitlement to  asylum  and/or  humanitarian
    protection was rejected by the First-tier Tribunal and it has not  been
    shown that such findings are infected by arguable legal error  or  that
    the circumstances warrant a finding in the appellant's favour  on  this
    point.
38.  The decision in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60  was  concerned
    with the law pre the Immigration Act 2014. In that case Lord Reed noted
    that "cases falling within the scope of section 32 of the 2007  Act  in
    which the public interest in  deportation  is  outweighed,  other  than
    those specified in the new rules themselves, are likely to  be  a  very
    small minority (particularly  in  non-settled  cases).  They  need  not
    necessarily involve any circumstance which is exceptional in the  sense
    of being extraordinary (as counsel for the Secretary of State accepted,
    consistently with Huang [2007] 2 AC 167, para 20), but they can be said
    to involve "exceptional circumstances" in the sense that they involve a
    departure from the general rule".
39.  So far as post Immigration Act 2014 is concerned, in NE-A  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 239 it was held that there  was  no  inconsistency
    between the analysis in Rhuppiah and what was said in Hesham  Ali.  The
    focus in Hesham Ali was on the rules and it had not been  necessary  to
    consider the provisions of s117. Part 5A of the 2002  Act  was  primary
    legislation directed to tribunals and governing their decision  making.
    Sections 117A to D were intended to provide for a  structured  approach
    to the application of Article 8 which produced in  all  cases  a  final
    result compatible with Article 8.  Section  117B(6)  was  more  than  a
    statement of policy to which  regard  was  to  be  had  as  a  relevant
    consideration.  Parliament's  assessment  that  "the  public   interest
    requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2" was one to  which
    the tribunal was bound by law to give effect. There was no room for any
    additional element in the  proportionality  balance  under  Article  8.
    Observations in Akinyemi were not to the contrary.
40.  In taking a balanced approach, it is necessary to fully appreciate  the
    purpose of a decision to deport the appellant from the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to the automatic deportation provisions. In Taylor [2015] EWCA
    Civ 845 it was held that although the tribunal recognised the  need  to
    attach significant weight to the public interest, it erred  in  failing
    to identify clearly the different purposes  served  by  a  deportation:
    namely, to reflect public revulsion of serious crime,  to  protect  the
    public from further offending and to deter  others  from  acting  in  a
    similar way. There was no discussion of the public interest of  a  kind
    that indicated that the tribunal was aware of  the  importance  of  the
    reasons underlying it.
41.  A decision of the Court  of  Appeal  that  may  appear  to  assist  the
    appellant is that in SSHD v RF (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 124, in  which
    the Court of Appeal found the First-tier Tribunal had correctly applied
    Hesham Ali and on the particular facts this was a rare  case  in  which
    there were very  compelling  reasons.  The  appellant  was  29  and  of
    previous good  character  before  the  commission  of  the  offence  of
    possession of crack cocaine with intent to supply for which he received
    4 years' imprisonment. He  was  in  the  UK  with  leave  as  a  spouse
    (previously having leave as a visitor and then a student) and he was  a
    committed family man with an 8 year old daughter who had worked in  the
    past and was in a good position to obtain employment on release. He was
    found to be a low risk of re-offending and no or low  risk  of  serious
    harm to the public. In  those  circumstances  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    placed weight on the commitment of the family to each  other;  that  it
    was not reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  daughter  to  live  in
    Jamaica and that there were insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's
    wife living in Jamaica and found that there  were  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the family so as to make the circumstances of the case
    exceptional in accordance with paragraph 399, although care needs to be
    taken in relation to this decision as the case turned on its particular
    facts and the decision was before s117C came into force.
42.  The Immigration Act 2014 brought into force  section  117  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  By  virtue  of  section  117A,  in
    considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  tribunal  must  (in
    particular) have regard (a) in all cases, to the considerations  listed
    in section 117B, and (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C. Subsection (2)
    provides that "the public interest  question"  means  the  question  of
    whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for  private
    and family life is justified under Article  8(2).  Section  117A(2)  is
    mandatory. As the public interest provisions are contained  in  primary
    legislation they override existing case law. Section  117A(3)  confirms
    that the Tribunal is required to carry out  a  balancing  exercise.  In
    other words, the  Tribunal  cannot  just  rely  on  the  listed  public
    interest factors as a basis for rejecting a claim but must carry out  a
    balancing exercise where a person's circumstances engage  article  8(1)
    to decide whether the proposed interference is proportionate in all the
    circumstances. Section 117B sets out the public interest considerations
    applicable  in  all   cases.   Section   117C   sets   out   additional
    considerations in cases involving foreign criminals.  Section  117D  is
    the interpretation section. Sections 117D(2), (3) and (4)  reflect  but
    are not identical to sections 33 and 38 of the UK Borders Act 2007.
43.  Section 117A(3) confirms that the Tribunal is required to carry  out  a
    balancing exercise. In other words, the Tribunal cannot  just  rely  on
    the listed public interest factors as a basis for rejecting a claim but
    must carry out a balancing  exercise  where  a  person's  circumstances
    engage article 8(1) to decide  whether  the  proposed  interference  is
    proportionate in all the circumstances.
44.  In relation  to  section  117C;  In  NA  (Pakistan);  KJ  (Angola),  WM
    (Afghanistan) and MY (Kenya) [2016] EWCA Civ 662 it was held  that  the
    general scheme of Section 117C(2) to (7) was similar to that set out in
    the 2014 Immigration Rules  which  drew  a  distinction  between  those
    sentenced to less than or more than 4  years.  Medium  offenders  under
    section 117C could escape deportation if they fell  within  the  safety
    net of 'Exception 1'  (long  residence  provisions)  or  'Exception  2'
    (parent/partner provisions). Serious offenders could not  make  use  of
    those safety nets, but section 117C(6) provided that they could  resist
    deportation if there were  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2". Although section  117C(3)
    did not make any  provision  for  medium  offenders  who  fell  outside
    'Exceptions 1 and 2', the Court was of the view that the lacuna in that
    section was an obvious drafting error and  that  Parliament  must  have
    intended medium offenders to have the  same  fall  back  protection  as
    serious offenders. Although there was no 'exceptionality'  requirement,
    it inexorably followed from the statutory  scheme  that  the  cases  in
    which circumstances were sufficiently compelling to outweigh  the  high
    public interest in deportation would be rare. The Court of Appeal found
    that paragraphs 398 to 399A of the 2012 Rules  constituted  a  complete
    code in MF (Nigeria). The same was true of sections  117A-117D  of  the
    2002 Act, read in conjunction with paragraphs 398 to 399A of  the  2014
    Rules.
45.  In IT(Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 932 it was  held  that  section  117C(2)
    made it clear that the nature of the offending was  also  to  be  taken
    into account. Subsections (1) and (2) of section 117C made manifest the
    strength of the public interest. To displace that public interest,  the
    harshness brought about by the continuation of  the  deportation  order
    had to be undue. Inevitably, therefore, there would  have  to  be  very
    compelling reasons.
46.  The framework in relation to which these issues have to  be  considered
    is therefore not in issue between the parties. Mrs  Aboni  referred  to
    paragraph 398 of the  Rules  requiring  the  appellant  to  demonstrate
    compelling circumstances over and above those set out in 399 -399A  but
    this is reflected in the statutory provisions which are  applicable  to
    this matter.
47.  A case involving this appellant on his own would not have got this  far
    as it would not have succeeded  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant in isolation establishing nothing  in  relation  to  his  own
    circumstances that would warrant a finding other than that he should be
    deported from the United Kingdom. The issue is, and has always been  in
    this case, the impact upon the children.
48.  Children are not able to choose  who  is  to  parent  them  and  it  is
    arguable that  so  far  as  B  and  C  are  concerned  they  have  been
    unfortunate in having a mother previously addicted to Class A drugs and
    a father who thought it acceptable to import a substantial quantity  of
    drugs into United Kingdom for personal financial gain which resulted in
    a lengthy prison sentence. The children's mother was removed from their
    lives as a result of her inability to properly care  for  the  children
    and the appellant was absent as a result of sentence of imprisonment.
49.  It is pleasing to note from the children's perspective that  they  were
    fortunate enough to have a maternal grandmother willing and able to put
    her own life and plans  on  hold  to  provide  the  type  of  care  and
    stability the  children  need.  All  the  evidence  available  to  this
    Tribunal shows that the placement with the children's  grandmother  has
    been a great success and that, as a permanent placement, it  is  likely
    to continue irrespective of  any  decision  made  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's future and whether he is deported from the United Kingdom.
50.  There is reference to the children's mother making progress in her  own
    life and being able to have contact with the children again which is an
    important element in terms of their own  development  and  relationship
    although, as with anybody struggling  with  past  drug  addiction,  the
    future may at this point in time be described as  being  'hopeful'  but
    otherwise uncertain.
51.  It is also the case that  the  children  appear  to  have  had  a  very
    supportive social worker and that any concerns  that  originally  arose
    that the appellant had himself been providing the drugs the  children's
    mother was using having been dispelled by  the  current  social  worker
    which allowed the current contact to be developed.
52.  Although social services indicate that if  the  status  quo  is  to  be
    preserved they anticipate withdrawing from their involvement, which  is
    indicative more of the care provided by the children's grandmother  and
    trust in her meeting the best interests of the children rather  than  a
    judgement on the appellant in isolation, it  is  recognised  that  this
    also takes into account the fact that children are  happy  and  settled
    with the contact they enjoy with the appellant.
53.  Social services have elected not  to  tell  the  children  about  these
    proceedings which is a judgement call made by the  social  workers  and
    one which appears wholly appropriate in light of the fact that there is
    no need to cause the children any upset or uncertainty in relation to a
    decision that at that point was not yet known.
54.  Social  services  however  stated  in  a  recent  letter  that  if  the
    appellant was to be removed it may be necessary for them  to  undertake
    direct work with the  children  indicating  that  professional  support
    services are available and on hand if required.
55.  It is accepted that if the appellant is deported the children  will  be
    distressed. Claims that they would regress  into  a  chaotic  lifestyle
    have been shown to be a gross exaggeration by the appellant and one  no
    doubt made to try and strengthen his position to  prevent  his  removal
    from the United Kingdom. I accept that having suffered loss within  the
    family which has been partially replaced by their grandmother these are
    children who would have to be supported if  they  perceived  a  further
    loss. I do not find  it  made  out  that  such  support  would  not  be
    available  or  that  the  support  that  was  available  would  not  be
    effective. I accept that any immediate impact upon the  children  would
    be distressing and indeed harsh but whether it would  be  unduly  harsh
    such as to establish very compelling as opposed to  compelling  reasons
    has not been arguably made out.
56.  This is not a case in which the appellants deportation will mean  there
    will be no ongoing contact with the children although  it  is  accepted
    the nature of that contact will change. It is accept the appellant will
    not be to take the children out as he will be in  a  different  country
    and that although telephone conversation with  young  children  may  be
    difficult, face-to-face electronic communication by means such as Skype
    has  not  been  shown  not  to  be  available.  This  is  a  means   of
    communication enjoyed by many with relatives  in  other  parts  of  the
    world or even within the United Kingdom allowing real-time  visual  and
    oral  communication.  I  accept  that  through  such  a  method  it  is
    impossible for the appellant to hug the children or for them to hug him
    but the  loss  of  that  element  forms  part  of  the  proportionality
    assessment. The appellant's argument based upon a claim there  will  be
    no ongoing contact has no arguable merit. The only reason there will be
    no ongoing contact is he chose not to contact the children. It has  not
    been made out  the  children's  grandmother  would  obstruct  any  such
    indirect contact especially in light of the great  care  that  she  has
    taken to date in ensuring that the needs of the children are met.
57.  If the appellant is removed from the  United  Kingdom  it  is  arguable
    that the children's grandmother may have to assume an even greater role
    than she currently does in meeting the needs of the children, at  least
    in the short term. It has not been made  out  that  she  is  unable  or
    unwilling to do so or to ensure that  the  children  are  able  to  re-
    establish a routine in their lives against which they can  continue  to
    attend school, be housed, fed and watered, and  their  emotional  needs
    met as far as possible, on a personal level, with professional  support
    being available as required.
58.  It has long been recognised that the  impact  of  deportation  is  that
    families are broken up. The lawfulness of the decision to deport is not
    disputed the question in relation to this matter being whether it is  a
    proportionate decision. The scenario outlined in this case in  relation
    to the family dynamics is unfortunately not as uncommon as  some  would
    like but the  family  dynamics  only  form  one  half,  albeit  one  of
    considerable importance, of the balancing exercise.
59.  Against this has to be weighed the case advanced by  the  Secretary  of
    State.
60.  In LT (Kosovo) [2016] EWCA Civ 1246 it was held that  when  considering
    an appeal against a  deportation  order  made  on  the  basis  that  an
    individual's offending had  caused  "serious  harm",  tribunals  should
    accord significant weight to  the  Secretary  of  State's  view,  while
    considering all the facts. Her view that supplying Class A drugs caused
    serious harm was reasonable.
61.  There is in addition to this the finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    when considering section 72 of the 2002 Act that the  appellant  failed
    to rebut the presumption that he constitutes a danger to the  community
    of the United Kingdom for the reasons given in  the  earlier  decision.
    Nothing that has arisen in relation to this appeal  warrants  making  a
    different finding.
62.  It is accepted the appellant has not offended since  2014  but  he  has
    during that time remained  on  licence  following  his  release  having
    completed half of this custodial sentence and remains the subject of  a
    deportation order and appeal proceedings. It will  be  highly  unlikely
    that a person who has fought so vehemently to avoid  his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would act  in  such  a  manner  in  the  interim  by
    committing further offences that would completely undermine the case he
    is advancing in support of his appeal.
63.  In Hesham  Ali  Lord  Reed,  at  paragraphs  47  to  50,  endorsed  the
    structured approach to proportionality and said "what  has  now  become
    the established  method  of  analysis  can  therefore  continue  to  be
    followed in this context.....The critical issue for the  tribunal  will
    generally be whether, giving due weight to the strength of  the  public
    interest in the deportation of the offender in the case before it,  the
    article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it. In general, only
    a claim which is very strong indeed - very compelling, as it was put in
    MF (Nigeria) - will succeed".
64.  All relevant legal authorities together with the  submissions  made  by
    the advocates have been considered and even if  there  is  no  specific
    reference to case law, submissions, or legal  provisions  it  does  not
    mean they  have  not  been  taken  into  account  in  arriving  at  the
    conclusion below.
65.  It is accepted the appellant has established both  family  and  private
    life in the United Kingdom. The appellant was granted indefinite  leave
    to remain although that has now lapsed as a result of  the  deportation
    order and so it is not a case of a  person  who  has  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully for all the time he has been here.
66.  It is accepted the appellant's private life  includes  extended  family
    members in Birmingham and that his family life includes that  with  the
    children B and C.
67.  It is accepted the respondent's decision will interfere with  both  his
    private and family life although the family life  he  currently  enjoys
    will not be lost to him but will have to be exercised in  a  different,
    indirect, manner. The same is arguably applicable to private life based
    upon face-to-face contact with other members of his family.
68.  It is not disputed that  the  interference  will  be  of  a  sufficient
    degree to engage article 8 ECHR.
69.  It is not argued that the respondent's decision  is  unlawful  and  the
    issue in the case has always been that of the  proportionality  of  the
    decision.
70.  It is clear that the appellant has advanced his case at its highest  in
    seeking to rely upon  the  children  to  prevent  his  removal.  It  is
    accepted that the effect of deporting the appellant upon both  children
    will be harsh and may result in a strong emotional reaction. It has not
    been shown the children will  be  without  support  or  that  the  home
    environment that they currently have with  their  grandmother  will  be
    lost to them. It has not been made out the children's lives will become
    chaotic or that the security they currently have that  underpins  their
    current  and  future  development  with  their  grandmother   will   be
    irreparably harmed. It has not been  made  out  that  the  professional
    intervention, assistance, and support given when combined with that  of
    the children's  grandmother  will  not  be  sufficient  to  enable  the
    children to understand what has occurred and to adapt to a new  routine
    and continue with the progress they have made to date. The presence  of
    the appellant although important has not been shown on the evidence  to
    be the determinative factor or one that his  absence  will  lead  to  a
    complete collapse in the physical, emotional, or psychological  welfare
    of the two children. The impact has not been shown to be unduly harsh.
71.  It has not been established the support the  children  currently  enjoy
    will not be available to them  meaning  that  the  consequence  of  the
    appellants removal has not been shown to be as severe as the  appellant
    invites this tribunal to find.
72.  When weighing all the facts relied upon by  the  appellant  with  those
    relied upon by the Secretary of  State,  including  the  strong  public
    interest in deporting a person who commits  such  serious  drug-related
    offences and who has still been shown to  represent  a  danger  to  the
    community of the United Kingdom, and in the absence of it  being  shown
    that very strong or very compelling circumstances are made out such  as
    to outweigh the public interest  in  the  appellants  deportation,  the
    finding of this tribunal is that the Secretary of State has  discharged
    the burden of proof upon her to the required standard, when considering
    both requirements of the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR, to  show
    that the decision is proportionate.
73.  The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Decision

74.  The First-tier Tribunal has been found to have materially erred in  law
    and that decision set aside. I remake the  decision  as  follows.  This
    appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

75.  The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

     I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 29 November 2017




                                   Annex A


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: DA/01376/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|        Decision         |
|                                       |Promulgated              |
|on 2 May 2017                                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Khubber instructed by Turpin & Miller Solicitors
(Oxford)

                            ERROR OF LAW FINDING


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ford ('the Judge') promulgated on 14 December  2016
    in which the Judge allowed DF's appeal on Article 8 family life grounds
    against the decision to deport him from the United Kingdom as a  result
    of his criminality.
 2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted by
    another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis it was found  the
    grounds asserting the Judge misdirected herself in her assessment  that
    the reason she identified outweighed  the  strong  public  interest  in
    deportation, by reason of there  being  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those set out in the statutory exceptions, disclosed  an
    arguable error of law.
3.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary State the parties shall  be
    referred to by their status  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  meaning
    reference to the appellant is to DF.

Background

4.   DF is a national of Jamaica. On 10 July 2014, the  Secretary  of  State
    made an order for his deportation from the United Kingdom  pursuant  to
    section 32(5) UK Borders Act 2007. DF appealed the decision on  grounds
    that (i) he will  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason on return to Jamaica and  (ii)  of  being  killed  or
    subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment by certain gang members. On
    human rights grounds DF contended that his removal would place  the  UK
    in breach of protected Article 8 private and family life rights.
5.   In relation to DF's criminal offending the Judge noted:

    3.   On 31  October  2012  the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  4  years
         imprisonment for being knowingly concerned in fraudulently  evading
         prohibition/restriction on the importation of a controlled class  A
         drug. He had acted as a drugs mule carrying a  case  with  850g  of
         cocaine into the UK from Jamaica.


    4.   He had two previous convictions. On 7 July 2007 he was bound  over
         for 12 months and fined following a conviction  for  breaching  the
         peace.


    5.   On 30 March 2010 the Appellant was convicted of  Criminal  damage,
         ordered to pay costs and compensation and made subject  to  a  two-
         year restraining order - protection from harassment order.


6.   In relation to the asylum claim, the Judge noted the first issue to  be
    dealt with is whether the appellant had rebutted the  presumption  that
    pursuant to Section 72 Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    which states that a person shall be presumed to have been convicted  of
    a final judgment of a "particularly serious crime" and to constitute  a
    danger to the community of the UK if he is convicted in the  UK  of  an
    offence and sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  two
    years. The Judge noted the offence was that of drug smuggling which, as
    noted by the sentencing judge, the terrible harm  caused  by  drugs  is
    only too clear from the  appellants  and  family  experiences  and  the
    tragic consequences of the appellant's former partner, MN's,  addiction
    for her children.
7.   Having considered the relevant factors at [14] to [18] the  Judge  sets
    out her conclusions in relation to the Section 72 issue at [19] in  the
    following terms:


    19.  Having considered the evidence  before  me  I  am  satisfied  that
         despite the low risk of reoffending, the potential harm involved in
         future offending by this Appellant is not low because of  the  risk
         factors that have been identified above. I am not satisfied the s72
         presumption has been rebutted by the Appellant. But even  if  I  am
         wrong on this I do not,  having  considered  all  of  the  evidence
         before me, find the Appellant credible in his claim that he  is  at
         real risk of persecution, being killed or subjected to inhumane  or
         degrading treatment on his return to Jamaica from gang members.

8.   At [20] to [30] the Judge sets out her  reasoning  in  support  of  her
    finding in the alternative. There  has  been  no  cross-appeal  to  the
    rejection of the appellants claim the section 72 presumption  had  been
    rebutted and therefore the alternative finding is academic although, on
    the face of it, sustainable.
9.   The appellants claims, pursuant to Articles 2  and  3  ECHR,  stand  or
    fall with the finding of a lack of credibility in the asylum  claim  as
    does the claim for Humanitarian Protection.
10.  The Judge went on to consider the Article 8 aspect of the appeal.
11.  The Judge noted that DF entered into a relationship with  MN  in  2008.
    MN has two children; the eldest K has ongoing contact with her  natural
    father and is not said to have a father/child relationship with DF.  C,
    the middle child was born two weeks before the relationship between  DF
    and MN started. Although DF is not the child's father  it  is  said  he
    took on the role of a father in her life from the time she was  only  a
    few weeks old. DF and MN have a child of their own, B, born in 2011.
12.  The Judge noted that MN visited DF regularly with the children when  he
    was in prison and that the couple hoped to continue their  relationship
    when DF was released, although Social Services had to intervene in  the
    family in November 2013 leading to the children being placed with their
    Maternal Grandmother, Mrs N, where they have remained since. The  Judge
    noted the placement is now permanent. The concern in  relation  to  the
    children was that of emotional neglect arising from MN's use of Class A
    drugs. The Judge noted MN has no contact with the children  at  present
    and is not in contact with DF or Social Services, although is  believed
    to be living with a relative.
13.  At [34 - 36] the Judge writes:

    34.  Ultimately the real issues in this case are as follows. Is  it  in
         the best interests of C and B that the Appellant  is  permitted  to
         continue his family live with them in the UK  rather  than  outside
         the UK? If it is not, then the appeal will be dismissed as I do not
         accept that in those circumstances the Appellant  can  successfully
         argue that there are exceptional factors in this  case  outweighing
         the public interest in his deportation.


    35.  If it is in the children's best interests or in the best interests
         of either of them then I have to look  at  whether  there  are  any
         exceptional factors in this case that  might  potentially  outweigh
         the public interest. If I get to this point I will finally  conduct
         a balancing exercise giving full recognition and weight to the will
         of Parliament and the  considerable  weight  given  by  it  to  the
         deportation of foreign criminals as set out at paragraph 14 above.


    36.  On the evidence before me I am satisfied that it is  in  the  best
         interests of the children C and B that the Appellant to be  allowed
         to continue to enjoy family life with them in the UK.  I  say  this
         for the following reasons.


14.  The Judge then sets out a series of reasons which can be summarised  in
    the following terms:

         .    The children have had to endure very difficult experiences  in
             their lives. C has never had any meaningful contact  with  her
             own father. [37].
         .    MN is a vulnerable individual who has a  history  of  being  a
             victim of domestic violence, drug  abuse  and  depression  and
             whose lifestyle has been chaotic for most  of  the  children's
             lives. There is no evidence the appellant has been involved in
             using drugs. [38].
         .    MN brought the children to see DF on a regular basis,  usually
             once a month, when he was  in  prison  when  the  family  were
             living on disability benefits and child benefits. [40].
         .    MN's children were in a very dangerous situation  when  Social
             Services intervened and removed them from their mother's  care
             placing them in the care of the maternal grandmother  who  now
             has a Special Guardianship Order for all three children. Their
             mother was openly using Class A drugs in their presence. [40]
         .    It was noted to be of concern that when released  from  prison
             DF and MN saw the  children  when  they  were  with  relatives
             without permission or  supervision  of  Social  Services.  The
             Judge records "The Appellant knew  that  he  should  not  have
             taken matters into his own hands. It was extremely selfish  of
             him to see the children in this  manner  and  it  had  harmful
             effects upon  B  in  particularly  because  he  had  not  been
             prepared in advance for this visit" [42]
         .    Following the issuing of a contact application  by  DF  and  a
             change of social worker the Court approved contact between  DF
             and C and B initially supervised  but  moving  on  to  regular
             unsupervised contact once a  month  which  continues  with  no
             concerns for the children's welfare arising from such contact.
             [43].
         .    The children are in a stable permanent  placement  with  their
             maternal grandmother (Mrs N) where they will remain until they
             are adults. They have no contact with their mother at  present
             and there appears to be no likelihood of such contact  in  the
             foreseeable future. [44].
         .    DF is not in a relationship with MN at the  present  time.  He
             lives with members  of  his  extended  family.  [45].  DF  has
             suffered from depression in the  past  but  is  not  currently
             taking any medication and living with  relatives  has  brought
             him stability, and courses completed whilst in  prison  appear
             to have increased his confidence, improved his life skills and
             his ability to cope [46].
         .    C and B are of mixed  ethnicity.  Both  children  are  British
             nationals [49]. The maternal grandmother referred in  evidence
             to the children's mixed ethnicity and how important it was for
             their  identity  to  have  the  family  connection  with   the
             Appellants wider family. [50].
         .    At [52] "These young children have had to endure the  loss  of
             their mother  from  their  lives  and  separation  from  their
             father, the Applicant. He has always endeavoured to retain and
             build on their relationship. To lose  him  as  well  as  their
             mother would be  (as  MN  states  in  her  witness  statement)
             "devastating". She says that the children  have  been  through
             some enormously difficult times  and  "finally  we  have  some
             stability in their lives". I am satisfied that the maintenance
             of this stability is crucial to the well-being of C and of B."


         .    DF has shown a commitment to the contact. It is crucial to the
             emotional development and well-being of the children not  only
             to have an ongoing close relationship with  their  father  but
             also maintain and strengthen their  relationships  with  their
             fathers extended family members for some time to come. [53].
         .    At 54 "These children need the reassurance  and  security  are
             seeing their father regularly and believing that he  is  there
             to care for them and give them security and love.  Contact  by
             way of visits and phone calls and written communications would
             be most unsatisfactory for such young  children,  particularly
             given the loss  and  disruption  they  have  already  suffered
             within  their  family.  Social  Services  are  in  favour   of
             continuing the direct unsupervised contact but more than  that
             wish to  see  a  building  on  the  relationship  between  the
             Appellant and the children. They see the contact is  having  a
             positive influence on the children. Mrs N sees the Appellant's
             presence in the children's lives is  crucial  to  their  well-
             being. She is trying to cope on her  own  with  the  full-time
             care of three young  children  and  she  needs  the  emotional
             support the Appellant can give and is giving to B and C."
         .    At [55] "I have no hesitation in concluding that it is in  the
             best interests  of  children  that  the  Appellant  should  be
             permitted to remain in the UK to enjoy family life with B  and
             C  here  without  disturbing   their   current   stable   care
             arrangements." At [56] "I am also  satisfied  that  there  are
             exceptional factors in this case that mean  that  despite  the
             Appellants  deportation  being  in  the  public  interest  the
             decision is disproportionate."
         .    The Judge noted that when the children were removed from their
             mother's care  and  placed  temporarily  with  their  maternal
             grandmother Walsall Children's Services were opposed to direct
             contact with DF as it hoped  that  rehabilitation  could  take
             place and because it was believed that DF had  not  only  been
             involved in attempting to smuggle Class A drugs  into  the  UK
             but had exposed the children to those drugs and  was  possibly
             involved in supplying drugs to their mother  [62].  The  Judge
             however found that it become clear that there was no  evidence
             on which it could  be  found  that  (i)  DF  had  exposed  the
             children to drugs, (ii) supplied drugs to  their  mother,  or,
             (iii) used drugs himself apart from one historic  incident  of
             cannabis use [63].
         .    DF has worked on his relationship with C and B through contact
             and is now seen as a  positive  influence  in  the  children's
             lives. The Judge writes "This  is  not  to  underestimate  the
             damage done to these very young children by the  behaviour  of
             both of their parents. As a result of that behaviour  and  the
             chaos and disruption it caused to their emotional  well-being,
             their need  for  security  and  stability  is  now  high.  The
             Appellant has become part of that stability." [65].
         .    DF provides the children with  an  important  sense  of  their
             mixed heritage and supports their  sense  of  self-worth.  The
             relationship between them is close and loving. Mrs N stated it
             would be devastating for the  children  to  stop  the  regular
             direct face-to-face weekly contact  and  input  from  DF.  The
             children's social worker agrees. [66].
         .    The best interests of the children are not a trump  card.  The
             Appellant's offending was particularly serious as reflected in
             a prison sentence imposed of four years imprisonment. Risk  of
             reoffending has been assessed as low. Risk factors may trigger
             a temptation to reoffend.  With  support  of  extended  family
             members  and  insight  gained  into  his  own  behaviour   and
             appreciation of the absolute need to put the children's  needs
             above his own, the risk of DF reoffending is low. [67].
         .    The likelihood of  the  children  maintaining  and  developing
             their relationship with the Appellants extended family members
             will be lower if he is not in the UK [69].
         .    At [72 - 74]:


                  72.  But ultimately  I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  be
                      disproportionate  not  to  allow  the  Appellant   to
                      continue his family life with C and B from within the
                      UK. It is in the public interest that such vulnerable
                      children are supported so that  their  own  risks  of
                      falling into chaotic lifestyles  and  drug  abuse  is
                      minimised.


                  73.  I have taken fully into account  the  nature  of  the
                      offence and its gravity. Drugs  cause  untold  misery
                      and  unhappiness  and  this  is  tragically  only  to
                      apparent in what has happened to  MN.  The  Appellant
                      was at fault for her being left to cope  on  her  own
                      with three young children when she was so  vulnerable
                      due to  her  history  of  addiction,  depression  and
                      domestic violence.


                  74.  As at the date of hearing I  am  satisfied  that  the
                      need for the Appellant to be allowed to continue  his
                      family life in the UK and to support Mrs N, B  and  C
                      is so great  that  it  outweighs  the  strong  public
                      interest in the Appellants deportation. The  decision
                      is not justified by the public interests stated given
                      its impact on the lives of two young  children  whose
                      young lives have been very  difficult  and  who  have
                      lost  their  mother  from  their  lives  and  endured
                      periods of emotional neglect and the potential impact
                      on their carer. Taking fully into account the  public
                      interest  in  the  Appellant's  removal,  I  am   not
                      satisfied that the decision  is  justified.  It  goes
                      further than is  necessary  to  protect  and  promote
                      those interests.  This  increases  the  risk  of  the
                      placement  of  the  children  with   their   maternal
                      grandmother breaking down and leave her coping on her
                      own with distressed young children who  have  already
                      suffered the loss of  one  parent,  and  having  been
                      reunited with their father would  see  him  disappear
                      from their lives again save for limited  contact  and
                      visits.   The   impact    of    the    decision    is
                      disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  is  being
                      pursued and I am satisfied that it is  in  breach  of
                      Article 8 family life, the family in  question  being
                      the two children C and B and the Appellant. There are
                      exceptional factors in this case that also amount  to
                      very compelling circumstances justifying a  departure
                      from the norm of deportation from  foreign  criminals
                      who have been sentenced to a  period  of  four  years
                      imprisonment for drug crimes.


15.  The Judge mentions the support of  the  Social  Services  and  at  [48]
    refers to a letter from the children's social  worker  from  which  the
    following quotes have been included in the decision under challenge:

    "The children are clearly important to DF and he fears that a time  may
    come when he will be separated  from  them.  He  has  considered  every
    scenario of what the future could hold but is certain that  however  he
    can and where ever he is he will always continue  to  be  a  consistent
    presence in the childrens' lives. DF has a supportive network and  many
    family members who live in the UK some of whom  have  assured  me  that
    they will continue to support DF and have done so to date. They  appear
    to be a close  family  which  is  something  DF  regards  as  being  of
    importance. He wishes to remain in position to ensure that B  has  full
    access to his family, maintains a sense of identity and is  exposed  to
    his cultural heritage.


    DF has to date been compliant; open and honest with the Local Authority
    and as a result we have every confidence in him continuing to live in a
    positive and well adjusted life given the opportunity. We are very much
    in support of him continuing to build a relationship with his  son  and
    at this point in B's life it is crucial  that  he  is  able  to  do  so
    freely. DF has an extremely positive relationship with  the  childrens'
    maternal grandmother who has increased contact  to  a  weekly  activity
    based on her own observations of the loving relationships  they  share,
    how much they enjoy spending time together and the  positive  influence
    this has over both B and C."


Error of law

16.  The Secretary of State does not dispute the  factual  basis  identified
    by the Judge but maintains a number of legal errors were  made  in  the
    decision under challenge.
17.  It is asserted the Judge failed to correctly identify  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those contained in the exceptions  and  in
    determination the circumstances failed to apply the "unduly harsh" test
    contained in paragraph 399 (a) of the  Immigration  Rules  and  section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
18.  The Immigration Rules relating to deportation provide:

    Deportation and Article 8

    A398.    These rules apply where:


           (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that  his
                deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
                obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


           (b)    a foreign criminal applies for a deportation  order  made
                against him to be revoked.


    398.     Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
           to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
           Convention, and


           (a)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                the public good and in the public interest because they have
                been convicted of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


           (b)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                the public good and in the public interest because they have
                been convicted of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  4  years
                but at least 12 months; or


           (c)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                the public good and in the public interest because,  in  the
                view of the Secretary of State, their offending  has  caused
                serious harm or they are a persistent offender who  shows  a
                particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of State  in
                assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399  or
                399A applies and, if it does not,  the  public  interest  in
                deportation will only be outweighed by other  factors  where
                there are very compelling circumstances over and above those
                described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -




           (a)     the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is
                in the UK, and


                (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or


                (ii)   the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                    least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of  the
                    immigration decision; and in either case


                    (a)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                        the country to which the person is to be  deported;
                        and


                    (b)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                        in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                        or


           (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen  or
                settled in the UK, and


                (i)    the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                    (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their  immigration
                    status was not precarious; and


                (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                    the country to which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,
                    because of compelling circumstances over and above those
                    described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                (iii)  it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                    in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

19.  Section 117C of the 2002 Act provides:

    117C


    Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving   foreign
    criminals.


    (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
    (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
    (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies.
    (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,
         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and
         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


    (5)   Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
    (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.
    (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken  into
         account where a court or tribunal  is  considering  a  decision  to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.


20.  In this case the Judge found that DF was 'caught' by 398(a) as  he  has
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four years. As a
    result DF does not fall within 399 or 399A,  meaning  that  the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
21.  In NA (Pakistan); KJ (Angola), WM (Afghanistan) and MY  (Kenya)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662 it was held that a foreign criminal seeking  to  establish
    exceptional circumstances was entitled to rely on matters of  the  kind
    referred to in paragraphs 399 or  399A,  but  they  would  need  to  be
    features making his Article 8 claim especially strong.
22.  It is not suggested DF has a qualifying  relationship  with  a  partner
    and the Judge found that the appeal turns upon  his  relationship  with
    the children C and B. In that respect paragraph 399 requires a  genuine
    subsisting parental relationship with a child under 18,  which  is  not
    disputed, and as the children are to remain in the  United  Kingdom,  a
    finding that it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the
    UK without DF.  What  the  Judge  was  required  to  do,  however,  was
    identified very compelling circumstances over and above those described
    in these provisions.  The  best  interests  of  the  children  are  not
    determinative albeit that they form a very  important/weighty  part  of
    the proportionality balancing exercise.
23.  In MM (Uganda) and [2016] EWCA Civ 450 it  was  held  that  the  phrase
    'unduly harsh' plainly meant the same in section 117C(5)  of  the  2002
    Act as it did in paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules.  It  was  an
    ordinary English  expression  coloured  by  its  context.  The  context
    invited emphasis on two factors: first,  the  public  interest  in  the
    removal  of  foreign  criminals  and,  secondly,   the   need   for   a
    proportionate assessment of any interference with Article 8 rights. The
    public interest factor was expressly vouched by Parliament  in  section
    117C(1). Section 117C(2) provided that the  more  serious  the  offence
    committed, the greater the public interest in deportation. That steered
    the tribunals and the court towards a proportionate assessment  of  the
    criminal's  deportation  in  any  given  case.  Accordingly,  the  more
    pressing the public interest in his removal, the harder it would be  to
    show that the effect on his child or partner would be unduly harsh. Any
    other approach would dislocate the 'unduly harsh' provisions from their
    context such that the question  of  undue  hardship  would  be  decided
    wholly  without  regard  to  the  force  of  the  public  interest   in
    deportation. In such a case 'unduly' would be mistaken for 'excessive',
    which imported a different idea. What was due or undue depended on  all
    the circumstances, not merely the impact on the child or partner in the
    given case. The  expression  'unduly  harsh'  in  section  117C(5)  and
    paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)   required   consideration   of   all   the
    circumstances,  including  the  criminal's  immigration  and   criminal
    history.
24.  The Judge sets out the factors that were  considered  relevant  to  the
    assessment so far as the children are concerned, which  relate  to  the
    failings of their parents to provide adequate and  suitable  care,  the
    transfer of responsibility for such care to the  maternal  grandmother,
    the reintroduction of DF into their lives following their  being  moved
    and his period of imprisonment, and what is said to  be  the  traumatic
    impact upon the children  of  removing  DF  from  their  lives  by  his
    deportation to Jamaica.
25.  The Judge does refer to the Secretary of State's position but  also  to
    DF's offending. As seen above, the Judge found at [67] that the risk of
    reoffending is low but also finds at [15] that notwithstanding the risk
    of reoffending being described as low the Secretary of State  submitted
    that the risk could escalate if DF is faced with financial problems  as
    DF travelled to Jamaica on a number of occasions, never explaining  how
    he managed to pay for these trips given that he was unemployed for long
    periods  of  time  and  the  household  income  largely  consisted   of
    disability benefits for MN and child benefit, and that the influence of
    family members in the UK did not prevent him from offending as nor  did
    the fact he had dependent children and vulnerable partner.
26.  The Judge at [17 - 19] found:

    17.  Dr Basu assess the risk of reoffending over the next two years  as
         low. He does refer to social networks as a risk  factor  and  notes
         that the Appellant is relatively socially isolated at  the  current
         time. He states this "may" improve if the Appellant is  allowed  to
         work. Dr Basu says that the Appellant's history  suggests  that  he
         has  found  himself  around  those  who  have  exerted  a  negative
         influence on him either through drug misuse or violence and  states
         "in the future he should be mindful of these and ensure that it  is
         not to surround himself with potentially negative  influences  that
         might increase his chances of reoffending".


    18   The Appellant has allowed himself to lose control  of  his  temper
         when his ex-partner stole his Criminal injuries compensation monies
         and he  attended  at  her  property  and  caused  criminal  damage,
         breaking a window there. He  has  been  both  the  victim  and  the
         perpetrator of domestic violence.


    19.  Having considered the evidence  before  me  I  am  satisfied  that
         despite the low risk of reoffending, the  potential  harm  involved
         future offending by this Appellant is not low because of  the  risk
         factors that have been identified above. I am  not  satisfied  that
         the s72 presumption has been rebutted by the Appellant.


27.  The consequence of the Judge finding the s72 presumption has  not  been
    rebutted is that it is not only the case that the  appellant  has  been
    found to have been convicted of a particularly serious crime, but  also
    to constitute a danger to the community  of  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Judge does not seem to factor within the proportionality assessment her
    finding relating to the danger  DF  presents  to  society  through  his
    reoffending.
28.  The Judge clearly found that  the  effect  on  the  children  would  be
    unduly harsh but more than this is required. It is  arguable  that  the
    Judge proceeded to identify relevant  factors  when  finding  that  the
    chance of the children developing a relationship  with  their  father's
    extended family members will be lower  if  he  is  not  in  the  United
    Kingdom, [69], but no reasons have been given as to why this should  be
    so. It is not suggested that there would be no ongoing contact  between
    the children and their paternal  family  if  DF  was  not  in  the  UK,
    especially when the evidence is that both the maternal grandmother  and
    DF's family are supportive of the children. It  is  not  disputed  that
    contact with extended family may be of importance in  relation  to  the
    children's heritage and background but the  Judge  fails  to  refer  to
    sufficient evidence to support a finding that this might be  prejudiced
    or compromised, to the extent that it could amount to an  unduly  harsh
    impact, if DF is removed.
29.  Similarly, at [72] the Judge finds it is disproportionate not to  allow
    DF to continue his family life with C and B  from  within  the  UK  and
    comments it is in the public interest that such vulnerable children are
    supported so that their own risk of falling into chaotic lifestyle  and
    drug abuse is minimised. Whilst it is accepted that that is a statement
    supported by all working  within  the  childcare  field,  there  is  no
    evidence that if DF were removed from the  UK  the  children  would  be
    reasonably likely to fall into chaotic lifestyles  and  hence  increase
    the risk that they themselves become problematic. The reason  for  this
    is the network of support  that  exist  for  the  children,  which  was
    accepted by Social Services as meeting the children's needs, even  when
    DF was in prison.
30.  The special guardian,  Mrs  N,  has  parental  responsibility  for  the
    children. Subject to any later order, the special guardian may exercise
    parental responsibility to the exclusion of all  others  with  parental
    responsibility, apart from another special guardian. Local  authorities
    are  required  to  make  arrangements  for  the  provision  of  special
    guardianship  support  services.  These  include  counselling,  advice,
    information and such other services (including  financial  support)  as
    are prescribed  in  the  Special  Guardianship  Regulations  2005.  The
    Regulations also provide  for  the  assessment  of  needs  for  special
    guardianship support services, and the planning and  the  reviewing  of
    those  support  services.  This  is  stable,  settled,  and   supported
    structure of the family unit in which the children currently live.
31.  Similarly, at [74], the Judge found that the decision to remove DF  was
    not justified given its impact upon the lives of the children  and  the
    removal increases the risk of the placement of the  children  with  the
    maternal mother breaking down, when there is insufficient reasoning  or
    evidence to support the contention that a  person  as  devoted  to  the
    children as their maternal grandmother would allow that to  happen,  or
    that leaving her on her own with "distressed young  children  who  have
    already suffered the loss of one parent" would  somehow  undermine  the
    placement. The first thing to note is it  is  not  suggested  that  the
    maternal grandmother would have to suffer on her own,  as  clearly  the
    children have a social worker and possibility of  further  Social  Work
    intervention/assistance within the family unit.
32.  The respondent's proposal is that it is in the public interest  for  DF
    to be removed from the UK and that any contact he  currently  has  with
    the children may continue thereafter by indirect means or eventually by
    face-to-face visits in Jamaica. It is not a case of family  life  being
    lost, but the quality of that family life and the way such family  life
    is undertaken changing.
33.  The Judge refers to the impact on the  children  of  DF  not  being  in
    their lives on a permanent basis but it does not appear there  are  any
    reports from Social Services of a sufficiently detailed nature  dealing
    with the consequences of DF's removal; with specific emphasis not  only
    upon the likely effect upon the child generally but also what work  can
    be undertaken to prepare the children for any actual removal, including
    ensuring they understand it is not as a result of  anything  they  have
    done or anything for which they are responsible, and what support would
    be available for the children both before, during, and after the period
    of DF's deportation from the United Kingdom. It is arguable that it  is
    only when the results of such additional work are known that it can  be
    assessed whether the effect on the children would not  only  be  unduly
    harsh but that the consequences  of  DF's  removal  will  result  in  a
    situation such that it could not be proportionate  when  balancing  the
    competing interests. Work of this nature  is  regularly  undertaken  by
    Social  Workers  in  the  field  of  adoption  where  a  placement   is
    contemplated which does  not  provide  for  ongoing  contact  with  the
    child's birth parents.
34.   This  is  not  to  say  that  the  requirements  of  the   rules   are
    determinative, for as found by the  Supreme  Court  in  in  Hesham  Ali
    (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, which was concerned with the law pre  the
    Immigration Act 2014, Lord Reed noted that in MF (Nigeria) [2014] 1 WLR
    544 "the Court of Appeal described the new rules set  out  in  para  23
    above as "a complete code" for article 8 claims (para  44).  Lord  Reed
    noted that that expression reflected the view that the concluding words
    of rule 398 required the  application  of  a  proportionality  test  in
    accordance with the Strasbourg jurisprudence, taking into  account  all
    the article 8 criteria and all other factors  which  were  relevant  to
    proportionality (para 39). On that basis, the court commented that  the
    result should be the same whether the  proportionality  assessment  was
    carried out within or outside the new rules: it was a sterile  question
    whether it was required by the rules or by the general law (para  45)".
    Lord Reed then went on to  say  that  "The  idea  that  the  new  rules
    comprise a complete code appears to have been mistakenly interpreted in
    some later cases as meaning that the Rules, and the Rules alone, govern
    appellate decision-making. Dicta seemingly to that effect can be found,
    for example, in LC (China) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1310; [2015] Imm AR 227, para 17,  and  AJ  (Angola)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1636" albeit
    that Lord Reed reiterated the weight to be given to the public interest
    in deport cases. Lord Wilson, however, said  that  "Provided  that  the
    phrase (in the Rules) is not misunderstood, there is nothing wrong with
    an analysis in certain contexts that "exceptional  circumstances"  will
    be necessary for a claim under article 8 to prevail". Lord Wilson  said
    that  where  the  appellant's  family  life  with  another  person  was
    developed at a time when, to  his  knowledge,  his  immigration  status
    rendered his ability to remain living in the UK precarious, " his claim
    to respect for his family life is  inherently  weak.  It  is  therefore
    legitimate to describe it as likely  to  prevail  only  in  exceptional
    circumstances. The court in Strasbourg has said so. Thus  in  Rodrigues
    Da Silva, Hoogkamer v Netherlands (2007) 44  EHRR  34,  the  Strasbourg
    court said: "39. ... where this is the case it is likely only to be  in
    the most exceptional circumstances that the removal of the non-national
    family member will constitute a violation of article  8."  Lord  Wilson
    added: "In  the  MF  (Nigeria)  case,  however,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    proceeded to make an insignificant but unfortunate error.  It  held  at
    para 44 that the new rules were "a complete  code"  which  fell  to  be
    applied not only by the Secretary of State's case-workers but on appeal
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  one  thing  to  suggest  that  the
    Secretary of State's rule 398 is  relevant  to  the  weight  which  the
    tribunal should give to the public interest. By doing so, the  tribunal
    would do no more than, in the words of Lord Bingham in the Huang  case,
    para 16, to accord "appropriate weight to the judgment of a person with
    responsibility for a given subject matter and access to special sources
    of knowledge and advice". But it is another thing altogether to suggest
    that the rules provide the legal framework within  which  the  tribunal
    should determine the appeal.
35.  In Hesham Ali (Iraq), Lord Reed at paragraphs 47  to  50  endorsed  the
    structured approach to proportionality and said "what  has  now  become
    the established -critical issue for  the  tribunal  will  generally  be
    whether, giving due weight to the strength of the  public  interest  in
    the deportation of the offender in the case before it,  the  article  8
    claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it. In general, only  a  claim
    which is very strong indeed - very compelling, as  it  was  put  in  MF
    (Nigeria) - will succeed".
36.  Whilst it is accepted that the Judge approached  consideration  of  the
    Article 8 issue in a structured manner, the respondent's position which
    forms part of the balancing exercise when assessing  the  Secretary  of
    State's states case is that set out in the Rules.
37.  It is arguable  at  this  stage  that  based  upon  the  evidence  made
    available to the Judge the finding that the situation for C and B, as a
    result of the consequences of DF's removal was such that the very  high
    threshold had been crossed, does support the contention that the  Judge
    has failed to substantiate the finding of very compelling circumstances
    in the case where although face-to-face  contact  may  be  lost,  other
    forms of contact will continue, and that  there  is  no  evidence  that
    those extra factors required to displace the  public  interest  in  the
    face of a four-year prison sentence for drug-related offences, was made
    out on the evidence.
38.  The determination shall be set aside. The Upper Tribunal was unable  to
    proceed to remake the decision on the day and the following  directions
    shall apply to the future conduct of this hearing:

         I.   List for a resumed hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge  Hanson
             sitting at Birmingham on the first  available  date  after  14
             July 2017, subject to the availability  of  Mr  Khubber.  Time
             estimate 3 hours.


         II    The  appellant  shall  file  a  consolidated,  indexed,   and
             paginated bundle containing all the  documentary  evidence  he
             seeks to rely upon in support of his claim, to include witness
             statements which are  to  be  signed,  dated,  and  contain  a
             declaration of truth. Expert reports from a child psychologist
             and/or the children's Social Worker dealing with the impact of
             DF's removal in specific  terms  and  any  work  available  to
             prepare the children for the same, referred to in the body  of
             this  decision,  shall  be  included  in  the   bundle.   Such
             statements shall stand as the evidence in chief of  the  maker
             who shall be tendered for cross examination and re-examination
             only. The bundle to be filed no later than 4 PM 16 June 2017.


         III  The respondent shall file a consolidated,  indexed,  paginated
             bundle containing all documents she  seeks  to  rely  upon  in
             support of her case and/or in rebuttal of the points taken  by
             the applicants no later than 4 PM 30 June 2017.


         IV   Skeleton arguments shall be filed with the Upper  Tribunal  no
             later than 4 PM 14 July 2017.


         V    Documents not submitted within the time  periods  provided  by
             these  directions  shall  not  be  admitted  without  specific
             permission of the Upper  Tribunal.  Such  permission  must  be
             sought in a written application to be filed before the  expiry
             of the period provided in these  directions.  The  application
             shall explain why there has been  a  failure  to  comply  with
             directions,  who  is  responsible  for  such  failure,   which
             documents the application relates to, the relevance  of  those
             documents to the issues in the appeal,  whether  the  opposing
             party consents to  the  documents  being  admitted  late,  the
             prejudice to either party of admitting or  refusing  to  admit
             the documents, the time period by which it is  envisaged  such
             documents shall be available, and the impact of  the  granting
             of the application upon any hearing date that has been fixed.


         VI   The findings of Judge Ford  in  relation  to  immigration  and
             criminal history, family composition and  contact  between  DF
             and the children and B shall be preserved.


         VII  Liberty to apply to the parties in the event  that  sufficient
             time is not provided for the  provision  of  expert  or  other
             related evidence in the directions provided herein.


Decision

39.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside  the
    decision of the original Judge. The case shall  proceed  to  a  Renewed
    Hearing in accordance with the directions set out above.


Anonymity


40.  The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
    I make such an order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.








Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8 June 2017






