
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01921/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2018                        |On 10 May 2018                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  KAMAL [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vaughan of NBS Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This appeal has been remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the Court of
        Appeal. An earlier hearing listed  for  1  March  2018  had  to  be
        adjourned due to the adverse weather conditions in  the  region  at
        that time.





Background


     2. It is not disputed the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  (i)
        failing to interpret and  apply  the  deportation  Rules  correctly
        including failing to consider whether it will be unduly  harsh  for
        the respondent's children to remain in the United  Kingdom  without
        him, an express requirement under paragraph 399(a)  of  the  Rules,
        (ii) in  failing  to  properly  balance  the  factors  relevant  to
        assessment under Article 8 including  failing  to  properly  direct
        itself as to the weight that should be given to the public interest
        in deportation foreign criminals. The Court of Appeal also find  an
        error in the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  being  considered  by
        them in the  tribunal  finding  the  Secretary  are  State  made  a
        concession before the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  undermined  the
        Secretary of States grounds of appeal, when no such concession  had
        been made.
     3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside permitting the
        Upper Tribunal to substitute a decision to either allow or  dismiss
        the appeal.




Discussion



     4. The appellant is an Iranian national born on [ ] 1980 who  came  to
        the United Kingdom in March 2003 and claimed asylum. The  appellant
        is a foreign offender following his conviction on 27 June  2005  at
        the Newcastle Crown Court for an offence of unlawful  wounding  for
        which he was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment.
     5. The appellant was made subject to  a  deportation  order  dated  17
        September 2007 pursuant to section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act
        1971.
     6. The appellant married his wife, an Iraqi national, on 1  July  2008
        in Bradford. They have 2 children H born 10 June 2009 and K born on
        20 June 2012. The children are British citizens and hold  no  other
        nationality.
     7. The family dynamics are that the appellant cares for  the  children
        which permits his wife, a national of Iraq  who  became  a  British
        citizen in 2012, to work full-time as  a  pharmacist  in  order  to
        support the family.
     8. Mr Mills confirmed he had checked the Police National Computer  and
        that there is no record of the appellant coming to the attention of
        the authorities  in  the  UK  for  any  other  offences  since  his
        conviction in 2005.
     9. Even though the original decision was a conducive  deport  decision
        in relation to an offence committed prior to the coming into  force
        of the UK Borders Act, by virtue of the  decision  in  YM  (Uganda)
        [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, I must apply the  legal  rules  currently  in
        force.
    10. It is accepted that a foreign criminal's deportation  is  conducive
        to the public good.
    11. The appellant has not  offended  further  indicating  a  successful
        period of rehabilitation within the United Kingdom.
    12. Pursuant to paragraph 391 of the  Rules,  whether  the  deportation
        order should be maintained requires a case-by-case analysis.
    13. Relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules relating to revocation
        of a deportation order are:

             '390.    An application for revocation of a deportation  order
             will be considered in  the  light  of  all  the  circumstances
             including the following:


                   (i) the grounds on which the order was made;


                   (ii)     any   representations   made   in   support   of
                   revocation;


                   (iii)   the interests of  the  community,  including  the
                   maintenance of an effective immigration control;


                   (iv)    the interests of  the  applicant,  including  any
                   compassionate circumstances.


             390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the  Secretary  of  State
             will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it
             does not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that
             the public interest in maintaining the deportation order  will
             be outweighed by other factors.


             391. In the case of a person who has been  deported  following
             conviction for a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
             deportation order against  that  person  will  be  the  proper
             course:


                   (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                   the person was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
                   less than 4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the
                   making of the deportation order when, if  an  application
                   for revocation is received, consideration will  be  given
                   on a case by case basis to whether the deportation  order
                   should be maintained, or


                   (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                   the person was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
                   at least 4 years, at any time,


             Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to
             the Human Rights Convention or  the  Convention  and  Protocol
             Relating to  the  Status  of  Refugees,  or  there  are  other
             exceptional  circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation   is
             outweighed by compelling factors.


             391A.    In other cases, revocation  of  the  order  will  not
             normally  be  authorised  unless  the   situation   has   been
             materially altered, either by a change of circumstances  since
             the order was made, or by fresh information  coming  to  light
             which  was  not  before  the  appellate  authorities  or   the
             Secretary of State. The passage of time since the  person  was
             deported may also  in  itself  amount  to  such  a  change  of
             circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.


             392. Revocation of a deportation order does  not  entitle  the
             person concerned to re-enter the United  Kingdom;  it  renders
             him eligible to apply  for  admission  under  the  Immigration
             Rules. Application for revocation of the order may be made  to
             the Entry Clearance Officer or direct to the Home Office.'

    14. In Smith (paragraph 391 (a)  -  revocation  of  deportation  order)
        [2017] UKUT 00166 (IAC) it was held that  (i)  In  cases  involving
        convictions for an offence for which the person was sentenced to  a
        period of imprisonment of less  than  4  years,  the  Secretary  of
        State's policy, as expressed in paragraph 391(a) of the Immigration
        Rules, is that the public interest does not require continuation of
        a deportation order after a period of ten years has  elapsed;  (ii)
        However, paragraph 391(a) allows the Secretary of State to consider
        on a case by case basis  whether  a  deportation  order  should  be
        maintained. The mere fact of past convictions  is  unlikely  to  be
        sufficient to maintain an order  if  the  'prescribed  period'  has
        elapsed. Strong public policy reasons would be  needed  to  justify
        continuing an order in such circumstances; (iii)  Paragraph  391(a)
        will only be engaged in a 'post-deportation' case if the person  is
        applying for revocation of the order from outside the  UK.  Nothing
        in the strict wording of the rule requires the ten-year  period  to
        be spent outside the UK. However, the main purpose  of  deportation
        is to exclude a person from the UK. Any breach of  the  deportation
        order is likely to be a strong public policy ground for maintaining
        the order even though a period of ten years has  elapsed  since  it
        was  made;(iv)     In  'post-deportation'  applications   involving
        sentences of less than four years made before the end of  the  ten-
        year  period,   and   'post-deportation'   applications   involving
        sentences of four years or more, appropriate weight should be given
        to the Secretary of State's policy as expressed in the 'Conventions
        exception' and 'sweep-up exception' with  reference  to  paragraphs
        398-399A and 390A of the Immigration Rules.
    15. In this case, the offence was committed over 12 years ago  and  the
        deportation order was signed on 17 September 2007  indicating  that
        the 10 year period expired on 16 September 2017.
    16. There is no indication the appellant poses an ongoing risk  to  the
        public  within  the  United  Kingdom  as  evidenced  by  Mr   Mills
        enquiries.
    17.  The  appellant's  children  are  British  nationals  and  so   are
        qualifying children. It is not disputed the appellant has a genuine
        and subsisting parental relationship with the children.
    18. This is a family splitting case  if  the  deportation  decision  is
        maintained, in that it is accepted that neither the mother nor  the
        children can live in Iran  with  the  appellant.  The  question  is
        therefore whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to live
        in the UK without their father in such circumstances.
    19. There is clear evidence of a settled  established  family  unit  in
        which the children's mother is able to work as a result of the role
        played by the appellant in providing care for the children. If  the
        appellant was not present she could not work as she currently does.
    20. This is a case in which it would be unduly harsh  the  children  to
        remain in the United Kingdom without their father who clearly plays
        a considerable role in their day-to-day lives.
    21. Balancing the public interest in the appellants  removal  from  the
        United Kingdom in accordance with the  deportation  order,  on  the
        basis he is a foreign criminal, against the  protected  family  and
        private life relied upon in this appeal, and in  particular  noting
        the time that has expired since the making of the deportation order
        and the absence of strong countervailing factors  relevant  to  the
        weight given to the  public  interest  sufficient  to  warrant  the
        continuation of the deportation order at  this  time,  I  find  the
        appellant has made out that the  continuation  of  the  deportation
        order  will  be  unreasonable  or   unduly   harsh   in   all   the
        circumstances.
    22. I find  maintaining  the  deportation  order  and  the  refusal  to
        discharge  the  order  on  the  facts  of  this  case   to   be   a
        disproportionate interference with the protected family and private
        life of this family unit. I allow the appeal.


Decision

    23. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake  the  decision
        as follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


    24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th of May 2018



