

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01850/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 April 2014                               |On 9 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     HJS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Harrington instructed by Gloucester Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269) we make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.   This  direction
      applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a  failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.

Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Ecuador who was born on 19 March 1955.

   3. The appellant first attempted  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  on  13
      January 1990 using the identity of "AS" who is  his  brother.   On  20
      September 1990, the appellant was refused leave to enter  the  UK  and
      was removed the following day to Ecuador.  On  8  February  1991,  the
      appellant married "SL" in Ecuador.  On 27 November 1992, he  travelled
      to the United Kingdom using the identity of "AS" with a date of  birth
      of 24 January 1964.  He entered as the spouse of  a  British  citizen,
      namely "SL" and was granted leave until 27 November 1993.  On 11 March
      1994, the appellant was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the
      spouse of a British citizen.

   4. On 7 March 1997, the appellant made an application for  naturalisation
      as a British citizen under the  identity  of  "AS".   He  was  granted
      British citizenship on 7 January 1999.

   5. In 2001, the appellant (using the identity "AS") changed his  name  by
      deed poll to "HJS" which is his real identity.  On  21  January  2001,
      the appellant was issued with a British passport in the name of "HJS".



   6. In 2004, the appellant  was  convicted  of  three  criminal  offences,
      namely theft of a motor vehicle, going equipped for theft  and  making
      off without payment.  He received sentences  of  community  punishment
      orders.

   7. In September 2004, the appellant and his family left the UK  and  went
      to Costa Rica.  At some point during 2004-2005, the appellant returned
      to Ecuador.  Whilst in Ecuador, the appellant faked his own  death  in
      order that his wife could claim  on  his  insurance  policies  in  the
      United Kingdom.  In December 2006, the appellant and his  family  went
      to live in Australia.  He was subsequently located in Australia, where
      he was arrested and extradited to the United Kingdom on 14 March 2012.



   8. On 12 April 2012, the appellant was convicted of a number of  offences
      at the Oxford Crown  Court,  namely  obtaining  a  money  transfer  by
      deception,  attempting  to  obtain  a  money  transfer  by  deception,
      securing the remission of liability by  deception  and  attempting  to
      secure remission of liability by  deception.   On  28  May  2012,  the
      appellant was sentenced to a total of five years' imprisonment.

   9. On 5 October 2012, the appellant was  notified  of  his  liability  to
      automatic deportation under the UK Borders Act  2007.   The  appellant
      completed a questionnaire and on 5 November 2012, he claimed asylum.

  10. On 13 February 2013, the Secretary of  State  notified  the  appellant
      that his certificate of naturalisation was null and void on the  basis
      that it had been obtained using a false identity.   His  passport  was
      subsequently returned to the passport office.

  11. On 29 August 2013, the Secretary of State made a decision that s.32(5)
      of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.  The Secretary of  State  rejected
      the appellant's claim for asylum and humanitarian protection and under
      Article 3 of the ECHR.  The Secretary of State  issued  a  certificate
      under s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   In
      addition, the  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  the  appellant's
      deportation was in accordance with the Immigration Rules  (HC  395  as
      amended), namely para 398 and that his deportation  would  not  breach
      Article 8 of the ECHR.

  12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 6 December 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Britton and Mr G
      H Getlevog) dismissed the appellant's appeal.  First,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum  and  humanitarian
      protection grounds and also under Article 3 of the ECHR.  Further, the
      First-tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant's  deportation  would
      not breach Article 8.

  13. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The
      grounds did not seek to challenge the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
      to dismiss the appeal on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds
      and under Article 3 of the ECHR.  Instead,  the  application  focussed
      upon the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR.

  14. On 9 January 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keane)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before us.

The Submissions

  15. Ms Harrington, who represented the appellant, relied upon the  grounds
      of appeal which she developed in her oral submissions.

  16. First, she submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  make
      any or any adequate findings in respect of the impact  of  deportation
      upon the mental health of the appellant's four children, in particular
      of his younger daughter "NJ" and had failed to take into  account  the
      evidence relating to her attempt at suicide and the  risk,  therefore,
      of that reoccurring if the appellant was deported.  She submitted that
      the First-tier Tribunal had failed to take into  account  the  medical
      evidence at pages 43 and 44 of  the  appellant's  bundle  and  also  a
      letter from "NS's" GP dated 21 November 2013 which had  been  provided
      to the First-tier Tribunal at the hearing.  In  addition,  she  relied
      upon supporting evidence of counsellors at the  children's  school  at
      pages  45-54  particularly  in  relation  to  the  impact   upon   the
      appellant's younger daughter.  She submitted that the evidence clearly
      raised issues above and  beyond  the  ordinary  issues  of  separation
      between a  father  and  his  children  in  a  deportation  case.   She
      submitted that the Tribunal should have made a factual finding on what
      the impact of the appellant's deportation would have on the  children,
      in  particular  his  youngest  daughter  which  was  relevant  to  the
      proportionality assessment.   Ms Harrington submitted that it was  not
      sufficient for the First-tier Tribunal to say, as it had at  para  59,
      that it had taken all the evidence into consideration.

  17. Secondly, Ms Harrington submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      failed to make any findings in respect of the "best interests" of  the
      children.

  18. Thirdly, she submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law
      in reaching its finding that family life could be continued  by  Skype
      and had failed to have regard to the impracticality  of  the  children
      visiting their father in Ecuador given the costs.

  19. Fourthly, Ms Harrington submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      failed to make any finding in relation to the  OASys  report  and  its
      conclusion that the risk of the appellant reoffending was low.

  20. Finally, Ms Harrington submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had made
      a factual error  (at  para  34)  in  recording  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant's  older  daughter  that  she  spoke  fluent  Spanish.   Her
      evidence was that she had at one time spoken Spanish fluently but  now
      only recalled a few words and phrases.

  21. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards relied upon the  Rule
      24 reply.  He submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  considered
      all the evidence, including referring at para 29 to the fact that  the
      appellant's younger daughter had attempted to commit suicide by taking
      an overdose of Paracetamol.  At para 57, the First-tier  Tribunal  had
      referred to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009
      and, referring to SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550,  had  noted
      the importance of the best interests of the children.  At para 59,  Mr
      Richards submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had  carried  out  the
      appropriate balancing exercise  including  taking  into  account  "the
      appellant's criminal activity".  Mr Richards submitted that the First-
      tier  Tribunal  had  well  in  mind  the  particularly  serious  crime
      committed by the defendant.  He submitted that the  Tribunal  properly
      concluded, given the seriousness of the  appellant's  offending,  that
      the public interest outweighed the competing claims of his family  and
      that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that  his  deportation  was
      proportionate was properly open to the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

  22. The First-tier Tribunal's consideration of Article 8 is at paras 55-61
      as follows:

           "55.  In relation to the appellant's deportation, the  crime  he
                 committed was a very serious form of fraud.   His  sentence
                 was over 4 year's imprisonment.  Under paragraph 398 of the
                 Immigration Rules only in  exceptional  circumstances  will
                 the public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by
                 other factors.

             56. We have taken into consideration the lengthy 5 year  prison
                 sentence imposed on the appellant, the length  of  time  he
                 used a false name and that he had  been  removed  from  the
                 United  Kingdom  in  1990,  the  appellant's  children  are
                 British and are innocent victims of their  parents'  crime,
                 he is now separated from his wife.

             57. We take into  consideration  section  55  of  the  Borders,
                 Citizenship & Immigration Act 2009 where it is the duty  to
                 safeguard the welfare of the children.  The interest of the
                 children must be a primary  consideration  in  making  this
                 decision.  The Court of  Appeal  in  SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
                 [2013] EWCA Civ 550 held that in previous  cases  in  which
                 potential deportees raised a claim under  Article  8  which
                 relied on the best  interest  of  the  child,  insufficient
                 attention had been paid  to  the  weight  attached  to  the
                 policy of deporting foreign  criminals  by  virtue  of  its
                 origin in primary legislation.   Law  LJ  said  that  "...I
                 think with respect, that insufficient  attention  has  been
                 paid to the weight to be attached, by virtue of its  origin
                 in primary legislation, to the policy of deporting  foreign
                 criminals" and  the  reference  to  the  'decision  maker's
                 discretion'.  The 'decision-maker' in the  context  clearly
                 means the Secretary of State.

             58. The appellant and his wife are separated and  the  children
                 will continue to live with their mother and be educated  in
                 this country.

             59. We take into consideration the evidence  submitted  by  the
                 appellant's children, the appellant's wife, the appellant's
                 sister in law and the other evidence  in  relation  to  the
                 children.   The  appellant  spoke  of  his  love  for   the
                 children, and that  is  undeniable.   However  we  have  to
                 balance the appellant's criminal activity with that of  his
                 family life.  We find that the appellant can keep in  touch
                 with his children via skype and also they can visit him  in
                 Ecuador.  The appellant has been apart from his family  for
                 sometime, he is separated from his  wife.   We  accept  the
                 children have visited him in prison but they have got  used
                 to not having a father around on a  daily  basis.   If  the
                 appellant returned to Ecuador the children  can  visit  him
                 there.

             60. We have taken  into  consideration  the  appellant's  OASys
                 report and the testimonials produced.  We have carried  out
                 a balancing exercise as to proportionality.  We  have  also
                 taken into consideration the criteria set out in Uner v The
                 Netherlands [20-6] (App No 46410/99).

             61. We find there is no breach of  Article  8.   The  appellant
                 will be returning to Ecuador where he was  brought  up  and
                 went to university.  He has a brother and sister in Ecuador
                 and we are satisfied  he  will  easily  adapt  to  live  in
                 Ecuador.   We  find  that   any   interference   with   the
                 appellant's family and private life is proportionate to the
                 legitimate aims of applying the immigration policy  of  the
                 United Kingdom."

  23. Whilst we accept that the First-tier Tribunal stated that it had taken
      into account all the evidence submitted in relation to the appellant's
      children and family (at para 59), it is far from clear that the First-
      tier Tribunal in fact took into account the  evidence  concerning  the
      best interests of the appellant's children, in particular that of  his
      younger daughter, "NJ".  It is not a matter of  dispute  that  shortly
      before the hearing, "NJ" attempted to  commit  suicide  by  taking  an
      overdose of Paracetamol tablets whilst at school.  The  background  to
      this is fully set out in a GP's letter dated 21 November  2013.   That
      letter concludes as follows:

           "It seems to me highly likely that this dangerous  overdose  has
           been  precipitated  by  the  distress  surrounding  the   events
           involving ["NJ's"] father, and particularly the  looming  threat
           of her being separated from him were he to be deported.  In this
           regard, I support the argument that it would be in this  child's
           best interest for her father to remain."

  24. Further supporting evidence is found in the  letter  from  the  School
      Counsellor dated 19 November  2013  (at  pages  50-51  of  the  appeal
      bundle).  This refers to "NJ" as being "extremely  anxious,  depressed
      and vulnerable".  It  further  relates  the  writer's  view  that  the
      prospect of the  appellant's  deportation  was  having  a  distressing
      effect - "showing signs of separation anxiety" - upon "NJ".

  25. We accept Ms Harrington's  submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      cannot be said to have taken this evidence into account (or indeed the
      evidence concerning the other children) simply by stating that it  has
      done so in para 59.  No reference is made to this evidence and, so far
      as we were shown by the representatives, the only  reference  to  "NJ"
      taking the overdose is to that simple fact in para 29.  We  cannot  be
      confident that the First-tier Tribunal took  this  important  evidence
      into account and, as it was required to do, grapple with it as part of
      its assessment of proportionality.

  26. This is a case where the best interests of the  appellant's  children,
      in particular "NJ" are  a  significant  part  of  the  proportionality
      assessment.  Despite the reference to s.55 of the 2009 Act and  to  SS
      (Nigeria) in para  57,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  any
      findings as to the best interests  of  the  appellant's  children,  in
      particular "NJ".

  27. In failing to take into account the important evidence in relation  to
      the children (in particular "NJ") and  in  failing  to  make  relevant
      factual findings including as to the best interests of  the  children,
      the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

  28. Despite the seriousness of the appellant's offending, this  is  not  a
      case in which we take the view that the First-tier Tribunal could only
      have reached one decision, namely that whatever the best interests  of
      the  children  they  were  outweighed  by  the  seriousness   of   the
      appellant's offending.

  29. In our judgement, these errors fatally flaw the First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision to dismiss the appeal under Article 8.  It is not  necessary,
      therefore, to express any view on the remaining submissions made by Ms
      Harrington.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  cannot  stand  in
      relation to Article 8 and we set it aside.

Decision

  30. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss
      the appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error of law  and
      is set aside.

  31. However, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's
      appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Article
      3 of the ECHR stands.

  32. Following discussion at the conclusion of  the  hearing  at  which  we
      indicated our decision in respect of the error of law, we concluded it
      appropriate to retain the appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
      remake the decision in respect of Article 8.

  33. It was agreed by both representatives that it would be appropriate for
      us to consider any updating evidence, in particular in relation to the
      appellant's children.  We noted that a mental  health  assessment  had
      been requested by "NJ's" consultant paediatrician (see  letter  of  18
      November 2013) and that that evidence would assist us in reaching  our
      decision in respect of Article 8.



                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
