
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01568/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th March & 1st May 2014                    |On 02nd May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR kaveh heshmati
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Thomas (instructed by Kesar & Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (12/03/201) & Ms A Everett (01/05/2014)
                    (Senior  Home Office Presenting Officers)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State which
    first came before me on 12th March 2014. For the sake of continuity and
    clarity I shall continue to refer to Mr Heshmati as the  Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. As a result of directions issued by the Principal Resident  Judge,  the
    hearing on 12th March 2014 was confined to whether or  not  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  had made an error of law in  its  determination  of  the
    appeal and if so whether and to what extent the determination should be
    set aside.

 3. The Appellant in this case is a citizen of Iran born on 23rd  September
    1981. He arrived in the UK on 4th March 2004 illegally and made a claim
    for asylum. That claim was refused on 6th April  2004  and  his  appeal
    against that refusal dismissed on 28th June 2004 by  Adjudicator  McKee
    (as he then was). All the Appellant's appeal rights were  exhausted  on
    1st June 2005. However, the Appellant did not leave. In June  2008  the
    Appellant claimed that he travelled to Ireland on a number of occasions
    in order to make a fresh claim to asylum. He was eventually detained in
    Ireland and transferred back to the UK under the Dublin  Convention  on
    8th July 2008.

 4. On 18th June 2009 the Appellant was convicted at Isleworth Crown  Court
    of possessing a false document and sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.
    The document in question was a forged Cypriot passport in the  name  of
    another person but containing his photograph. Notice of  liability  for
    deportation was served on the Appellant  on  15th  July  2009.  Further
    representations were submitted on his behalf on 10th November 2011  and
    a decision to deport him was taken on 19th July 2013. He  claimed  that
    to deport him to Iran would be a breach of the Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

 5. Suffice it to say that the grounds upon which he had initially  claimed
    asylum and in respect of which he lost his  appeal  before  Adjudicator
    McKee were found to have been a fabrication. Indeed, Adjudicator  McKee
    found there to be no serious possibility of any material  part  of  his
    story being true.

 6. His current claim for asylum is  based  upon  firstly,  his  sur  place
    activities in the UK and secondly, the fact that he has a tattoo of the
    Royal emblem of the Shah on his left shoulder/upper arm.  He  confirmed
    that the tattoo was done in the UK.

 7. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Clarke
    sitting with a non legal member Mr P Bompas, it made findings that  the
    Appellant is not a man to be trusted in  terms  of  his  evidence.  The
    panel concluded that his sur place claim was calculated with a view  to
    him being allowed to remain in the UK; that he had not been politically
    active in Iran before he came to the UK and that  if  he  had  been  it
    would have formed part of his original claim. His  original  claim  had
    been found to be totally false. The Tribunal did not believe he held  a
    genuine allegiance to the Shah's regime and found that  he  was  merely
    using it as a  means  to  remain  in  the  UK.  However,  the  Tribunal
    acknowledged  that  the  motivation  for  sur  place   activities   was
    irrelevant and what was important was whether  those  activities  would
    place an Appellant at risk on return. The Tribunal referred to the case
    of BA (demonstrators in Britain-risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT  36
    (IAC) and was provided with YouTube footage of the Appellant at a  pro-
    Shah demonstration in London. The Tribunal  made no  finding  that  the
    Appellant had in fact come to the attention of the authorities in  Iran
    but then in paragraph 28 found that even a cursory  body  search  would
    reveal his tattoo. They were uncertain of the significance of  the  sun
    on the tattoo but found that the fact that he had the tattoo would mean
    that enquiries would be made  and  the  YouTube  footage  studied  more
    closely and thus the Appellant would be at risk.

 8. In seeking permission to appeal the Secretary of  State  asserted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had failed to give any or any  adequate  reason
    for findings on a material matter in particular that he would  come  to
    the attention of the authorities and the Secretary  of  State  asserted
    that the tattoo was not determinative.

 9. At the hearing on 12th March 2013, having heard submissions  from  both
    representatives, I found that paragraph 28 of the determination,  being
    the paragraph in which the First-tier Tribunal  decided  to  allow  the
    appeal to be inadequately reasoned. The First-tier  Tribunal's  finding
    that his credibility was non-existent was sustainable  but  there  were
    inadequate findings to support the conclusion that he would be at risk.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not explain why he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return. I therefore set aside the determination in  that  respect  only
    and adjourned the case for a resumed hearing when the sole issue was to
    be whether or not the tattoo would put him  at  risk  and  whether  his
    activities as recorded on the YouTube video would come to the attention
    of the authorities and thus put him at risk.

10. On 1st May 2014, Ms Everett was at a disadvantage in that she had  been
    a late replacement for the original presenting officer and was  without
    a file or papers. However, having been provided with a Respondent's and
    Appellant's bundle and given time to prepare she expressed herself in a
    position to proceed. It was agreed that the hearing should  proceed  by
    way of  submissions  only  subject  to  our  viewing  the  DVD  of  the
    demonstration in question and examining  the  Appellant's  tattoo,  the
    photograph in the bundle being almost illegible.

11. The DVD was played. It was accepted on a previous  occasion  that  this
    was displayed on You Tube. It clearly showed a  pro-Shah  demonstration
    in the UK. A large number of people were waving the  imperial  flag  of
    Iran from prior to  the  1979  revolution  and  others,  including  the
    Appellant were holding aloft pictures of the Shah. They  were  chanting
    "bless the Shah"; "death to  the  Republic  of  Iran";  "death  to  the
    Supreme Leadership" and "Death to Khomeini". The Appellant  is  clearly
    visible wearing a white suit holding a picture of the  Shah  aloft  and
    joining in with the chanting.

12. The Appellant has a large tattoo on his left upper  arm/shoulder  which
    is an accurate representation of the lion holding a sword  with  a  sun
    behind as displayed on the pre-1979 imperial flag. Since that time  the
    emblem of the Persian coat of arms has been replaced  with  a  stylised
    script of the Arabic word "Allah".

13. On behalf of the Secretary of State Ms Everett submitted that there  is
    no evidence that the Appellant  has  been  identified  by  the  Iranian
    authorities from the YouTube footage and no evidence  that  the  tattoo
    would be seen on his return to Iran. She acknowledged however that  the
    tattoo itself was likely to be incendiary in Iran.

14.  I agree that if the Appellant is dressed on return as he  was  dressed
    in court, namely with a suit and tie,  than  the  tattoo  will  not  be
    visible. If he has not been previously  identified,  and  there  is  no
    evidence that he has, given infrequent  attendance  at  demonstrations,
    there is no reason why he should be searched upon  arrival.  Thereafter
    however it is reasonably likely that the tattoo will be  seen  and  its
    existence come to the attention of the authorities.  The nature of  the
    tattoo, being a clear symbol of the Shah's regime is highly  likely  to
    be regarded as indicative of support for an anti-regime group and  will
    lead to arrest, detention and it  is  reasonably  likely,  persecution.
    Bearing in mind the low standard of proof in asylum cases I  find  that
    the existence of the tattoo, particularly together with  the  You  Tube
    Footage is enough to make the Appellant at risk on return.   Whilst  it
    may well be that the tattoo and his attendance  at  the  demonstrations
    are no indication of his actual political views, and done in a  cynical
    attempt to secure his remaining in the UK; his motives  are  immaterial
    if the result is that he would be at risk and bearing in mind  the  low
    standard of proof, I find that he would.

15. My findings accord with those of the First-tier Tribunal  and  had  the
    First-tier Tribunal given reasons for its conclusions the appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal could have been avoided.

16. While the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed
    in that the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law,  in  re-
    deciding the appeal I allow it on asylum grounds and under Article 3 of
    the ECHR.




Signed                              Date 1st May 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
