
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01068/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                  SARKO [J]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Presenting Officer


                    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fisher, promulgated on 4 September 2014, dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 23  May  2015
    to refuse to revoke a deportation order made against him.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia, born on 2  July  1979.  He  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002.  He met his first wife, and they
    were married on 24 January 2004. He then returned  to  Gambia,  applied
    for a spouse visa  which  was  granted,  and  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom. The couple then had a child, AY, but he later  separated  from
    his wife.

 3. The appellant met his second wife, L, in the United Kingdom,  and  they
    were married in Gambia on 27 March 2007, his marriage to his first wife
    having been dissolved earlier that year.  A  further  spouse  visa  was
    granted and he returned to United  Kingdom,  eventually  being  granted
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  2  July  2009.  One   month   later,
    relationship with his second wife broke down  the  appellant  left  the
    family home.

 4. On 20 July 2010 the appellant was sentenced to 12 months'  imprisonment
    for possessing a class a  controlled  drug  (cocaine)  with  intent  to
    supply. The respondent then made a decision to deport him.  The  appeal
    against that decision  was  dismissed  and  his  appeal  rights  became
    exhausted by 1 August 2012.

 5. Further submissions were made to the respondent which were  treated  as
    an  application  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  subsequently  the
    applicant went to live with his new partner, [WD]; on 13 June 2013 they
    had a child, AM.

 6.  In  addition  to  these  relationships,  the  appellant  also  had   a
    relationship between his first and second  marriages  as  a  result  of
    which a child, JD, was born on 9 August 2006. [WD] also has a child, L,
    from a previous relationship. L has effectively  no  contact  with  her
    biological father.

 7. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal  letter  dated  23  May
    2014. She accepted that the appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with both AY and AM  but  did  not  accept  that  all  the
    requirements of paragraph 399 (a) of the Immigration  Rules  were  met.
    She  also  accepted  that  the  appellant  had   a   genuine   parental
    relationship with L. The respondent accepted that the appellant  has  a
    relationship with [WD] but did not  accept  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399 (b) of the immigration rules  were  met.  Respondent  not
    accept either that there were exceptional circumstances  in  this  case
    such that the deportation order should be revoked.

 8. The appeal came before the first-tier Tribunal on 19 August  2014.  The
    judge heard evidence from the appellant, [WD], and her daughter  L.  It
    also heard submissions from the representatives. Of particular note was
    a submission from Miss Bishop, on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    that since the Immigration Rules were changed in 28 July 2014  the  new
    version of the rules should be applied to the appeal [5]. That position
    had been opposed by Miss Soltani who appeared for the appellant on that
    occasion also.

 9. The judge found that: -

      i) the appeal was to be decided on  the  Immigration  Rules  in  force
         prior to 28 July 2014 [25] but that Part 5A of the 2002 Act  should
         apply;

     ii) it would be unreasonable to expect AY to  relocate  to  Gambia  but
         there was another family member, her mother, who was able  to  care
         for her in the UK and accordingly paragraph 399 (a)  (ii)  (b)  was
         not met [32];

    iii)  it would not be reasonable to expect L to leave the United Kingdom
         and that her mother could care for her [34];

     iv) it would not be reasonable to expect AM to leave the United Kingdom
         and that her mother could care for her [35];

      v) as the requirements immigration rules  were  not  met,  he  had  to
         consider whether there  are  any  exceptional  circumstances  which
         would outweigh the public interest  in  deportation  [36],  finding
         that the appellant's relationships with his  children,  giving  due
         weight to their best interests, involves anything  which  could  be
         termed as exceptional [37]; and, as many potential deportees  would
         be in relationships and have children, and if that  was  sufficient
         to amount to exceptionality, the word would be effectively rendered
         otiose;

     vi) while the sentence passed on the appellant was at the lower end  of
         the scale, the seriousness lies in the fact that he was prepared to
         sell a Class A drug for his own financial  benefit  this  therefore
         being a very serious offence [39];

    vii)  Exception 2 within section 117C of the 2002 was not met [40],  the
         effect on the three children  not  being  unduly  or  unjustifiably
         harsh, the public interest outweighing those of the parties in  the
         appeal [41];

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law: -

      i) in misdirecting himself,  having  found  the  requirements  of  the
         immigration rules were not met, in requiring exceptionality  it  is
         not required by section 117;

     ii) in considering exceptionality before considering section 117  C  of
         the 2002 Act;

    iii) in failing to give reasons for the conclusion that the  deportation
         of the appellant would not be unduly harsh in  its  effect  on  the
         children

11. On 25 November 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted  permission
    stating:

         "I am persuaded that this application demonstrates that the  First-
         tier Judge may have made  an  error  of  law  in  failing  to  give
         adequate reasons for  his  findings  on  material  matters  and  is
         arguably his as to whether the judge was entitled in law  to  reach
         the conclusions that he did for the reasons given"

Did the decision of the first tribunal involve the making  of  an  error  of
law?

12. For the reasons set out below, I  am  satisfied  that  it  did.  It  is
    unfortunate that this appeal was heard in the  short  gap  between  the
    coming into force of section 117C and new immigration rules on 28  July
    2014 and the decision in YM (Uganda) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1292.  As  both
    representatives agreed, the judge  had  a  for  understandable  reasons
    proceeded to determine the appeal on an impermissible basis,  that  is,
    on the basis of the Immigration Rules in place prior to 28  July  2014.
    The question then remains, is  the  decision  sustainable,  this  error
    notwithstanding?

13. There are significant differences  between  the  two  versions  of  the
    rules, in particular those relating to the exceptions which  may  apply
    in the  case  of  an  appellant's  children.  These  provisions  mirror
    exception 2 within section 117C

14. The correct approach, as the Court of Appeal has  made  clear,  was  to
    have considered the position under the Immigration Rules, in particular
    paragraph 399 (a) which would have required an  assessment  of  whether
    the effect on the children of the appellant's  deportation  would  have
    been unduly harsh.  He should then have gone on to consider whether, if
    those  exceptions  were  not   met,   there   were   "very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399".

15. As is clear from MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450, the assessment
    of whether something is unduly harsh required regard to be had  to  all
    the circumstances including the  criminal's  immigration  and  criminal
    history.  Assistance as to how to assess very compelling  circumstances
    as set out in paragraph 398, and section  117C  (6),  is  given  in  NA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662:

         "33.  Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

         34.  The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy  Prosecutor  of  the
             Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013] 1  AC  338  at  [145].
             Nevertheless, it is a consequence  of  criminal  conduct  that
             offenders may be separated from their children for many years,
             contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  those  children.   The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace of family life. That is not usually a sufficiently
             compelling circumstance to outweigh the high  public  interest
             in deporting foreign criminals. As  Rafferty  LJ  observed  in
             Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  CT  (Vietnam)
             [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:

                  "Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the  respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances  which  outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation."

         35.  The Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) that  paras.  398  to
             399A of the 2012 rules constituted a complete code.  The  same
             is true of the sections 117A-117D of the  2002  Act,  read  in
             conjunction with paras. 398 to 399A of  the  2014  rules.  The
             scheme of the Act and the rules together provide the following
             structure for deciding whether a foreign criminal  can  resist
             deportation on Article 8 grounds.

         36.  In relation to a medium offender, first see whether  he  falls
             within Exception 1 or  Exception  2.  If  he  does,  then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds. If he does not, then the next  stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  "sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". If there are, then the Article 8  claim  succeeds.  If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim fails. As was the case
             under the 2012 rules (as explained in MF (Nigeria)), there  is
             no room for a general Article 8 evaluation  outside  the  2014
             rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act."

16. While the judge did at [41] consider whether the effect on the children
    would be unduly harsh, it is unclear on  what  basis  he  reached  that
    finding. It appears from the structure of his  determination,  that  he
    considered this  only  in  the  context  of  whether,  given  that  the
    exceptions set out in the Immigration Rules were  not  met,  there  was
    anything exceptional to outweigh the public interest. That is  material
    given that the judge directed himself in accordance with  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1192 In which the court of appeal held:

         "40. Does it follow that the new  rules  have  effected  no  change
         other than to spell  out  the  circumstances  in  which  a  foreign
         criminal's claim that deportation would breach his article 8 rights
         will succeed? At this point,  it  is  necessary  to  focus  on  the
         statement that it will only be "in exceptional  circumstances  that
         the public interest in deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors". Ms Giovannetti submits that the reference to  exceptional
         circumstances serves  the  purpose  of  emphasising  that,  in  the
         balancing exercise, great weight should  be  given  to  the  public
         interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals  who  do  not   satisfy
         paragraphs 398 and 399 or 399A. It is only exceptionally that  such
         foreign criminals will succeed in showing that their  rights  under
         article 8.1 trump the public interest in their deportation.

         41. We accept this submission...:

17. The implication of this is that the public interest in deporting  those
    who do  not  fall  within  the  exceptions  is  higher.   There  is  no
    indication that the judge did not follow MF (Nigeria)  and  it  follows
    that he assessed the public  interest  as  higher  when  proceeding  to
    consider the  next  state  of  his  assessment.  It  follows  that  his
    assessment that the effect on the children would not  be  unduly  harsh
    took too high an assessment of the public interest.  Further, it is not
    entirely clear how he reached the conclusion at [41].

18. Accordingly, I consider that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
    not sustainable and I set it aside. Given the lapse of time  since  the
    previous hearing and the changes in circumstances  in  respect  of  the
    children, I consider that the matter must be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all issues.




    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on
    all issues. The hearing must not be before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fisher


Signed                                  Date:  19 October 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


