

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01648/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |          Decision and Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                           |
|On 19th January 2016                      |          On 20th January 2016        |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               SELIM MACASTENA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Gill QC and Mr N Ahluwalia, counsel, instructed
                    by Bankfield Heath solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. First Tier Tribunal (FtT) judge S  J  Clarke  allowed  Mr  Macastena's
      appeal  under  regulation  26  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 ("EEA Regulations") against a deportation order  made
      pursuant to regulation 19(3)(b)of the EEA  Regulations.  Judge  Clarke
      found that Mr Macastena had acquired permanent residency and was  thus
      entitled to the higher level  of  protection  afforded  by  regulation
      21(3) of the EEA Regulations namely whether there are serious  grounds
      of public policy or public security which necessitate his deportation.
      Judge Clarke then proceeded to consider the facts of the  offence  and
      whether there was a genuine and  present  threat  to  members  of  the
      public from Mr Macastena.


   2. Mr Macastena was convicted on 30th August 2013 of  wounding/inflicting
      grievous bodily harm, s20 Offences against the Person Act  1861  on  a
      plea of not guilty. He was sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.  He  did
      not appeal against conviction or sentence. He had no prior convictions
      and had no convictions since that conviction.


   3. The SSHD was granted permission to appeal on the  basis  that  it  was
      arguable that Judge Clarke had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
      finding that Mr Macastena had acquired a permanent right of residence;
      as to the nature of his claimed relationships and the  impact  of  his
      period of imprisonment on the period of  lawful  residence.  The  SSHD
      also relied upon, and was granted permission  upon,  a  second  ground
      namely that the judge had erred in the  assessment  of  public  policy
      which itself was infected by the finding of  the  judge  that  he  was
      entitled to the higher level of protection.


   4. Mr Macastena, a Kosovan national date of birth 22nd June 1982  arrived
      unlawfully in the UK in 2005. He did not seek to regularise  his  stay
      and subsequently left the UK on 4th August 2008.


   5. On 30th July 2008 he signed a disclaimer  in  the  case  of  Voluntary
      Departure having been notified that he was liable to be  removed  from
      the UK under Immigration Powers.  By  letter  dated  29th  July  2008,
      through his then solicitors, he notified UK Immigration  Service  that
      he wished to return  to  Kosovo  on  4th  August  2008  "and  make  an
      application for entry Clearance to the UK to join his partner,  Emilia
      Aniela Leszczynska, a Polish National exercising  treaty  Rights".  He
      duly left the UK. On 6th August 2008 he  married  Ms  Leszczynska.  He
      applied for entry clearance; in the application for entry clearance he
      stated, inter alia, that he had met Ms Leszczynska on 10th July  2007,
      that  their  relationship  commenced  three  days  later;  that  their
      marriage was due to take place on 6th August 2008 and  that  they  had
      been living together since 14th September 2007. In a  covering  letter
      dated 11th August 2008 from his then solicitors, Mr Macastena said, he
      would be making an application  "for  an  entry  Clearance  (otherwise
      known as EEA Family Permit) as a Family Member of an EEA national  who
      is exercising Treaty Right". That covering letter also refers  to  the
      information set out in the application form as regards when  they  met
      and when they started living together and when they were intending  to
      marry. The  covering  letter  from  the  solicitors'  states  that  Mr
      Macastena and Ms Leszczynska meet the requirements  of  paragraph  281
      and therefore he "MUST be granted an EEA Family permit".


   6. Mr Macastena was issued with an EEA Family Permit as a  family  member
      of an EEA national valid for 6 months and on  5th  September  2008  he
      entered the UK. On 20th  or  24th  February  2009  he  applied  for  a
      Residence Card. That application  was  acknowledged  by  the  UKBA  by
      letter dated 21st April 2009. On 23rd September  2009  he  was  issued
      with a Residence Card valid until 23rd September 2014.  On 1st  August
      2012 he applied for a new Residence Card on the grounds  that  he  was
      divorced from his EEA spouse. He was issued with a new Residence  Card
      on 3rd May 2013 as a person who had  retained  a  right  of  residence
      under the EEA Regulations valid until 3rd May 2018.


   7. On 24th October 2013 Mr Macastena was notified  of  his  liability  to
      deportation. He was sent an EEA questionnaire which was replied to  in
      the form of a letter from his  then  solicitors  (different  to  those
      which he had instructed earlier but not his current solicitors)  dated
      11th November 2013. In that he stated, inter alia,


             "...he  came  to  the  UK  in  September  2008  and  has  been
             exercising EU  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
             then....
             ...it should be noted that Mr Macastena  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom in 2008 as a family member of a EEA  citizen.  He  has
             remained in the United Kingdom for the  last  five  years.  Mr
             Macastena' offence was serious  but  he  himself  he  was  not
             involved in physical injury to others. Mr Macastena  has  been
             in the United  Kingdom  for  over  five  years  and  enjoys  a
             "permanent right of residence" in the United Kingdom..."


   8. In a witness statement dated 13th July 2014 and submitted to the  UKBA
      by his current solicitors, Mr Macastena stated


             "2  ...I  met  my  wife  2007  shortly  after  and  started  a
             relationship. My wife is a Polish national and was living  and
             working in the UK. I sought legal advice on our  position  and
             we were advised that I was entitled to remain in the UK as her
             unmarried partner as long as she was exercising Treaty Rights.
             We decided that we wanted to marry however and so we  returned
             together to Kosovo together and married on August 2008.
             3.. I returned  to  the  UK  on  5/9/2008  on  an  EEA  family
             permit.....
             4. In around 2011, my  wife  and  I  separated.  We  were  not
             getting on particularly well anymore and we  decided  to  make
             our separation permanent. We divorced in 2012. At the time  of
             our separation I met my current girlfriend...
             ....
             6....Since I separated from my wife, I obtained permission  to
             remain in the UK under the  EEA  Regulations  as  I  had  been
             married for over three years and resided with my wife  in  the
             UK throughout our relationship. Due to the length  of  time  I
             have spent in  the  UK  under  the  EEA  regulations,  I  have
             acquired a permanent right of residence here.
             ...."


   9. In the reasons for deportation letter dated 11th August 2014 the  UKBA
      acknowledges receipt of the letter and enclosures from the  solicitors
      dated 11 November 2013, 16th July 2014 and 17th July  2014;  considers
      Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations; states  that  residence  in  the
      context of the EEA Regulations  means  "lawful  residence  within  the
      community. It is not considered that time spent in prison  constitutes
      residence for the purpose of the EEA Regulations". In the reasons  for
      deportation letter the UKBA states


             "17. Although you claim to have first arrived in the UK in
             2005, you have provided no evidence to substantiate your
             claims. Furthermore, as you claim to have entered the UK as a
             family member of a European Citizen on 5th September 2008, it
             is only your period of residence from that date that can be
             assessed for the purpose of the 2006 EEA Regulations. You
             stated that you have acquired a permanent right to reside in
             the UK due to the length of time you spent in the UK under the
             EEA Regulations. A point your previous representatives
             reiterated in their letter of 11th November 2013. It is noted
             that you have been incarcerated since 30th August 2013 when
             you were sentenced for your current offence. Time spent in
             custody is not considered as lawful residence within the
             community for the purpose of the EEA Regulations. Your
             residence here initially as the family member of an EEA
             national and subsequently as an individual who had retained a
             right of residence under the 2006 EEA regulations falls short
             of the pre-requisite 5 years. Therefore it is not accepted
             that you have resided in the UK for a continuous period of 5
             years in accordance with the EEA Regulations.
             18. In light of the information available, it is considered
             that you have not acquired the right of permanent residence in
             the United Kingdom. An EEA national or a family member of n
             EEA national who has not acquired permanent residence in the
             UK may be deported on grounds of public policy or public
             security...."


  10. Before the FtT Mr Macastena submitted that he was, on  any  reasonable
      view given the evidence, in a durable relationship with Ms Leszczynska
      prior to his departure to Kosovo and at least from the  point  of  his
      departure to Kosovo with the express intention of marrying  there.  It
      was submitted that the UKBA decision the subject of the appeal  before
      the FtT was flawed for its failure to give consideration to whether Mr
      Macastena was in fact in a durable relationship  with  Ms  Leszczynska
      prior to his marriage. It was acknowledged by his representatives that
      in such circumstances the SSHD  would  be  required  to  exercise  her
      discretion under regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations but the  fact
      that such discretion was not,  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case,
      exercised does not preclude the FtT from doing so: YB (EEA reg 17(4) -
      proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062.


  11. FtT Judge Clarke concluded:


             "9. It was submitted by Mr Gill  QC  that  the  Appellant  has
             acquired a permanent right  of  residence  and  I  accept  the
             Appellant has provided evidence to substantiate this claim.  I
             accept the Appellant has  shown  that  he  was  in  a  durable
             relationship with his Polish Spouse prior to his  marriage  to
             her. In the supplementary Appellant's Bundle 2 at page 1 there
             is a letter from his former representatives dated 29 July 2008
             to UK Immigration Service London Stansted Airport which states
             that the Appellant entered the UK illegally on 3 July 2005 and
             remained in the UK illegally. He wishes to return  voluntarily
             back to Kosovo on 4 August 2008 and make  an  application  for
             entry clearance to the UK to  join  his  then  partner  Emilia
             Aniela Leszczynska a Polish National exercising treaty  rights
             in the UK.
             10. On page 3 of the same bundle is a  letter  from  the  same
             former representatives dated 11 August  2008  to  the  British
             Embassy  in  Skopje  regarding  his  application  for  an  EEA
             residence card. It records how the EEA national entered the UK
             in May 2006, the parties met on 10 July 2007 and  commenced  a
             relationship shortly after that, and  14  September  2007  the
             couple commenced living together. The couple were  engaged  on
             25 December 2007. They were married on 6 August 2008.
             11. The writer of the letters state that their relationship is
               evidenced by way of photographic evidence together in the  UK
               prior to their wedding, a tenancy agreement in joint names, a
               council tax bill in joint names and utility  bills  in  joint
               names, and the marriage  certificate.  The  application  form
               dated 30 July 2008 was provided which confirms these dates.
             12. I was provided with registration certificate for  the  EEA
               national, the tenancy agreement, various utility  bills,  the
               tenancy agreement showing  both  their  names  and  the  bank
               statements of the EEA national all showing the address of  73
               Beechwood Rise. The bank statements also show  payments  into
               her account from PMP recruitment and I accept  that  she  was
               exercising treaty rights as claimed.
             13.  Therefore  the  Appellant  has  shown  that  he  acquired
               permanent residence...."


  12. The SSHD's grounds assert that the FtT judge failed to  make  reasoned
      findings on when Mr Macastena last entered  the  UK  and  that  having
      entered the UK illegally previously and been convicted  of  a  serious
      offence such lack of reasoned finding amounts to inadequate reasoning.
      Mr Bramble did not actively pursue this line of argument. It is  plain
      from the reasons for the deportation letter that Mr  Macastena's  last
      date of entry is not in dispute; nor can it be  legitimately  disputed
      that he was in the UK at the end of July 2008 when he  was  in  direct
      contact with UKBA. Nor was any point taken by the SSHD with regard  to
      the claimed prior relationship between Mr Macastena and Ms Leszczynska
      - had there been any challenge to their account  it  is  inconceivable
      that he would have been issued with a family permit so soon after  his
      marriage.


  13. Mr Gill accepted that counting  from  the  last  date  of  entry  (5th
      September 2008) the applicant  did  not  have  five  years  continuous
      residence (the de minimis submission made to the FtT was not  made  to
      me) prior to his incarceration. In so far as the SSHD asserts that the
      FtT judge did not have regard to the incarceration in calculating  the
      period of lawful residence, this again was not actively pursued by  Mr
      Bramble - quite  properly  because  nothing  turned  on  that  and  Mr
      Macastena had not been arguing that it did.


  14. The significant ground relied upon by the SSHD  is  that  set  out  in
      paragraph 8 of the grounds which is that the judge does not explain or
      make a clear finding on what basis he  could  have  acquired  5  years
      lawful residence; that it was not clear whether Mr Macastena was in  a
      durable relationship and that the decision was inadequately  reasoned.
      This paragraph of the grounds  is  rather  confused  when  read  as  a
      challenge to the findings of the judge in paragraphs 9 to  12  of  his
      determination as set out  above.  The  judge  plainly  looked  at  the
      evidence before him - the veracity and legitimacy  of  which  was  not
      challenged by the SSHD and  reached  the  clear  conclusion  that  the
      couple had been in a durable relationship  prior  to  their  marriage.
      Although the judge does not give an actual date  it  is  inconceivable
      that he could not have considered them to be in a durable relationship
      since the date they started living together - a finding that was  open
      to him on the evidence before him: a matter (and  evidence  of  which)
      had been before the SSHD since 2008 when Mr Macastena applied  for  an
      EEA family permit and again in  2012  when  he  applied  for  retained
      rights of residence and again in response to a letter  from  the  SSHD
      requesting reasons why he should not be deported. Even if that date is
      not accepted or correct it is inconceivable that the couple could  not
      have been in a durable relationship on 4th  August  2008,  given  they
      married two days later and he  was  issued  with  a  residence  permit
      shortly thereafter.


  15. It is Acte Clair that a  residence  permit/card  is  not  required  to
      enable a person to remain in the UK on the basis of  EEA  rights.  The
      issue of such a permit/card is declaratory of such rights. Although Mr
      Macastena entered the UK unlawfully and remained unlawfully,  when  he
      entered into a durable relationship with Ms Leszczynska he  ceased  to
      be unlawfully in the UK.


  16. There does remain the issue of whether, in the  purported  absence  of
      the  exercise  of  discretion  by  the  SSHD  Mr  Macastena  could  be
      considered to be in a durable relationship such that he was no  longer
      unlawfully in the UK and was thus accruing lawful  residence  for  the
      purposes of the EEA Regulations. It is plain  that  the  claim  by  Mr
      Macastena  that  he  had  been  in  a  durable  relationship  with  Ms
      Leszczynska prior to leaving the UK on 4th August 2008 was before  the
      SSHD both at the time the application for a residence permit was  made
      following the couple's marriage  and subsequently. In her reasons  for
      deportation letter dated 11th August 2014 the SSHD  implicitly  refers
      to his unlawful residence in the  UK,  considers  what  is  implicitly
      accepted as his lawful residence in the UK (paragraph 17) but fails to
      provide reasons why his previous  unlawful  entry  to  the  UK  should
      result in the implicit refusal of recognition of his entitlement to be
      in the UK as a result of his durable relationship. Although there  has
      been  no  express  consideration  by  the  SSHD  of  her  exercise  of
      discretion under regulation 17(4) it is plain that she could not  have
      reached her decision as to whether Mr Macastena had acquired permanent
      residence  upon  his  incarceration  without  having  considered   the
      evidence before her as to his acquisition of residence  permits/cards.
      That she did not exercise her discretion in his favour is implicit  in
      the decision to consider he had lawful residence  in  accordance  with
      the EEA Regulations only from 5th September 2008. As is made clear  in
      [38] of YB the Tribunal is  entitled  and  required  to  consider  for
      itself the lawfulness of the exercise of discretion.


  17. Judge Clarke plainly had  evidence  before  him  which  supported  and
      justified the account given by Mr Macastena that he was in  a  durable
      relationship with Ms Leszczynska prior to their marriage. Absence from
      the UK for a month does not  break  that  required  continuity  -  see
      regulation 3 of the EEA Regulations. Although the  decision  of  Judge
      Clarke could perhaps  have  referred  more  specifically  to  the  EEA
      Regulations and to YB when reaching his decision, and to  the  reasons
      for deportation letter of the SSHD, it is plain from a proper  reading
      of the decision that he properly considered the  evidence  before  him
      and reached conclusions  that  were  reasonable  and  sustainably  and
      lawfully open to him.


  18. There is no error of law in the finding  by  the  FtT  judge  that  Mr
      Macastena was in a durable relationship prior  to  his  entry  on  4th
      September 2008 and it is inconceivable that  that  relationship  could
      not have been durable prior to their  marriage  on  6th  August  2008.
      Accordingly Mr Macastena has acquired a permanent right  of  residence
      and is entitled to the higher level of protection as  found  by  Judge
      Clarke.


  19. In so far as the  second  ground  upon  which  the  SSHD  was  granted
      permission the assertion that the decision was infected by the finding
      as to permanent residence falls away. The remaining ground relies upon
      an asserted failure on the part of the FtT judge to factor in and take
      account of the fact that Mr Macastena was  tried  as  a  co-defendant;
      that he appears to have brothers in the UK and there was no assessment
      of his contact with those individuals, that although he may have a low
      risk of re-offending there is an elevated risk of him causing  serious
      harm if he does so  offend;  that  current  good  behaviour  had  been
      achieved whilst on licence; he had been unlawfully in the  UK  between
      2005 and 2008 and thus this should have been considered and  that  his
      stable family and employment circumstances were the  same  factors  in
      place at the time of the instigation of the offence.


  20. Although permission was granted on this ground, it is in  fact  little
      more than a disagreement with the findings of the  judge.  The  ground
      fails to consider the appropriate test under the  EEA  Regulations,  a
      test which the FtT judge considered and applied to the evidence before
      him taking fully into account  inter  alia,  the  seriousness  of  the
      offence,  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks,  the  social  worker  and
      probation officer reports, the  OASys  report,  the  sentencing  plan,
      compliance and  letters  from  prison  officers.  The  judge  properly
      directed himself to the relevant test of whether Mr  Macastena  was  a
      genuine and present  threat  to  the  public.  Although  there  is  no
      specific consideration of Mr Macastena's contact with his  brother  or
      other individuals or that his current good behaviour has  been  whilst
      he is on licence or that he was in  a  stable  family  and  employment
      environment at the date of the commission of the  offence,  the  judge
      considered appropriately whether  there  was  a  genuine  and  present
      threat. There is no requirement to set out each  and  every  piece  of
      evidence or submission  to  which  he  was  referred.  The  judge  has
      illustrated in his decision that he has fully considered the whole  of
      the evidence and the account in reaching  his  decision.  The  judge's
      findings and conclusion were open to him on the evidence  before  him.
      There is no error of law.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision of the FtT; the decision stands  namely
    the appeal against the decision to deport him under the EEA Regulations
    is allowed.


                                    Date 20th January 2016
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
