
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01961/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2014                                |On 22nd may 2014             |
|Prepared 13 May 2014                          |                             |


                                   Before

            LORD BANNATYNE SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ZYDRUNAS JURASAUSKAS

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Claire, of Counsel instructed by Messrs J M
Wilson


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler  and
    Sir Jeffery  James  KBE  CMG  (lay  member))  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 10 December 2013  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Zydrunas
    Jurasauskas against a decision of the Secretary of  State  made  on  16
    September 2013 to make a deportation order against him pursuant to  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant  before  us  we  will,
    for ease of reference, refer to her as the respondent as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly, we will refer to  Mr
    Zydrunas Jurasauskas as the appellant as he was the  appellant  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania born on 10 December  1987.   He
    arrived in Britain in June 2006 joining  his  mother  who  was  working
    here.  He started working in July 2006 at the poultry factory where his
    mother  was  working  -  his  employment  being  through   Prime   Time
    Recruitment at Tulip Ltd in Tipton.  There was in 2007  a  gap  in  his
    employment before in July 2008 he started working for Spice Hawk  Steel
    Sections.

4.   On 14 February 2013 he was convicted on pleas of guilty of  two  counts
    of possession of class A drugs (heroin and crack cocaine)  with  intent
    to supply and was sentenced to  twenty  months'  imprisonment  on  each
    count.

5.   Thereafter the decision to deport was made.

6.   In their determination the Tribunal set out the relevant parts  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 namely Regulations 15,  19  and  21.
    They noted  the  evidence  before  them  and  set  out  at  length  the
    sentencing remarks of the judge.

7.   They found  that  the  appellant  was  a  qualified  person  under  the
    Regulations from his arrival in June 2006 until  April  2007  and  from
    July 2008 onwards.  Taking those  dates  and  noting  that  the  period
    beginning on 21 February 2013 when he was first detained could  not  be
    relied on, they  found that the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  the
    higher level of protection afforded by Regulation  21(3)  to  a  person
    with a permanent right of residence.

8.   They then turned to the factors that are set out  in  Regulation  21(5)
    and (6).

9.   Although there was no OASys Report before them they noted the  National
    Offender Management System Report which referred to  an  OASys  Report,
    completed on 18 February 2013,  which had  assessed  the  appellant  as
    presenting a low likelihood of reconviction and a  low  level  risk  of
    serious harm.

10.  The Tribunal  considered  the Presenting Officer's submission  that  as
    the appellant had had a drug problem prior to his arrest and  had  been
    unable to address it and that therefore, although he was undertaking  a
    detoxification programme in prison where he would have an incentive  to
    follow the course,  it should be assumed that he would  resume  contact
    with the people with whom he had been  previously  associated  and,  in
    effect, that therefore the appellant would be unable  to  remain  drugs
    free.  The Tribunal stated that those submissions  were  not  accepted.
    They placed weight on the offender manager report stating that:-

         "In our  judgment,  considerable  weight  must  be  placed  on  the
         professional opinion of  an  offender  manager  with  training  and
         expertise in the assessment of the risk reoffending.  We regard the
         appellant's  completion  of   the   detoxification   programme   as
         significant, particularly in the light of the appellant's  evidence
         that it had been difficult  for  him.   We  found  the  appellant's
         evidence that he intended not to take drugs on release from  prison
         to be persuasive.  It is consistent with  oral  evidence  from  his
         sister who told the Tribunal  that  the  appellant's  attitude  and
         behaviour had changed since his imprisonment and that  he  was  now
         remorseful."

11.  The Tribunal  then  went  on  to  note  other  relevant  factors  which
    included the fact that the appellant had the support of his mother with
    whom he had lived before his conviction and with whom he would be  able
    to live on release and  who had secure accommodation and  that  he  had
    employment to which he could return, the company  having  confirmed  by
    letter that his employment remained open to him.  They pointed out that
    the appellant had demonstrated a good employment record for  more  than
    four years prior to his conviction and had  demonstrated  his  wish  to
    return to work.

12.  At paragraph 24 they wrote:-

         "We must also take into account the support to which the  appellant
         will be entitled and the supervision which he will be  required  to
         accept under the terms of his licence for a period of ten months if
         he is released on the earliest possible  date.   We  consider  that
         this and the other factors mentioned  above  are  relevant  to  the
         question of rehabilitation.  In this respect the  Tribunal  has  to
         consider the interests of the European  Union  in  general:  see  R
         (Essa) v Upper Tribunal and another [2012] EWCA Civ 1718.   If  the
         appellant were deported to Lithuania he  would  not,  we  find,  be
         homeless because he has extended family including grandparents with
         whom he has previously stayed but he would  not  benefit  from  the
         assistance of an offender manager nor would  he  be  as  likely  to
         obtain employment.  Although no direct evidence on this  point  was
         adduced, the specific example of family migration displayed by  the
         appellant's mother and  later  the  appellant  and  his  sister  is
         indicative of the relative ease of obtaining employment in  the  UK
         in comparison with Lithuania.  The appellant gave evidence  through
         an interpreter as was his entitlement but he  demonstrated  a  good
         understanding of English, spontaneously answering some questions in
         English.  His good work record and his ability  to  communicate  in
         English are also favourable factors which point to a  finding  that
         the prospects of rehabilitation are  greater  in  the  UK  than  in
         Lithuania."

13.  They concluded in paragraph 26 by stating:-

         "Drawing these threads together, we conclude that  the  appellant's
         conduct does not represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
         society.  Taking account of the  NOMS  risk  assessment,  which  we
         accept, the level of the appellant's integration in the UK and  his
         prospects of rehabilitation we conclude that the decision does  not
         comply with the principle of proportionality.   For  these  reasons
         the appeal on EEA grounds must succeed and it is not necessary  for
         us to consider Article 8 of the European Convention."

14.  The Secretary of State appealed.  The grounds of  appeal  first  argued
    that the Tribunal had misdirected themselves in  consideration  of  the
    issue of rehabilitation, stating that  the  appellant  would  have  the
    support of extended family members in Lithuania and arguing that he had
    not shown that there were no rehabilitative options  available  to  him
    there and therefore the findings of paragraph 24  were  not  adequately
    reasoned.  Secondly the grounds stated that the  Tribunal  should  have
    considered  the  relevance  of  rehabilitation  in  relation   to   the
    appellant's  level  of  integration  with  society  in  Britain.   They
    submitted that the relevant test was whether or not the  appellant  was
    "genuinely integrated" into society in Britain and argued that  it  was
    relevant that the appellant had only been considered to be afforded the
    lowest level of protection in relation  to  deportation.  Moreover,  he
    would retain his association with Lithuania by virtue of his  usage  of
    the language and through family ties.

15.  They argued that his integration was hampered by his criminality  which
    indicated that he had failed to integrate with the societal  values  of
    the host country.  They referred to the opinion of Advocate General Bot
    in Onuekwere v SSHD case C-378/12 and stated  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to establish a genuine level of integration.

16.  At the hearing of the appeal before us Mr Avery having  emphasised  the
    seriousness of the appellant's crime and the sentence he  had  received
    argued that in the  determination  the  Tribunal  had  erred  in  their
    conclusion that the appellant was unlikely to  take  drugs  on  release
    from prison and in their conclusion that the  appellant's  conduct  did
    not represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interest of society.

17.  He stated that a key factor was that the  appellant  had  not  obtained
    permanent residence and that criminality was a factor  which  militated
    against a conclusion  that  an  appellant  was  integrated.   He  quite
    properly pointed out that the advocate general's opinion  in  Onuekwere
    had been superseded  by  the  judgment,  which  he  placed  before  us,
    arguing that it showed that a prison sentence undermined the  level  of
    integration of an appellant and that this was a factor to be taken into
    account.

18.  He accepted that  the  finding  that  there  was  a  low  risk  of  the
    appellant reoffending was not challenged.

19.  Mr Claire first attempted to argue that the appellant should have  been
    entitled to permanent residence here and therefore a  higher  level  of
    protection.  We pointed out that  that  had  not  been  raised  in  any
    challenge on behalf of the appellant against the determination  nor  in
    any Rule 24 statement and that we were therefore not prepared to accept
    that challenge.  Mr Claire then went on to ask us to take into  account
    a letter from the appellant's offender manager dated 6 May  2014  which
    indicated that he had made good progress and had been  fully  compliant
    with the requirements of his licence since release from  prison  on  20
    December, that he was in full employment and had a strong  work  ethic.
    Of course that document was not before the Tribunal and we stated  that
    we would not take it into account.

20.  Mr Claire asked us to find  that  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  was
    correct and they had properly dealt with the issues  of  rehabilitation
    and correctly found that the appellant did  not  represent  a  genuine,
    present and  sufficiently  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society nor indeed that the  decision  complied  with  the
    principle of proportionality.

Discussion and conclusions
21.  We have concluded that there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.

22.  We consider that the Tribunal properly considered all relevant  factors
    and reached conclusions that were fully open to them.  They  considered
    the NOMS Report regarding the risk of reoffending and  relied  thereon.
    Their conclusions that the appellant's completion of the detoxification
    programme was significant  and  their  acceptance  of  the  appellant's
    assertions that he would not to take drugs on release was fully open to
    them.   They  properly  took  into  account  the   appellant's   family
    circumstances here, the fact that his job was open to him and  that  he
    had a good employment record.

23.  With regard to the issue of  rehabilitation  they  properly  took  into
    account the relevant judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Essa  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1718 and were entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant  was
    properly integrated into  this  country.   Their  conclusion  that  the
    prospects of rehabilitation were greater in Britain than Lithuania  was
    again open to them.

24.  The judgement in Onuekwere  which was  relied  on  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal really deals with a different matter which is that of whether or
    not a period of imprisonment in  the  host  member  state  of  a  third
    country national should be taken into consideration for the purposes of
    the acquisition of the right of permanent residence and of  whether  or
    not continuity of residence is interrupted by periods of  imprisonment.
    It  is not a judgment which relates to the issue of rehabilitation and,
     indeed,  the Tribunal in making their finding that the  appellant  did
    not have permanent residence in Britain were making  a  decision  which
    reflected the conclusions of the court in Onuekwere.

25.  The reality is that the Tribunal properly  assessed  the  evidence  and
    concluded that there were a number of factors  which  showed  that  the
    appellant, notwithstanding the crime for which he had  been  imprisoned
    was integrated into Britain - his mother and sister lived here, he  has
    a stable home here and a good work record with an employer  who  wished
    to employ him on release.  They were also correct to  place  weight  on
    the fact that the appellant was supported by an offender  manager  here
    and that he had given up the addiction to drugs which had been a strong
    factor in his crime. They were entitled to find that the removal of the
    appellant would not be proportionate.

26.  We consider that the conclusions of the  Tribunal  correctly  reflected
    the relevant law and were based on findings of  fact  which  were  well
    reasoned.

27.  We therefore find that the determination of the Tribunal allowing  this
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  deport  the
    appellant shall  stand.  The  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    therefore dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


