
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01541/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2016                              |On 13 May 2016                |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                    [K T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1982.  He has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    J Robertson dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  of
    3 March 2014 to refuse him asylum under paragraph 336  of  HC  395  (as
    amended) and on 7 May 2014 to make a deportation order against  him  by
    virtue of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant arrived in the UK on 18 July  1999.   He  claimed  asylum
    but was refused in October 1999.  He was granted exceptional  leave  to
    remain for one year.  On 23 March 2000 he was granted indefinite leave
    to remain.  Following a sentence of  six  years'  imprisonment  he  was
    served with a liability to automatic deportation.  On 11 December 2012
    he made a fresh application for asylum which was  refused  on  3 March
    2014 and certified under Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.

3.   In 2003 the  appellant  was  convicted  of  two  counts  of  possessing
    offensive weapons in a public place.   In  2008  he  was  convicted  of
    resisting or obstructing a constable.  In  2011  he  was  convicted  of
    assaults occasioning actual bodily harm, robbery, conspiracy to rob and
    false imprisonment.  He was sentenced to six years' imprisonment.

4.    In  appealing  against  the  respondent's  decision,   the   appellant
    submitted that his removal from the UK would breach  his  rights  under
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

5.   The appellant's evidence is that he returned to Sri Lanka on 9  January
    2006 to get married.  He was arrested at  the  airport  and  questioned
    about his involvement with the LTTE.  A glass of water  was  thrown  at
    his head and he was scarred as a  result.   He  paid  3  lakh  and  was
    released with reporting conditions with which he failed to comply.   He
    fears that he will be suspected as a terrorist if he returns.

6.   On 23 August 2014  the  appellant  married  his  wife  at  a  religious
    ceremony in the UK.  She came to the UK in January 2013  and  has  been
    granted asylum.  Their first child was born on  13  August  2015.   The
    appellant's claim under Article 8 of the ECHR was  dismissed.   He  was
    not granted permission to appeal the  judge's  decision  on  Article  8
    grounds.

7.   The judge dismissed the appellant's asylum and Article 3 ECHR  appeals.



8.   The judge held as follows:

     "19.     With regard  to  his  humanitarian  protection  claim  it  was
    submitted that the appellant will be in a category of persons  at  real
    risk of persons at real risk of persecution as set out in the  case  of
    GJ and Others (post-war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC)

    (a)  individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka


    20.  The submission is primarily  based  on  the  appellant's  previous
         detention in 1997/98 prior to his leaving for  the  UK  and  events
         when he returned in 2006.  On that occasion he reports that he  was
         questioned at the airport for a few hours and assaulted, only being
         released after payment of  a  bribe.   He  subsequently  failed  to
         report as agreed and left the country.


    21.  I do not accept on the evidence before me that  the  appellant  is
         likely to be perceived as being involved in the post-war  LTTE  sur
         place  activity.   He  does  not  claim  any  involvement  in   the
         activities of the LTTE and felt able to  return  to  Sri  Lanka  in
         2006.  Any interest the authorities may have in the  appellant  are
         likely to be from his failure to comply with  reporting  conditions
         rather than any perceived threat.  The main motivation  appears  to
         be financial.  He had no difficulty leaving the country."

9.   The grounds submitted by the appellant argued that the judge  erred  in
    respect of her assessment of the  appellant's  claim  under  article  3
    because she failed to engage with the entirety of the appellant's case.
     Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.  He found that the Article 3 arguments were  made
    out because  consideration  of  the  factual  matrix  was  confined  to
    paragraph 20 of the judge's decision.  Within that paragraph  it  would
    appear  that  the  judge  accepted  the   appellant   had   encountered
    persecutory treatment in 1997/98 and in 2006.  Although there has  been
    a material change  in  the  situation  in  Sri  Lanka  since  the  LTTE
    collapsed it is clear from the country  guidance  case  CG  that  those
    formerly linked with the LTTE might still face a real risk  of  serious
    harm on return, particularly  a  person  who  has  previously  been  on
    reporting restrictions.  DIJ  McCarthy  went  on  to  say  that  it  is
    arguable therefore that the judge has either failed to explain that she
    rejected the truthfulness of the appellant's account (and he noted that
    there was no application of paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules) or
    she has failed to explain why the past persecution encountered  by  the
    appellant was not a strong indication of future risk (as per  paragraph
    339K of the Immigration Rules).  DIJ McCarthy said that  these  factors
    suggested that the judge may have failed to engage with the evidence.

10.  At the hearing before me Mr Bramble accepted that in the absence  of  a
    challenge by the respondent, the judge's findings at paragraph  20  are
    to be taken as an acceptance of the appellant's previous  detention  in
    1997/98 and his detention in 2006 following his return to Sri Lanka and
    what happened to him subsequently.

11.  It appeared to me that in assessing risk on return to  Sri  Lanka,  the
    judge focused solely on the authorities' perception of the appellant as
    being involved in post-war LTTE sur  place  activity.   Indeed  in  the
    respondent's response to the grounds of appeal  under  Rule  24,  Mr  T
    Melvin of  the  Specialist  Appeals  Team  accepted  that  the  judge's
    findings were sparse and Mr Bramble said the same.

12.  Mr Blundell submitted that  there  was  before  the  judge  a  skeleton
    argument by the appellant's Counsel below.  Paragraph 2 of the skeleton
    argument and repeated at paragraph 3 of the grounds, other factors were
    mentioned as likely to put the appellant at risk  and  which  were  not
    considered by the judge.   These  other  factors  are  that  after  his
    departure from Sri Lanka in 2006, the authorities went in search of the
    appellant at his home address but he had already left the country.  His
    mother was arrested and detained by  the  authorities.   The  appellant
    feared returning to Sri Lanka due to his  previous  failure  to  comply
    with reporting conditions and due to his sur place activity here in the
    UK.  Mr Blundell submitted  that  the  authorities  have  a  historical
    family interest in the appellant because his father had  a  history  of
    association with  the  LTTE,  as  well  as  his  brother-in-law,  which
    prompted the authorities to arrest him on the two occasions.

13.  Mr Blundell relied on the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes
    in the appeal of the appellant's wife.  The judge accepted the  history
    given by the appellant's wife  who  had  been  tortured  and  raped  in
    detention in October 2012.  She left Sri Lanka unlawfully.   The  judge
    accepted that the authorities had been to her home  and  asked  of  her
    whereabouts.  FtTJ Landes applied MP [2014] EWCA Civ 829 in  which  the
    Court of Appeal  highlighted  that  although  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    concluded that diaspora activism, actual or perceived was the principal
    basis on which the authorities would regard a returning Tamil as posing
    a threat, it was not the only basis on which a returning Tamil might be
    regarded as posing such a threat.  Even if such activity would  usually
    be  the  touchstone,  that  was  not  the  absolute  prerequisite   for
    protection.  Ultimately  it  was  a  question  of  fact.   Mr  Blundell
    submitted that the judge attached weight to the appellant's wife  being
    sought after after her departure from Sri Lanka and being  involved  in
    diaspora activities while she was here.

14.  Mr Blundell submitted that were the appellant to be questioned  by  the
    authorities on his return to Sri Lanka, the questions  at  the  airport
    would be based on biographical details, including family members.  This
    was what the Tribunal in CJ accepted in the light of a letter from  the
    respondent's own staff at the Sri Lankan Embassy,  Mr  Lewis,  who  had
    first hand experience of the return process from the UK to  Sri  Lanka.
    Based on the respondent's evidence before GJ,  it  is  clear  that  the
    starting point is that the appellant will be asked for details  of  his
    family.  In light of the historical association by family members  with
    the LTTE, the appellant is likely to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.



15.  Mr Bramble responded by saying that the judge did  not  find  that  the
    appellant had engaged in sur place activities.  Furthermore it was  not
    the appellant's evidence that there was a court order against him or  a
    warrant for his arrest.  He accepted that  the  judge's  findings  were
    sparse but relying on GJ, and irrespective that  the  judge  found  the
    appellant credible, on the specific claim made by the appellant, he did
    not find that he would be at risk on GJ principles.

Findings

16.  I find that the judge in assessing risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka,  the
    judge erred in focusing solely on the authorities'  perception  of  the
    appellant as being involved in post-war LTTE sure place activity.   She
    failed to consider the other factors raised in  the  skeleton  argument
    and identified by Mr. Blundell as likely to put the appellant at  risk.
    This error meant that the judge's decision cannot stand and  I  set  it
    aside in order to remake it.

17.  It has been accepted by Mr Bramble that the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was detained in 1996/1997 prior to  his  departure  from  Sri
    Lanka.  The judge also accepted that when he returned to Sri  Lanka  in
    2006 he was detained, questioned and assaulted  by  a  police  officer.
    His mother paid a bribe and he was released.  He did  not  comply  with
    reporting restrictions and left the country.  The other evidence, which
    has not been disputed, is that his mother was arrested and detained  by
    the authorities when they went to his house in search of him and  found
    that he had left the country.

18.  I find that having been detained twice before, and not having  complied
    with reporting restrictions, the appellant is likely to be detained  on
    his return to Sri Lanka.  Based upon the  questions  that  he  will  be
    asked, it will  become  apparent  that  other  family  members  have  a
    historical association with the LTTE.  Mr Blundell drew  the  attention
    of the court to the appellant's supplementary  statement  in  which  he
    said that in 2008/9 he used to accompany his father  to  demonstrations
    in Westminster.  This evidence was acknowledged by  the  respondent  at
    paragraph 19(k) of her supplementary refusal letter dated 7  May  2014.
    While this may not be heavy duty diaspora activity,  it  needed  to  be
    assessed in consideration of risk on return.  I rely on what the  Court
    of Appeal said in MP.  The appellant's diaspora  activity  may  not  of
    itself be sufficient to  put  him  at  risk.   However,  when  all  the
    evidence is taken together, I find that the appellant is likely  to  be
    at risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka.

Notice of Decision

19.  Accordingly, I allow the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 6 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
