
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01939/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|on 26th April 2016                            |On 9th May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    T X T

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr A Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms A F Miller of Hamilton Burns Solicitors, Glasgow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are as described above, but  for  continuity  and  ease  of
    reference the rest of this determination refers to them as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, age 34.  An anonymity order made
    in the First-tier Tribunal  remains  in  place.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant or  any
    member of her family.  This direction applies to both parties.  Failure
    to comply could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. On 21st August 2014, the appellant was convicted in the Crown Court  in
    England  of  production  of  cannabis  and  sentenced  to  six  months'
    imprisonment.

 4. The respondent found the appellant's account of her history unreliable,
    declined to accept that she was a victim of human trafficking, and made
    a deportation order.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In his decision issued on 23rd November 2015 Judge R A Cox accepted the
    appellant's account in full.  He found at paragraph  21  that  she  had
    been trafficked for sexual exploitation, and having escaped  from  that
    in the UK, because of her vulnerability and lack  of  options  she  was
    exploited again, firstly for unpaid domestic service and then for  work
    in a cannabis factory.  She engaged the Refugee Convention by reason of
    membership of a particular social group.  At paragraph  22,  the  judge
    held that the appellant would remain at risk in Vietnam from one if not
    from two gang networks; that internal relocation would  not  solve  her
    problems; and  that  the  respondent's  view  that  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency of state protection was not borne  out  by  the  background
    evidence to which the respondent referred.  The judge  added  that  his
    own conclusions on those matters were further supported  by  an  expert
    report at paragraphs 135 to 143.

 6. The respondent does not dispute the judge's findings of  primary  fact.
    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  on  the  basis  of  inadequacy  of
    reasoning on the two issues of sufficiency of protection  and  internal
    relocation:

           5. ... Sufficiency of state protection is  not  measured  by  the
             existence of a real risk of abuse of human rights but  by  the
             availability of a system for the protection of a citizen and a
             reasonable willingness by the state to operate it.

            6.  The  country  information  demonstrates  that  there  is  an
             effective police force ... in Vietnam ...  the  appellant  has
             been unable to demonstrate a sustained and systemic failure of
             state protection on the part of the authorities ... the  judge
             has failed to ... address this.  The  judge  was  required  to
             show that the appellant's fear ... was not a fear of  criminal
             acts of individuals but a  fear  of  a  sustained  pattern  or
             campaign  of  persecution  ...  knowingly  tolerated  by   the
             authorities,  or  that  the  authorities   were   unable,   or
             unwilling, to offer the appellant effective  protection.   The
             judge has failed to establish this...

           7. ... The appellant has never sought assistance from the  police
             in Vietnam ... the appellant  can  seek  redress  through  the
             proper authorities, such as  the  police  ...  before  seeking
             international protection.

           8. ... The judge  failed  to  adequately  explain  why  [internal
             relocation] is not an option...

           9. ... The appellant could live in a different  area  of  Vietnam
             where she is not known and away from those she fears ... given
             that [her] alleged problems with gangsters  emanate  from  her
             home area.  The judge failed to provide adequate reasoning  as
             to why the appellant could not internally relocate.

           10.    ... The appellant belongs to the largest ethnic group  and
             speaks the national language ... has demonstrated a  level  of
             resourcefulness and adaptability which will stand her in  good
             stead when making a more  modest  relocation  within  her  own
             country ... has easily transferrable  skills  which  could  be
             used to obtain employment ... all positive factors in relation
             to her ability to support herself ...the judge appears to have
             ignored this...

           11.    ... Hardship alone is  not  sufficient  reason  to  render
             internal flight ineffective or unduly harsh and in failing  to
             address these matters appropriately the  judge  has  erred  in
             law...

            12.     Support  and  protection  from  governmental  and   non-
             governmental sources in Vietnam  are  generally  available  to
             victims of trafficking and internal relocation will also often
             be a viable option  for  applicants  who  fear  reprisal  from
             traffickers upon return...

           13.    The judge finds that the  appellant's  problems  would  be
             exacerbated by her HIV condition and  societal  discrimination
             ...there was  no  evidence  [to  support  this]  and  ...  the
             appellant's condition was manageable in Vietnam.

 7. Mr Matthews submitted further  as  follows.   The  judge's  reasons  in
    respect of sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal  relocation  were
    scant, almost entirely lacking.  Although the  judge  relied  upon  the
    expert report that was  largely  concerned  with  the  reality  of  the
    trafficking claim, rather than with  circumstances  upon  return.   The
    judge's decision at paragraph 18 referred only indirectly to the expert
    report, as it had been summarised in a supplementary skeleton  argument
    by the appellant's counsel.   Those  references  went  to  whether  the
    appellant had been trafficked, a matter now resolved.  Apart from that,
    there was only the indirect reference at paragraph 22 of  the  decision
    going to paragraphs 135 to 143 of the report.

 8. Referring directly  to  the  report,  Mr  Matthews  accepted  that  the
    conclusions about return to Vietnam summarised at paragraph  143  might
    support an outcome in  favour  of  the  appellant,  but  he  said  that
    nevertheless  it  had  to  be  explained  why  those  conclusions  were
    justified.  The respondent was entitled to know why the judge came down
    on that side rather than on the other.  The judge appeared to  consider
    that risk  extended  throughout  Vietnam,  but  did  not  explain  that
    conclusion.  He  did  not  concern  himself  in  any  detail  with  the
    questions whether relocation elsewhere would avoid the risk,  or  would
    be unduly harsh.  Paragraph 129 of the expert report refers  to  a  21%
    rate of re-trafficking.  Mr Matthews accepted that such  a  rate  might
    amount to a real risk, but he pointed out that the reference was  brief
    and appeared to be geographically unrestricted - worldwide, rather than
    related to Vietnam.  The question of risk to the appellant  could  only
    be considered by reference to country specific evidence.  If the  judge
    did intend to resolve the internal relocation alternative, rather  than
    making a finding of risk throughout the country, he failed  to  provide
    any statement of the law or any analysis of what it was that  would  be
    unduly harsh.  The decision should be set aside.   There  had  been  no
    application by either side to lead  further  evidence,  so  unless  the
    appellant were to show any reason for re-opening the evidence, the case
    should be decided on the evidence to which reference had been made, and
    the outcome should be reversed.

 9. Ms Miller firstly adopted and relied upon a Rule 24 response  filed  by
    previous agents.  This argues that the judge considered  the  level  of
    protection available to the appellant on return  by  reference  to  the
    expert report, in particular at paragraph 18 of  his  decision,  citing
    paragraph 4(vii) of the skeleton argument referred to above.   This  in
    turn relied upon information from  the  US  State  Department  and  the
    Vietnamese Committee on Human Rights to  the  effect  that  traffickers
    operate  significant  networks,  preventing  successful  reintegration,
    "This is emphasised by evidence that support and reintegration services
    could be lacking in Vietnam".   The  judge  considered  the  option  of
    internal relocation in detail at paragraph 22.  The  expert  report  at
    paragraph 135 said that:

         Based on evidence about protection and support offered  to  victims
         of trafficking ... it is indeed questionable whether she  would  be
         able to access adequate support if repatriated ...  highlights  the
         paucity of protection for victims of trafficking at  the  hands  of
         the authorities ... and the punitive  experience  of  some  victims
         ....

    The judge had considered 135 to 143 of the report  in  detail  and  was
    rightly satisfied in respect of internal relocation and sufficiency  of
    protection.  The respondent should not have been granted permission  to
    dispute the findings reached, the  grounds  being  disagreement  rather
    than identification of error of law.

10. In further submissions, Ms Miller accepted that the re-trafficking rate
    cited in the report was not based on  a  source  specific  to  Vietnam.
    However, she pointed out that paragraphs 136 and 137 on the  extent  of
    the threat  on  return  and  on  the  shortcomings  of  protection  are
    supported at footnotes 42 and 43 by references  to  reports  which  are
    specifically about trafficking  from  Vietnam.   She  argued  that  the
    evidence which was before the judge supported his conclusions,  and  he
    gave a sufficient indication to the respondent of why the  issues  were
    resolved as they were.  The judge had also stated, correctly, that  the
    respondent's view that there would be sufficient state  protection  was
    "simply not borne out by the background evidence  the  respondent  sets
    out in her own refusal letter".

11. This submission prompted a search for the relevant  passage,  which  is
    not plainly cited.  This aspect of the respondent's decision making  is
    to be found in a supplementary letter dated 22nd May 2015,  running  to
    twelve pages, copied at pages 9 to 21 of the appellant's bundle in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.   Sufficiency  of  protection  is  dealt  with  at
    paragraphs 23 to 28 (and  internal  flight  at  paragraph  29  to  35).
    Paragraph 25 quotes from the US  State  Department  Report  2012:  "The
    police were generally effective at maintaining public order, but police
    capabilities, especially investigative, were generally very limited and
    training and resources were inadequate".  There is a further  quotation
    from Jane's Security Country Risk Assessment 2012: "The police  force's
    role is geared more to upholding  party  doctrine  than  combating  law
    breakers".  The decision letter continues at paragraph 29, "The country
    information demonstrates  that  there  is  an  effective  police  force
    operating in  Vietnam  ...you  could  ...  report  your  fears  to  the
    police...".  Ms Miller submitted that the background evidence cited did
    not justify the  respondent's  conclusion,  but  rather  justified  the
    conclusion stated by the judge.  The respondent had provided no further
    background  evidence  about  sufficiency  of  protection,  whereas  the
    appellant had supplied the expert report.  As far  as  internal  flight
    was concerned, there was no error in the judge's finding that the  risk
    extended throughout the country, but the alternative reasoning was also
    adequate.  There was no justification for setting the  decision  aside.
    If it were to be remade, all the relevant evidence  had  been  referred
    to, and for the reasons given in submissions, the same  outcome  should
    be reached.

12. Mr Matthews in response said that paragraph 136 of the report  did  not
    deal explicitly with sufficiency of legal protection  in  Vietnam,  and
    that was a matter which could not  properly  be  said  to  be  implicit
    either in an expert report or in  a  judge's  conclusions.   The  judge
    reached sweeping conclusions about the effectiveness of law enforcement
    in Vietnam.  Although the sources cited were much less than  a  glowing
    recommendation, they did justify the respondent's view that  there  was
    an effective police force to whom the appellant could make a complaint.
     That was all that was legally required.  The judge was not entitled to
    conclude from the  evidence  before  him  that  there  was  no  general
    sufficiency of protection in Vietnam and had dealt with the matter much
    too casually and dismissively.

13. I reserved my determination.

14. In my opinion, the judge's reasoning on  the  two  issues  called  into
    question has not been shown to be less than legally adequate.

15. The hearing before the judge was first and  foremost  a  conflict  over
    credibility, which is no longer live.  Of  course,  the  resolution  of
    that clash did leave further important issues before a final conclusion
    could be reached.  Those matters are dealt with relatively  briefly  in
    paragraph 22, which runs to only nineteen lines.   However,  from  that
    paragraph the following  can  be  derived.   The  appellant's  fear  of
    renewed persecution on return to Vietnam was found to  be  well-founded
    for the following reasons:-

      i) She had been disowned by her parents.

     ii) She had no other relatives who might help.

    iii) She would return as a single lone female without a place to live or
         likely means of employment.  Although very  well  presented  before
         the judge, she was not well-educated and had no particular  skills.
         [That analysis is at least as  likely  as  the  suggestion  in  the
         grounds of appeal to  the  UT  that  she  had  resourcefulness  and
         adaptability to stand her in good stead.  The grounds on that point
         are a plain attempt to reassess factual findings  properly  reached
         by the judge.]

     iv) The appellant would be at real  risk  of  re-trafficking  from  her
         original trafficking gang, or  other  similar  gangs,  particularly
         perhaps the former, because they would not  regard  her  "debt"  as
         paid off, especially in view of her escape.

      v) An individual who had purported to help the appellant was either  a
         member of the original gang or of another gang.  In  either  event,
         the appellant was at risk from one or two such networks.

     vi) The appellant's problems would be exacerbated by her HIV  condition
         and societal discrimination.

    vii)  Internal  relocation  would  not  solve   these   problems.    The
         respondent's view of sufficiency of protection was not borne out by
         the background evidence the respondent cited.

   viii) The judge's conclusions on those two issues were supported  by  the
         expert report at paragraphs 135 to 143.

16. It is permissible to incorporate reasoning by  reference  to  materials
    which are available to both parties.  There has been  no  criticism  of
    the qualifications and standing of the expert, and no  suggestion  that
    the judge was not entitled  to  accept  her  conclusions,  although  of
    course it remained for him and not for her to make the final decision.

17. The expert report is supported by  background  references  and  by  the
    expert's own experience (paragraph  138).   In  my  opinion,  that  was
    sufficient to justify  the  judge's  conclusion  on  the  risk  of  re-
    trafficking.  Organised crime is by definition extensive, and the judge
    was entitled to conclude that this was a risk which extended throughout
    Vietnam.  In the alternative, the factors to  which  he  referred  were
    sufficient to justify the conclusion that internal relocation would  be
    unduly harsh.  The background evidence together with the report was  at
    least  as  amenable  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  sufficiency   of
    protection as to the respondent's.   The  conclusions  reached  by  the
    expert at paragraph 143 are properly supported.  The decision  and  the
    report must be read together.  Taken as a whole, they  form  a  legally
    adequate explanation  to  the  respondent  of  why  the  appellant  has
    succeeded in establishing her case.  Appeals should not be conducted by
    an endless search for reasons upon reasons.

18. I am fortified in these conclusions by reference  to  the  respondent's
    document "Victims  of  modern  slavery  -  frontline  staff  guidance",
    version  3.0,  published  on  18th  March  2016.   This  includes   the
    following:

         Women who are victims of trafficking may face serious  consequences
         if they return to their home country,  particularly  if  they  were
         forced into prostitution or sexual exploitation.  This may take the
         form of:

         Reprisals or retaliation from trafficking rings or individuals

         Discrimination from their community and families

         The risk of being re-trafficked or the risk of becoming a victim of
         modern slavery again.

         In some cases it will be necessary for  you  to  consider  internal
         relocation...

         You must consider each case on its merits.

         You must assess the evidence in the country reports on the  current
         country  situation  for  sufficiency  of  protection  and  specific
         trafficking support.  For example is support available for  victims
         of trafficking, and the police able to protect them from being  re-
         trafficked.  This needs to be looked at in light of the applicant's
         ability to move or seek protection.

19. The judge found all these features present in this case, and  they  all
    tended towards a resolution in the appellant's favour.   There  was  no
    evidence of any significant  support  being  available  to  victims  of
    trafficking on return.  Mr Matthews was right to  point  out  that  the
    test for legal sufficiency of protection is not an effective guarantee,
    but there was very little to suggest that the police are  of  any  real
    use to victims in the appellant's position.

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           28 April 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
