
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01297/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates               |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 18th November 2013                         |on 3rd December 2013         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                                    C A C
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Misra of Crown Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination panel of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal composed of PJ M Hollingworth and Mrs Bray JP (hereinafter
        referred to as "the Panel") who in a determination  promulgated  on
        19th September 2013 dismissed the CAC's appeal against an order for
        his deportation from the United Kingdom made pursuant to UK Borders
        Act 2007.



Background


     2. CAC is a citizen of Jamaica born on 2nd May 1976.  His  immigration
        history shows he entered the United Kingdom as a  visitor  on  28th
        May 2000 and was given six months leave to enter. In August 2000 he
        applied to join the British Army, and  was  therefore  exempt  from
        immigration control, but was later discharged for  medical  reasons
        on 2nd April 2001.


     3. CAC married RMR on 23rd June 2001 after which he was granted  leave
        to remain, as a foreign spouse, valid until 15th October 2003.  RMR
        wrote to the Home Office in July 2003 advising that she and CAC had
        separated. As a result his application for further leave to  remain
        was refused on 4th February 2004 with no right of  appeal  although
        correspondence was received on 2nd February 2006 and 1 January 2007
        advising the Home Office that the parties  had  become  reconciled.
        The couple eventually divorced in March 2007.


     4. CAC formed a relationship with EC in July 2005 after which he  made
        an application for leave to remain as her unmarried partner on 19th
        November 2008 which  was  refused.    EC  had  a  daughter  from  a
        previous relationship and two  sons  with  CAC.   As  a  result  of
        further representations  he  was  eventually  granted  three  years
        discretionary leave on 11th May 2010.


     5. CAC finds himself in the situation he now in as  a  result  of  his
        conviction for conspiracy to supply Class A drugs, heroin and crack
        cocaine, on two counts at Warwick Crown Court on the 23rd  February
        2012.  On 17th May 2012 he was sentenced to two concurrent terms of
        four years imprisonment.


     6. In his sentencing remarks HHJ Coates stated:


              [CAC], would you stand-up please?  I have got to say  to  you,
   you should                   have thought about your partner and children
   before you went out selling drugs             and you  were  in  it,  not
   because  you   were   a   drug   addict,   but   you   wanted   to   earn
   money and that is the way you chose.  We have  lots  of  people  standing
   where          you are as a result of Operation Aberfoyle, some  involved
   to a lesser extent than               you, others more, but you had  been
   involved for quite a bit of time.  Let us just              look at  your
   telephone usage in August, 12 calls a day on that phone.


              I take into account what has been said about you, your lack of
   previous                convictions, your age, your plea  of  guilty  and
   the sentence on the  matters  before             me  will  be  concurrent
   sentences  of   four   years'   imprisonment.   You   serve   half   that
   sentence. The 13 days on remand will  count  towards  that  part  of  the
   sentence you            have to serve.


     7. Having reviewed the evidence, both oral and documentary, the  Panel
        set out their findings which can be summarised as follows:


               i.   The  range  of  corroborative  documentary  evidence  in
   relation to                      the addresses lived at  by  CAC  in  the
   context of his claim to have                  been sharing  accommodation
   with EC is sparse and  lacking  in                        regularity  and
   scope [57].


              ii. It was found extraordinary that a witness who was able  to
   send a                  number of photographs claimed she  did  not  know
   how to operate                   equipment to print off more  photographs
   which the Panel were told                 were  in  existence  reflecting
   the claimed relationship over the years.               When this witness,
   EC, was asked why she should be believed now                when she  had
   lied   to   the   authorities   previously,   she   claimed    she    was
   now  telling  the  truth  [61].   The  Panel  found  this   witness   had
     demonstrated she was prepared to  give  an  account  depending  on  the
     circumstances in which she finds herself and did  not  accept  that  on
          the basis of her evidence she had lived with CAC  at  the  claimed
          addresses. She was not found to be a  witness  of  truth  for  the
   reasons                 stated [62].


              iii.     The Panel did not accept that CAC  is  a  witness  of
   truth and did not                accept he  had  lived  with  EC  at  the
   addresses claimed [88].


              iv. The relationship between CAC and EC is  far  more  limited
   than has                been  claimed  by  either  of  them.  It  is  not
   accepted they lived together                  as asserted [96].


              v.  The Secretary of State conceded  that  CAC  has  two  sons
   under ten               years of age [96].  The Panel do not accept  that
   S  is  the  daughter  of                   the  CAC  and  EC  based  upon
   discrepancies in the evidence relating to                   the start  of
   the  relationship  and  its  relevance  to   the   date   of   birth   of
   S. The evidence did not satisfy the Panel as  to  paternity  and  no  DNA
          evidence was provided. It is considered CAC may have maintained  a
              limited family life with EC and  her  three  children  through
   visits at               their address [97].


              vi.  The  Panel  accept  such  contact  has  been  maintained,
   including whilst                 CAC has been in prison [98].


              vii.     It is accepted CAC has a private life in  the  United
   Kingdom [98].


              viii.    CAC has committed serious  offences  involving  drugs
   for economic                 gain over a sustained period [99].


               ix.  CAC  has  engaged  in  conduct  which   undermines   the
   foundations of                   British society. He deliberately refused
   to answer the question put to                  him  in  cross-examination
   regarding the  scope  of  his  involvement.                 The  sentence
   reflects the gravity of the offence [100].


              x.  The Panel did not accept the NOMS assessment  with  regard
   to risk of                   reoffending. CAC failed to substantiate  the
   basis for his                         disagreement with the  analysis  of
   the sentencing Judge and declined                   to  answer  questions
   about his offending [101].


              xi. CAC  has  sought  to  minimise  his  role  and  failed  to
   recognise the                extent of it or his responsibility.  In  all
   the circumstances it is                        unrealistic  to  take  the
   view the risk of reoffending is low. The Panel                   find  on
   the contrary there is a substantial risk of reoffending [102].


              xii.     On the basis of the  claimed  relationship  with  his
   partner and                      children CAC had every incentive not  to
   engage in criminal conduct.               The relationship  acted  as  no
   incentive to avoid such criminal                       behaviour  and  no
   realistic      basis      has       been       put       forward       to
   demonstrate  that  CAC  has  sufficient  incentive   to   avoid   further
     criminal offending [103].


              xiii.    The Panel took into account  references  provided  on
   CAC's behalf,                the fact he joined the British Army and  the
   positive  factors  advanced                  in  support  of  his  appeal
   including time in the United Kingdom.  The                    Panel  take
   into    account    the    contents    of    the    NOMS    report     and
   submissions  made  by  Mr  Misra  on  his   behalf   regarding   progress
   made by CAC [104].


              xiv.     The  Panel  considered  the  best  interests  of  the
   children. They did not                find  CAC's  behaviour  in  selling
   drugs  to  be  consistent  with                    promoting   the   best
   interests of the children.  The Panel did not find                    CAC
   a  good  role  model.   The  best  interests   of   the   children   were
     found to be served by limited contact with him which is  all  that  has
          been achieved for some time in  light  of  his  imprisonment.  The
   Panel               find  the  reality  of  the  situation  is  that  the
   children have been brought                up by EC. Both the children and
   their mother are British citizens. The                  medical  evidence
   regarding Rushaun was considered by the Panel                   [105].


              xv. CAC worked in Jamaica and the Panel found he  can  readapt
   to living               there. He lived in Jamaica  longer  than  he  has
   lived in the United                   Kingdom. The  positive  factors  in
   his favour are outweighed by his                   criminal  conduct  and
   the    risk    of    further    offending.    It    was     not     found
   disproportionate to remove  him  and  therefore  not  found  there  would
     be a breach of Article 8 including in relation to the Article 8  rights
   of                  CAC's sister in the United Kingdom [106].


              xvi.     CAC  cannot  bring  himself  within  the  exceptional
   circumstances in                 relation to the  new  Immigration  Rules
   [107].  It was not argued he                  has any fear  of  returning
   to Jamaica and no exceptions were proved               to the  provisions
   governing automatic deportation [108].






Discussion



     8. We announced in court our primary finding that the Panel  had  made
        no legal error material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  and
        now give our reasons.


     9. CAC is a foreign criminal as defined in law.  The  UK  Borders  Act
        2007 now mandates that in certain circumstances the deportation  of
        a foreign criminal is deemed to be conducive to the public good and
        a deportation order should be made. The Secretary of State for  the
        Home Department has a duty to make a deportation  order  against  a
        foreign criminal who does not fall into one of  the  exceptions  in
        section 33.


    10. CAC relies upon the exceptions provided in the 2007 Act, limited to
        consideration of Article 8 ECHR, to avoid deportation.  Section  33
        of the 2007 Act states that the obligation to  deport  under  these
        provisions does not apply if an exception applies.  Exception 1, to
        be found in s. 33 (2), is where removal  of  the  foreign  criminal
        would breach a persons Convention rights (s 33 (2) (a)) or the UK's
        obligations under the Refugee Convention.


    11. Since the passing of the Act the Secretary of State has amended the
        Immigration Rules to reflect her convictions in relation to the way
        in which Article 8 factors should be considered and applied,  which
        have subsequently been approved by Parliament.  Although s. 33 only
        refers to Convention rights, which is  a  reference  to  ECHR,  the
        Panel was required to consider both the  Rules  and  Convention  as
        part of their assessment which they did  -  see  paragraphs  397  -
        399A.


    12. The grant of permission to appeal is critical of the style  of  the
        Panel but a full reading of the determination shows they considered
        the evidence with the degree of care required in an appeal of  this
        nature, that of anxious scrutiny, and gave reasons for the findings
        they made. As a result the challenge to the  determination  in  the
        Grounds based upon allegations of  undue  or  inappropriate  weight
        fail as weight was a matter for the Panel in such  circumstances  -
        see SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155.


    13. In relation to the Rules, the Panel found CAC had not proved he was
        able to bring himself within the exceptional circumstances required
        by paragraph 397. As a result of  the  fact  he  was  sentenced  to
        period of imprisonment of at least four years  paragraphs  399  and
        399A are not applicable and so,  if  there  is  no  breach  of  the
        Refugee or Human Rights Conventions, paragraph 397 states  it  will
        only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
        deportation is outweighed.


  14. There have been two recent decisions of  importance  relating  to  the
      Rules in relation to deportation. The first of which is  MF  (Nigeria)
      [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  states  that
      exceptionality is a likely characteristic of  a  claim  that  properly
      succeeds rather than a legal test to be  met.   In  this  context  the
      Court also found that the new  Rules  relating  to  Article  8  claims
      advanced by foreign criminals seeking  to  resist  deportation  are  a
      complete code and the exceptional circumstances to  be  considered  in
      the balancing exercise involve the application  of  a  proportionality
      test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence: MF (Nigeria) at para
      43.  The  second  case  is  Kabia  (MF:  para   398   -   "exceptional
      circumstances") [2013] UKUT 00569 (IAC) in which  the  Tribunal  found
      that "exceptional" means  circumstances  in  which  deportation  would
      result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual or their
      family such that a deportation would not be proportionate".


    15.  Whether  there  are   exceptional   circumstances   that   prevent
        deportation will depend upon the outcome of  a  properly  conducted
        balancing/proportionality exercise.


    16. Before us, Mr Misra concentrated on three issues which he submitted
        warranted a finding that  the  Panel  had  made  a  legal  error(s)
        material to their decision to dismiss the  appeal.   The  first  of
        these related to the way in which the  Panel  considered  the  best
        interests of the children which is to be found in paragraph 105  of
        the determination. We do not find it can be  said  that  the  Panel
        were unaware of their obligation to consider the best interests  of
        the children, that they were unaware of the evidence relied upon in
        relation to the children, or the fact that their primary carer  has
        always been their mother, EC.


    17. The submission that the best interests of the children should  have
        been determinative of the appeal  has  no  merit  in  law.   In  SS
        (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 Laws LJ, in summarising the  findings
        of the Court stated:


               55.  None  of  this,  I  apprehend,  is   inconsistent   with
   established principle, and                the approach I have outlined is
   well supported by  the  authorities                       concerning  the
   decision-maker's   margin   of   discretion.    The    leading    Supreme
   Court cases, ZH and H(H), demonstrate  that  the  interests  of  a  child
   affected                by a removal decision are a matter of substantial
   importance, and that the                  court must proceed on a  proper
   understanding of the facts which                        illuminate  those
   interests  (though   upon   the   latter   point   I   would   not   with
   respect accept that the decision  in  Tinizaray  should  be  regarded  as
          establishing anything in the nature of general principle). At  the
   same time               H(H)  shows  the  impact  of  a  powerful  public
   interest (in that case                    extradition) on what  needs  to
   be demonstrated for an Article 8 claim to                   prevail  over
   it.  Proportionality,  the  absence  of  an  "exceptionality"  rule,  and
     the meaning  of  "a  primary  consideration"  are  all,  when  properly
          understood, consonant with the force to be attached  in  cases  of
   the present                  kind to the two  drivers  of  the  decision-
   maker's margin of discretion: the                   policy's  source  and
   the  policy's  nature,  and   in   particular   to   the   great   weight
   which the 2007 Act attributes to the deportation of foreign criminals.


    18. It is accepted that the best interests of any child  are,  in  most
        cases, to be brought up in a stable and loving environment parented
        by both parents.  The Panel analysed the  evidence  made  available
        regarding the accommodation situation and found the claim that  CAC
        and the children's  mother  have  lived  together  for  the  period
        alleged was not  true.  The  Panel  clearly  understood  the  facts
        surrounding the regime in  place  for  meeting  the  needs  of  the
        children which have been met  by  their  mother  as  their  primary
        carer, an arrangement which will continue if CAC is removed.


    19. The Panel found the interaction between CAC and  the  children  has
        been limited  to  contact  indicating  that  although  family  life
        recognised by Article 8 exists, the nature of such family  life  is
        limited.  The Panel note the nationality of the children and  their
        mother as British citizens and so were clearly aware  of  the  fact
        this is a family splitting case.


    20. Mr Misra was asked what evidence was made available  to  the  Panel
        relating  to  the  best  interests  of  the  children   and   their
        circumstances, which he confirmed was only that to be found in  the
        written and oral evidence of CAC and EC.   There  was  no  evidence
        from a childcare expert or any  other  source  showing  serious  or
        irreparable   harm   to   the   children,   of   a   physical    of
        emotional/psychological nature, if  CAC  is  deported.   We  accept
        there will be a period of upset and distress and adjustment but  do
        not accept there was sufficient evidence before the Panel  to  show
        there will be  devastating  consequences,  as  submitted  on  CAC's
        behalf before us, should he be removed.


    21. We accept the language used in paragraph 105 does  not  state  that
        the Panel considered the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a
        paramount consideration but they were  clearly  considered  and  we
        find this an error of form rather than substance.  The situation of
        the children both as it will be with CAC in the United Kingdom  and
        following his removal, was understood, and we do not find it proved
        that this element was somehow demoted in significance in the  minds
        of  the  Panel  when  they  were  conducting  the   proportionality
        exercise.


    22. In any event, the best  interests  of  the  children  are  not  the
        paramount factor and even if it was  shown  to  be  in  their  best
        interests for CAC to remain in the United Kingdom this is only  one
        element of  the  balancing  exercise,  albeit  one  of  substantial
        importance.


    23. The second challenge was  to  the  Panels  treatment  of  the  NOMS
        Report.  We have considered the decision in AM v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
        Civ 1634 in which section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  applied.
        The Court of Appeal took issue with the UT Tribunal's assessment on
        risk of reoffending. The assessment of low risk had been made by  a
        trained probation officer whose job it was to assess  risk  and  it
        could not be lightly dismissed. There was no reference in any  part
        of the tribunal's reasoning to  an  examination  of  the  probation
        officer's assessment or any reasoned basis for the substitution  of
        its own view for that of the  probation  officer.  The  appeal  was
        remitted.


    24. The Panel refer in paragraph 47 to the case of  Vasconcelos  (risk-
        rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378 (IAC)(Blake J) it  which  it  was
        held that in assessing whether an EEA national represents a current
        threat to public policy by  reason  of  a  risk  of  resumption  of
        opportunistic  offending,  the   Tribunal   should   consider   any
        statistical assessment of re-offending provided by NOMS but is  not
        bound by such data  if  the  overall  assessment  of  the  evidence
        supports the conclusion of continued risk.


    25. The Panel clearly considered the contents of  the  NOMS  assessment
        with regard to the risk of offending but, as  a  result  of  issues
        that arose during the course of the hearing, found  they  were  not
        willing to place weight upon the assessment that  CAC  presented  a
        low risk.  The OASys assessment was completed on 24th July 2012 and
        assessed the risk of serious harm as medium based upon a number  of
        risk factors including drug users, local community, serious  health
        issues  to  drug  users,  financial  loss  to  the  community,  the
        community in general becoming rundown  with  uninvited  drug  users
        visiting the area, and CAC failing to gain full time employment and
        being unable to support his family.


    26. In relation to the risk  of  reconviction,  using  the  established
        assessment tools, the risk was found to be low.   The  report  does
        not contain a great deal of  detail  and  in  particular  fails  to
        comment upon whether the fact CAC attempts to  minimise  his  role,
        does not recognise the extent of it, and declines to face up to the
        reality of what he has done, if this fact was known to  the  author
        of the report, was factored into the assessment of  risk.  If  such
        factors were known and  not  considered  it  does  cast  doubt  the
        reliability of the conclusion; especially as CAC sold the drugs for
        personal economic gain and one of the issues highlighting  risk  is
        economic need and inability to provide for his family.   The  above
        form part of the assessment for finding a risk of reoffending  over
        and above that contained in the NOMS Report in paragraph 102 of the
        determination.  We do not find that such a finding has  been  shown
        to be perverse or irrational.


    27. In any event, even if the risk of reoffending was  low,  this  does
        not prove legal error material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal.  In Gurung v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 62 the  Court  of  Appeal
        said that the absence of a  risk  of  reoffending,  though  plainly
        important, is not the "ultimate aim" of the deportation regime.


    28.   In   Masih   (deportation   -    public    interest    -    basic
        principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046(IAC)  the Tribunal said that
        so long as account is taken  of  the  following  basic  principles,
        there is at present no need for further citation  of  authority  on
        the public interest side of the balancing exercise.  The  following
        basic  principles  can  be  derived  from  the  present  case   law
        concerning the issue of the public  interest  in  relation  to  the
        deportation of foreign  criminals:  (i)  In  a  case  of  automatic
        deportation, full account  must  be  taken  of  the  strong  public
        interest  in  removing  foreign  citizens convicted  of   serious
        offences, which lies not only in the prevention of further offences
        on the part of the individual concerned, but  in  deterring  others
        from committing them  in  the  first  place.  (ii)  Deportation  of
        foreign  criminals  expresses  society's  condemnation  of  serious
        criminal activity and promotes public confidence in  the  treatment
        of foreign citizens who have committed them. (iii)   The  starting-
        point for assessing the facts of the offence of which an individual
        has been committed, and their effect on others, and on  the  public
        as a whole, must be the view taken by the  sentencing  judge.  (iv)
        The appeal has to be dealt with on the basis of  the  situation  at
        the date of the hearing. (v) Full account should also be taken  of
        any developments since sentence was passed, for example the  result
        of any disciplinary adjudications in prison or  detention,  or  any
        OASys or licence report.


    29. The third challenge relates to the  Article  8  balancing  exercise
        conducted by the  Panel.  It  was  accepted  before  us  that  this
        challenge relates solely to the  fifth  of  the  Razgar  questions,
        namely the proportionality assessment. It was submitted by Mr Misra
        that having considered the evidence, including the impact upon  the
        relationship with EC and the fact they would no longer be  able  to
        live together, that it should have been found that the decision was
        disproportionate.


    30. During the course of the hearing  an  interesting  point  arose  in
        relation to the comment  by  the  Panel  that  CAC  disagreed  with
        remarks made by the Sentencing Judge. It  was  advanced  before  us
        that this  disagreement  was  a  relevant  factor  especially  when
        considering the proportionality of the decision. We set  out  above
        the sentencing remarks and in particular the comment by HHJ  Coates
        that CAC should have thought of his partner and children before  he
        went out selling drugs.  The submission made  appeared  to  suggest
        that CAC did not accept the statement  because  rather  than  being
        reckless about his partner and children he had thought about  them.
        If he did think about them and claims his  motive  in  selling  the
        drugs was for their economic betterment to meet the  needs  of  his
        family it could equally be argued that he embarked on this  venture
        not only with the full knowledge of the benefits but also the  risk
        to  his  ties  to  the  family  as  a  result  of  imprisonment  or
        deportation if caught.  In QJ v  SSHD  (2009)  UKSIAC  84/2009  the
        Appellant had been involved in terrorist  activities.   Deportation
        was found to be legitimate deterrent to those who were non  British
        citizens  who  had  committed  such  crimes.   SIAC  said  that  by
        undertaking those activities, the claimant  had  knowingly  put  at
        risk the opportunity of enjoying family life and he could  have  no
        legitimate complaint at the disruption, either short or long  term,
        of his family life as a result of his deportation.   Although  this
        is a SIAC case we find the same approach can in principle apply  in
        the case of lesser offences.


    31. It is established jurisprudence that  a  challenge  to  a  properly
        conducted proportionality exercise is only susceptible to challenge
        on Public Law grounds.  The  submissions  made  before  us  do  not
        identify any such ground as  the  Panel  took  into  account  every
        aspect in favour of CAC and the family and the seriousness  of  his
        offending and harm that drugs caused to the community. As stated in
        paragraph 46 of SS (Nigeria) "the more pressing the public interest
        in removal or deportation, the stronger must  be  the  claim  under
        Article 8 if it is to prevail. This  antithesis,  in  my  judgment,
        catches in the present context the essence of  the  proportionality
        test required by Article 8(2)."


    32. In SS (Nigeria) the appellant had been sentenced  to  3  years  for
        dealing drugs. He appealed relying on the  best  interests  of  his
        children. The Court of Appeal said that in previous cases in  which
        potential deportees raise claims under Article 8 rule lying on  the
        children's interests insufficient attention had been  paid  to  the
        weight attached to the policy of deporting foreign criminals  which
        came from primary legislation. The  finding  that  deportation  was
        proportionate was upheld.


    33. In Richards v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
        EWCA Civ 244 the Jamaican claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in
        1999 and had a daughter aged six. He had a number of serious  drugs
        offences. The Upper Tribunal dismissed his appeal. The Court of the
        Appeal upheld the decision and said that the  important  point  was
        that the strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals  was
        not merely the policy of the Secretary of State but  the  judgement
        of Parliament. That gave it special weight which the courts  needed
        to recognise.


    34. When weighing up the factors in favour of the Secretary of State as
        set out in Masih and the case law above,  including  the  deterrent
        element, the evidence considered by the Panel in  relation  to  the
        best interests of the children (which will continue to  be  met  by
        their remaining with their mother), the situation of EC  and  other
        associated with CAC, the potential damage to society caused by drug
        dealing, the refusal of CAC to engage with  the  Panel  and  answer
        questions relating to his role, and his  attempts  to  minimise  or
        recognise the extent and culpability for his offending,  it  cannot
        be said that the finding of the Panel that the Secretary  of  State
        had discharged the  burden  of  proof  upon  her  to  the  required
        standard to show that the decision was proportionate  or  that  CAC
        had not  shown  he  could  bring  himself  within  the  exceptional
        circumstances envisaged by the Rules, is a finding that  is  either
        perverse, irrational, or contrary to the evidence.  We do not  find
        it proved that the decision is infected by legal error material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal even accounting for the ages  of
        the children and the period of time for which CAC will  be  refused
        entry to the UK.


    35. In AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 Sedley  LJ  said  "the  tragic
        consequence is that this family...  Would  be  broken  up  forever,
        because of the appellant's bad behaviour. That is what  deportation
        does."




Decision

    36. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Panel's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    37. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


          We continue that order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure           (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19th November 2013












