
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01349/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decisions and Reasons promulgated    |
|on 22 September 2015                 |on 26 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JOSEPH HILMAN GREENWOOD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr M S Gill QC, instructed by Hanwsoods Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary  of  State")
    dated 27 June 2013, whereby it  was  determined  that  the  deportation
    provisions of section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 (the "2007 Act")
    apply to the Respondent, a national of  Jamaica  aged  36  years.   The
    impetuous for this decision was the conviction  of  the  Respondent  in
    respect of two counts of possession of Class A  Controlled  Drugs  with
    intent to supply (crack cocaine and heroin), generating a  sentence  of
    five years imprisonment, on 23 September 2011.

History

 2. The history is somewhat protracted and we summarise it thus:

    (a)  In April 2002 the Respondent  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         visitor and was subsequently granted leave to remain as a student.

    (b)  On 23 January 2004 he was  sentenced  to  12  months  imprisonment
         having pleaded guilty to possession of heroin with intent to supply
         and two other drugs possession offences.

    (c)  On 30 April  2004  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  make  a
         deportation order against the Respondent.

    (d)  On 26 July 2006 the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  allowed  the
         Respondent's appeal against this decision.

      e) There followed the grant of discretionary leave to  remain  to  the
         Respondent, ultimately expiring on 06 May 2011.

      f) Between January and September 2011 the Respondent was  detained  on
         remand in respect of certain drugs offences.

      g) On 24 June 2011 the Respondent  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom based on his  marriage  to  a  British
         citizen on 23 September 2003.

      h) On 23 September 2011 the index convictions  were  made  at  Bristol
         Crown Court.

      i) On 07 October 2011 the Secretary of State refused the  Respondent's
         indefinite leave to remain application.

      j) By a determination promulgated on 09 February 2012  the  First-tier
         Tribunal dismissed the appeal, finding that the Respondent did  not
         satisfy paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules and,  further,  that
         his deportation would not infringe Article 8 ECHR.

      k) On appeal, the Upper Tribunal held that the FtT had erred in law in
         its dismissal of the  appeal  under  Article  8.  By  its  decision
         promulgated on 19 December 2012,  the  Upper  Tribunal  remade  the
         decision, dismissing the Respondent's appeal.

      l) Meantime, on 15 March 2012, prior to the  grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  (supra),  the  Secretary  of  State
         transmitted  the  customary  "minded  to  deport"  letter  to   the
         Respondent.

      m) This elicited representations on behalf of the Appellant.

      n) Next, on 27 June 2013, the Secretary of State decided that  section
         32(5) of the 2007 Act was applicable  and,  on  the  same  date,  a
         deportation order was made.

First Decision of the FtT

 3. By its decision promulgated on 23 September 2013, the FtT  allowed  the
    Respondent's  appeal.  It  did  so  on  the  single  ground  that   the
    deportation order (dated 17 June 2013) preceded the decision to  deport
    (dated 27 June 2013). This decision was based on an analysis of various
    decisions of the 2007 Act and the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (the  "2002  Act").  Having  made  this  conclusion,  the  FtT
    declined to determine the second ground of appeal, which was  based  on
    Article 8 ECHR.  It formulated its decision in these terms:

         "The Respondent's decision to deport Mr  Greenwood  dated  24  June
         2013 is not in accordance with  the  law.   Given  the  fundamental
         nature of the Respondent's error, we remit the matter back  to  the
         Respondent for the error to be remedied.   We,  therefore,  do  not
         proceed to decide the substance of the Article 8 appeal.  We  allow
         the appeal against deportation to the aforementioned extent only."

 4. We shall comment infra on the FtT's election to decide  the  appeal  in
    part only.

First Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The  Secretary  of  State  was  granted  permission  to  challenge  the
    aforementioned decision of the FtT by  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which, by its determination dated 04 July 2014, set aside the  decision
    of the FtT.  It did so on two main grounds.  First, it  concluded  that
    there is nothing unlawful where a notice that section 32(5) of the 2007
    Act applies postdates the associated deportation  order.  We  highlight
    the following passages:

         "[29]    ... The making of the deportation  order  expressly  under
                section 32(5) is a decision that section  32(5)  applies  to
                the case.  To treat it otherwise would be bizarre ...

         [33] ... [It] is the clearest possible indication that the decision
                maker has decided that the subsection applies ...

         [38] The right of appeal is against the decision that section 32(5)
                applies.  Such  a  decision  is  not  rendered  unlawful  by
                bearing a date after that of the deportation  order,  either
                on the basis  that  the  combination  of  dates  necessarily
                indicates a failure of due process or on the basis  that  it
                necessarily indicates that the person giving the reasons was
                unable fairly to consider the case."

    The Upper Tribunal determined to set aside the decision of the FtT  and
    to order remittal.  This was the stimulus for  the  further,  and  most
    recent, decision of the FtT giving rise to the appeal which we must now
    decide.

 6. For completeness, by its order dated 29 April 2015 the Court of  Appeal
    dismissed the Respondent's application for permission to appeal against
    the last mentioned decision of the Upper Tribunal.

The Most Recent Decision of the FtT

 7. The FtT allowed the Respondent's appeal.   The  basis  upon  which  the
    judge did so is discernible from the following passages:

         "[104]   ... I find that it would be unduly harsh for the child  to
                remain in the UK without the Appellant ...

         [107]    I come to the conclusion that at  this  time  and  on  the
                evidence now before me there  are  very  compelling  reasons
                over and above those in paragraphs 399 and 399A ...

         [109]    In the circumstances of this case, the separation  of  the
                Appellant from his children and extended family  is  in  the
                public interest but the strong  (and  very  weighty)  public
                interest in this  case  is  outweighed  by  the  Appellant's
                interests and  those  of  the  children  concerned  and  his
                partner ...

         [110]    I find that the Appellant meets the  requirements  of  the
                Immigration Rules namely  that  there  are  very  compelling
                reasons over and above the matters listed in  paragraph  399
                and 399A which outweigh the public interest in this case."

    Under  the  rubric  of  Article  8  ECHR,  the  Judge's  analysis   and
    conclusions continued, containing the following salient passages:

         "[121]   ... It is difficult to  see  that  a  decision  under  the
                Immigration Rules in this case  would  justify  a  different
                conclusion in respect of Article 8 ...

         [122]    It is my  view  that  the  proportionality  considerations
                under the Immigration Rules and outlined above cover all the
                factors which the Tribunal should consider under  Article  8
                ...

         [124]    In all the circumstances of this case, the separation  (ie
                deportation) of the Appellant  from  the  children  and  his
                partner is in the public interest but this is outweighed  by
                the  Appellant's  interests  and  those  of   the   children
                (including step children and wider extended family) and  his
                partner ...

         [126]    In all the circumstances and for the reasons already given
                above I consider that the  decision  of  the  Respondent  is
                disproportionate ...

         [128]    Therefore the Appellant meets the exceptions  set  out  in
                section 33 (UKBA 2007)."

Our Decision

 8. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  against
    this decision.  The essence of the grant of permission is contained  in
    the following passage:

         "The decision does not show what it is about the  circumstances  of
         the Appellant and the children that  make  it  very  compelling  or
         unduly  harsh.   The  situation  was  predictable   as   were   the
         consequences for the Appellant and his family."

    There is little correlation between the grant of permission  to  appeal
    (on the one hand) and the dominant argument which was presented  to  us
    on behalf of the Secretary of State (on the other). We  permitted  this
    argument to unfold de bene esse. Its substance is that the FtT erred in
    law in its consideration of paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  Immigration
    Rules. Paragraph 398 must also be considered.  We reproduce here  these
    three provisions:




    Paragraph 398

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least  12
             months; or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because, in the view of
             the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused  serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a  particular
             disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing
             that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies
             and, if it does not, the public interest in  deportation  will
             only be outweighed by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraphs 399 and 399A."

    Paragraph 399

         "399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

          i) the child is a British Citizen; or

         ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the  7
             years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

          b) the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and

          i) the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

         ii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

        iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the  UK
             without the person who is to be deported."

    Paragraph 399A

         "399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -

          a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and

          b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

 9. As the Appellant's personal  and  family  circumstances  are  rehearsed
    adequately in the decision of the FtT, they need not be repeated  here.



10. In all cases belonging to this  sphere,  the  contest  is  between  the
    several public interests favouring deportation - deterrence, protecting
    the public, maintaining firm  immigration  control  and  promoting  the
    economic wellbeing of the nation - and the private, personal  interests
    of the offender and the members of his family circle.  The  potency  of
    the public interest in play was emphasised resoundingly by the Court of
    Appeal in SS (Nigeria) - v - SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  This theme  has
    continued to chime in further decisions of the Court of Appeal.  In  LC
    (China) - v - SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1310, it was stated, at [21]:

         "The fact  that  they  are  British  nationals  is  undoubtedly  of
         importance, since it carries with it  the  right  to  live  and  be
         brought up here, but in this  case  the  children  appear  to  have
         formed no particular attachment to this country and are of  an  age
         at which they can be expected to  integrate  into  Chinese  society
         with less difficulty than  might  otherwise  have  been  the  case.
         However, they are not being required to leave the UK,  since  their
         mother has indefinite leave to remain and can continue to care  for
         them here, if she so chooses. If the appellant is deported, it will
         be for him  and  his  partner  to  decide  whether  it  is  in  the
         children's best interests to remain here with her or move to  China
         as part of a united family. In the end, however, this  case  turned
         largely on the balance struck between two competing interests:  the
         public interest  in  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  and  the
         children's interests in remaining here with both parents."

    The judgment continues, at [24]:

         "The starting point for any such assessment is the recognition that
         the public interest in deporting foreign criminals is so great that
         only in exceptional circumstances will it be  outweighed  by  other
         factors, including the  effect  of  deportation  on  any  children.
         However, in  cases  where  the  person  to  be  deported  has  been
         sentenced to a term of imprisonment for less than  four  years  and
         has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a  child
         under the age of 18 years who enjoys British nationality and is  in
         the UK, less weight is to be attached  to  the  pubic  interest  in
         deportation if it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to
         leave the UK and there is no one else here to look  after  him.  By
         contrast, however,  where  the  person  to  be  deported  has  been
         sentenced to a term  of  four  years'  imprisonment  or  more,  the
         provisions of paragraph 399 do not apply and accordingly the weight
         to be attached to the public interest in deportation  remains  very
         great despite the  factors  to  which  that  paragraph  refers.  It
         follows that neither the fact that the appellant's  children  enjoy
         British nationality nor the fact that they may  be  separated  from
         their father for a long  time  will  be  sufficient  to  constitute
         exceptional circumstances of  a  kind  which  outweigh  the  public
         interest in his deportation. The appellant's children will  not  be
         forced to leave the UK since, if she chooses to do so, their mother
         is free to remain with them in this country."

11. Most recently, in PF (Nigeria) - v - SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  251,  the
    Court of Appeal,  having  emphasised  the  supreme  importance  of  the
    tribunal identifying exceptional, or compelling, factors sufficient  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation, stated at [43]:

         "I fully recognise that if the Judge's factual  findings  are  well
         founded, they will be a real and damaging impact on his partner and
         the children: but that is a common consequence of  the  deportation
         of a person who has children in  this  country.   Deportation  will
         normally be appropriate in cases such as the present,  even  though
         the children will be affected and the interests of the children are
         a primary consideration."

    We are also mindful of the statement of the Court of Appeal in SSHD - v
    - MA Somalia [2015] EWCA Civ 48, at [17], that -

         ".... the scales are heavily weighted in favour of deportation  and
         that something very compelling is required to outweigh  the  public
         interest in deportation."

12. The Secretary of State's argument also invokes the recent  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Chege (Section  117D  -  Article  8  -  Approach)
    [2015] UKUT 00165. This decision, inter alia, that in applying the  new
    provisions of Part 5A of the 2002 Act, the Tribunal  should  adopt  the
    following sequence:

    (a)  Is  the  appellant  a  foreign  criminal  as  defined  by  section
         117D(2)(a), (b) or (c)?

    (b)  If "yes", does he  fall  within  paragraph  399  or  399A  of  the
         Immigration Rules?

    (c)  If "no", are there very compelling circumstances  over  and  above
         those falling within paragraphs 399 and 399A?

13. It is common case that the Respondent is a  "foreign  criminal"  within
    the meaning of section 117D(2). Furthermore, paragraph 398 of the Rules
    applies  to  this  case  because  the  Appellant   was   sentenced   to
    imprisonment for a  period  exceeding  four  years.  As  a  result  the
    Appellant, on appeal to the FtT, could not succeed simply by satisfying
    paragraph 399 or 399A of the Rules. By paragraph 398 the  Secretary  of
    State, in the first place and the Judge, on appeal, were  both  obliged
    to do two things: first, to consider  whether  paragraph  399  or  399A
    applies and,  if yielding a negative answer, then to  consider  whether
    the public interest in deportation was  outweighed  by  other  factors.
    This entailed the application of the following  test:  are  there  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A?

Conclusion

14. The gravamen of the argument on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  is
    that the Judge erred in law by considering paragraphs 399 and  399A  en
    route to his conclusions. We consider this argument to be fundamentally
    flawed.  Logic, reason and common sense dictate that paragraphs 399 and
    339A must be considered in the application of the "over and above" test
    enshrined in paragraph 398. Indeed a failure to  do  so,  if  material,
    would itself be an error of law. In cases where, as here, the "over and
    above" test is engaged, paragraphs 399 and 399A provide the bridge,  or
    link, between the application of the test and  the  resulting  outcome.
    Giving effect  to  the  ordinary  and  natural  meaning  of  the  three
    provisions of the Rules under scrutiny, we consider that:

    (a)  The first question is whether, having regard to the  findings  and
         evaluative assessments made, the Secretary of State (in  the  first
         place) and the FtT (on appeal) considers that either paragraph  399
         or 399A of the Rules applies.

    (b)  If the above exercise yields the assessment that  neither  of  the
         said paragraphs applies, it is then  necessary  to  decide  whether
         there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

15. It requires no manipulation or distortion of  the  text  of  the  FtT's
    decision to conclude that the  Judge,  in  deciding  the  appeal,  gave
    effect to the approach  which  we  have  espoused  above  and  to  that
    contained in Chege.  Mr Melvyn, on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,
    was driven to accept that the Judge's decision is replete with  correct
    self-directions  in  law.  We  reminder  ourselves  of  the  scope  for
    intervention of an appellate tribunal in cases of this kind.  This,  it
    may be observed, is sometimes overlooked.  In particular, in  practice,
    it is not addressed in the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.  Nor
    is it routinely addressed in the grant of permission to appeal.  Indeed
    one may also observe, with  deference,  that  in  a  number  of  recent
    decisions of the Court  of  Appeal  the  governing  principles  do  not
    feature.

16. These principles are based in authority of  unmistakable  pedigree  and
    binding force. They are contained in Edwards - v - Bairstow  [1956]  AC
    14.  While their Lordships were not uniform in their formulation of the
    governing principle, it suffices to recall what Lord  Radcliffe  stated
    (at page 9):

         "I do not think that it much matters whether this state of  affairs
         is described as one in which there is no evidence  to  support  the
         determination or as one in which the evidence is inconsistent  with
         and contradictory of the determination or as one in which the  true
         and  only  reasonable  conclusion  contradicts  the  determination.
         Rightly understood, each phrase propounds the same test."

    The test for unreasonableness, which later became known as  perversity,
    or irrationality, is whether the decision under appeal is one which  no
    person acting judicially and properly instructed on  the  relevant  law
    could reasonably have made. The restraint which an appellate court must
    exercise, having regard to these principles, features in  the  decision
    of the House of Lords in Moyna - v - Secretary of State  for  Work  and
    Pensions [2003] UKHL 44.  In R - v - Monopolies and Mergers Commission,
    ex parte South Yorkshire  Transport  [1993]  1  WLR  23,  Lord  Mustill
    offered the following pithy summary (at 32 - 33):

         "In such a case the Court is entitled to substitute its own opinion
         for that of the person to whom the decision has been entrusted only
         if the decision is  so  aberrant  that  it  cannot  be  classed  as
         rational."

    Decisions which fall "within the permissible field of judgment" do  not
    satisfy this elevated hurdle.

17. The second question which arises is whether  the  Judge  committed  any
    error of law in his application of the correct legal test. We  find  no
    such error. In the context of the present appeal there is no suggestion
    that the Judge left out of account any material evidence nor can it  be
    suggested sustainably in law that the Judge allowed anything extraneous
    to enter  the  equation,  that  second  proposition  follows  from  our
    rejection of the Secretary of State's primary argument.  That being the
    case the touchstone for intervention is irrationality.   This  Tribunal
    can find an error of law in the context of  this  appeal  only  if  the
    Judge's conclusion on the application of  the  correct  legal  test  is
    vitiated  by  irrationality.   That  is   a   self-evidently   elevated
    threshold, one which is rarely satisfied in  practice  and  one  which,
    interestingly, does not feature expressly in many of the  recent  Court
    of  Appeal  decisions  belonging  to  this   sphere.   The   test   for
    irrationality has been formulated in a variety  of  tried  and  trusted
    ways. Was it reasonably open to  the  Judge  taking  into  account  all
    material factors and disregarding everything extraneous  to  reach  the
    conclusion under challenge?  Another formulation is: did his conclusion
    fall within the band of conclusions reasonably open  and  available  to
    him? There is also the repeated  admonition  to  appellate  courts  and
    tribunals that what they might have done as a first instance  court  or
    tribunal is not in point. Thus while it may be  that  not  every  first
    instance immigration judge would  have  reached  the  conclusion  under
    challenge in this appeal this does not vitiate in law the decision.

18. The Upper Tribunal has the impression that the Secretary of State, as a
    matter  of  routine,  applies  for  permission  to  appeal   in   every
    deportation appeal in which the  appellant  succeeds  before  the  FtT.
    Furthermore, the grounds of appeal are frequently formulated  in  bland
    and formulaic terms. Thirdly, the grounds of appeal  rarely,  if  ever,
    engage with the governing principles which we have rehearsed above.  We
    would suggest that these observations be carefully considered by  those
    who compile applications for permission to appeal and  the  Judges  who
    decide them.

19. If there is indeed a practice of  this  kind  we  suggest  that  it  be
    reconsidered by  the  Secretary  of  State.   To  slavishly  apply  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in every deportation  appeal
    resolved in favour of the appellant, if this be the practice, is not  a
    proper  or  legitimate  invocation  of  this  Tribunal's  jurisdiction.
    Decisions on whether to apply for permission to appeal  should  be  the
    product of conscientious evaluation  of  the  first  instance  judicial
    decision in every case.  This, we consider, is what was contemplated by
    the legislature in making provision for this mechanism.  Access to this
    Tribunal via the process of an application  for  permission  to  appeal
    requires  a  conscientious,  considered  assessment  in   every   case.
    Inundation of the Upper Tribunal with permission to appeal applications
    in every case belonging  to  a  given  category  cannot  be  considered
    harmonious with the Parliamentary intention. Moreover, it is unfair  to
    other users.

20. Finally, we have drawn attention,  in  [8]  above,  to  the  disconnect
    between the grant of permission to appeal and  the  case  presented  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State at the hearing. We also  received  the
    customary 11th hour skeleton argument on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  We take this opportunity to emphasise, not for the first  time,
    the impropriety of each of  these  practices  and  the  breach  of  the
    Tribunal's procedural rules which they entail.

CONCLUSION

21.  We  are  satisfied  that  applying  the  correct  legal  criteria  and
    principles this decision withstands scrutiny.  Accordingly  we  dismiss
    the appeal of the Secretary of State and affirm  the  decision  of  the
    FtT.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Dated:  12 October 2015
