
IAC-AH-LEM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2015                           |On 26 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bradshaw instructed by Hasan, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, HA, is a citizen of Turkey who was  born  in  1961.   I
    shall hereafter refer to the appellant as the  respondent  and  to  the
    respondent as the appellant (as they appeared respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).  In 2008, the appellant was convicted  of  making
    dishonest representations to obtain welfare benefit  and  sentenced  in
    2009 to a period of eighteen months'  imprisonment.   The  decision  to
    make a deportation order under the UK Borders Act 2007 was taken on  13
    May 2014 and the appellant appealed against that decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) which, in a determination promulgated  on
    30 October 2014, allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant has a son, TA, who is a British citizen and  is  aged  16
    years.  The appellant's wife has medical problems which cause her  pain
    and limit her mobility.  Judge Shimmin found as a fact  [66]  that  the
    wife is disabled.  The appeal turned on the  application  of  paragraph
    399 of the  Immigration  Rules.   In  essence,  the  judge  found  that
    deportation of the appellant would have unduly harsh  consequences  for
    the child TA in particular; at [80], the judge noted "giving weight  as
    detailed above to the public interest in deporting foreign criminals  I
    found it would be unduly harsh on TA to deport the appellant."

 3. Matters are complicated by the change in the  Immigration  Rules  which
    took place between the date of the Secretary of State's decision letter
    and the hearing before Judge Shimmin.  Applying the  previous  text  of
    paragraph 399, the Secretary of State accepted [31] that TA is  in  the
    United Kingdom and is a British citizen  and  also  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect TA to leave the United  Kingdom.   However,  the
    Secretary of State considered there  was  another  family  member  (the
    appellant's wife / TA's mother) who would be able to care for TA in the
    United Kingdom.  By the time the  appeal  came  before  Judge  Shimmin,
    paragraph 399(a) appeared in the following form:

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
             if -

               a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                   i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                  ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported...

 4. I accept that the judge was told by Mr Bradshaw  (who  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal also) and the Presenting Officer that the judge
    should have considered the "new" form of paragraph 399(a) but the judge
    appears to have applied a combination of the old and new  text  of  the
    Rules.  As I explained in court, this "belt and braces"  approach  does
    not itself render the determination wrong in law; indeed, it is  better
    that the Tribunal applies tests which may not be relevant than that  it
    should fail to apply a relevant test.   Judge  Shimmin  found  that  TA
    would "spend the rest of his childhood and into his  young  adult  life
    held back and burdened by the care of his [disabled] mother." [77].  He
    considered that the child would have to take "over his  father's  role"
    and that this would "adversely affect his education  and  development".
    The judge then found [78] (unnecessarily, in the light of the change in
    the Rules) that there would, in effect, be "no other family member  who
    is able to care for" TA because the mother could not do so  because  of
    her disability.  Whether that judgment was right or wrong is irrelevant
    since the judge was applying the former text  of  the  rule.   Further,
    confusion arose as to the "reasonableness" of  TA  returning  with  his
    father to Turkey and whether or not it would be  "unduly  harsh".   The
    proper test, under the new form  of  the  Rule,  was  that  of  "unduly
    harsh".  That was not a matter considered in the refusal  letter  which
    was written at a time when the Rules provided for the reasonableness of
    the child leaving the United Kingdom to be considered.

 5. As Mr Bradshaw pointed out, having previously said  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable for TA to travel to Turkey to live, the Secretary of State
    is now suggesting that it was "anything but unreasonable" for him to do
    so.  The grounds of appeal submit that there was no  good  evidence  to
    show that the appellant (who speaks Turkish and has been shown to  have
    run a business in the United Kingdom  previously)  will  be  unable  to
    obtain employment in Turkey.  In the  circumstances,  it  is  submitted
    that it is wrong for the Tribunal  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
    likely lack of employment would mean that it was unduly harsh for TA to
    join him in Turkey.

 6. At [44] Judge Shimmin noted

         I accept the appellant's argument that at his  age  he  would  have
         difficulty in obtaining a job  in  Turkey  and  any  job  would  be
         unlikely to be well paid.  He claims this would make  it  difficult
         to obtain health treatment for his wife and  education  in  English
         for his son.

    I see no difficulty in Judge Shimmin accepting the appellant's evidence
    on that point.  The fact that the appellant may have been found  guilty
    of a dishonesty offence does not mean that every statement that he  may
    subsequently utter  will  be  unreliable,  as  the  grounds  appear  to
    suggest.  Furthermore, Judge Shimmin does not go beyond accepting  that
    the appellant might find it difficult to find  a  job  in  Turkey;  the
    remainder of the passage which I have quoted above is no more than  the
    judge recording what the appellant said in evidence ("he claims  ...").
    Much more emphasis (entirely reasonably, in my view) is  given  in  the
    judge's reasoning to the illness and disability of the appellant's wife
    and the practical difficulty which TA (a teenager  just  beginning  his
    GCSE year at school) would face, in  the  absence  of  his  father,  in
    having to look after his disabled mother.  Moreover, in  the  light  of
    the text of the "new" paragraph 399, I find it was open to the judge to
    conclude, having regard to all the  circumstances,  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect TA to live  in  a  country  which  he  had  only
    visited on three occasions and where he had never lived  and  where  he
    would be unable to enjoy his own rights as a British citizen.  Although
    it  may  be  arguable,  notwithstanding  her  disabilities,  that   the
    appellant's wife would (in terms of the "old" form of  the  rule)  have
    been able to "care for" TA, it was open to the judge to  conclude  that
    the same factual matrix would render it unduly harsh for TA  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without the appellant (paragraph 399).

 7. As both parties accepted  at  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  there  is
    nothing in the particular facts of this appeal which would  compel  any
    particular outcome of the appeal.  It follows, therefore, that  it  was
    open to Judge Shimmin to allow the appeal, whilst any confusion on  his
    part as to the correct text of the Immigration Rule  is  not  material.
    The question remaining is whether the judge achieved that outcome by  a
    proper analysis of the relevant evidence and by supporting his decision
    with cogent reasoning.  I find that he did do so.  In effect, the judge
    has given reasons for allowing the appeal under both the  old  and  new
    form of paragraph 399.  Another Tribunal may have reached  a  different
    outcome but  that  is  not  the  point.   Accordingly,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 24 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
