
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01326/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 11th June 2013                             |on 12th June 2013            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                OSS (Jamaica)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: In person (previous representatives withdrew due to lack
of funding).
For the Respondent: Mrs K Heath Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer and Ms J
        Endersby (hereinafter  referred  to  as  'the  Panel')  who,  in  a
        determination promulgated on the  7th  March  2013,  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal against the order for his deportation made under
        section 32(5) UK Borders Act 2007.



Background


     2. The appellant was born on the 22nd April 1979 and is a  citizen  of
        Jamaica. He entered the United Kingdom lawfully as  the  spouse  of
        his wife, who I shall refer to as J, on 19th  February  2010.  They
        have a child M born in March 2011.


     3. The deportation order was made following the appellant's conviction
        at Snaresbrook Crown Court on 25th November 2011 for  drug  related
        offences.  Such  was  the  magnitude  of  the   supply   activities
        prosecution Counsel  advised  HHJ  T  King  during  the  sentencing
        exercise that the incidents of supply  of  Class  A  drugs  in  the
        location had fallen by 60%.  It was also noted these were  offences
        committed, with others, on an organised basis.


     4. The Panel considered all the evidence they were asked to  consider,
        including the effect of the order on the appellant, his  wife,  and
        their child, before concluding that the decision to deport him  was
        proportionate and so the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.


     5. The application for permission to appeal was initially refused  but
        thereafter granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  it  was
        arguable the Panel  failed  to  carry  out  a  proper  analysis  as
        required  by  paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration   Rules   before
        considering the Article 8 grounds.




Discussion



     6. This is a deportation appeal in which both  the  Immigration  Rules
        and Article 8 ECHR are relevant.    In  Izuazu  (Article  8  -  new
        rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) the Tribunal held that:


               (i)       In  cases  to  which  the  new  Immigration   Rules
   introduced as from 9                  July 2012 by HC 194  apply,  Judges
   should proceed by first                            considering whether  a
   claimant is able to benefit  under  the                        applicable
   provisions   of   the   Immigration    Rules    designed    to    address
   Article 8 claims. Where the  claimant  does  not  meet  the  requirements
     of the rules it will be necessary to go on to  make  an  assessment  of
          Article 8 applying the criteria  established  by  law.  The  Upper
              Tribunal observation  in  MF  (Article  8-new  rules)  Nigeria
   [2012]                       [2012]UKUT 00393 (IAC) to the same effect is
   endorsed;


              (ii)     The procedure adopted in relation to the introduction
   of the new                   Rules provided a weak form of  Parliamentary
   scrutiny; Parliament                  has not altered the legal  duty  of
   the   Judge   determining   appeals   to                     decide    on
   proportionality for himself or herself;


              (iii)    There can be  no  presumption  that  the  Rules  will
   normally be                      conclusive of the Article  8  assessment
   or  that  a  fact-sensitive  inquiry                    is  normally  not
   needed. The more the new Rules restrict otherwise                relevant
   and   weighty   considerations   from   being   taken    into    account,
   the  less  regard  will  be  had   to   them   in   the   assessment   of
     proportionality.


     7. The grounds argue that the Panel erred in  their  consideration  of
        paragraph 399 (b) in that  they  found  there  was  another  family
        member who is able to care  for  the  child  if  the  appellant  is
        deported. It is argued that the Panel should have  considered  this
        question by reference to whether there was a family member able  to
        care for the child to a standard  that  is  adequate  to  meet  the
        child's particular needs.  It is argued that the needs of J and the
        effect of the loss of the appellant through deportation would  mean
        she was unable to care for M to the required standard as  a  result
        of which the child will suffer.


     8. J filed two witness statements which were considered by  the  Panel
        and she gave oral evidence. There is specific reference to  her  in
        paragraphs 38 to 44 of the determination, including  a  letter  she
        wrote to the respondent  on  16th  August  2010  outlining  marital
        problems.  She gave oral evidence and was cross-examined  as  noted
        in paragraphs 9 to 16. It is clear the Panel  considered  with  the
        degree of care required in an appeal of this nature the  effect  of
        the order upon J and M and the impact upon her ability to meet  her
        son's needs. In paragraph 44 the Panel found:


              44. In his submissions Mr Ali contended that [J] is  not  able
   to care for the                  young child in the appellant's  absence.
   It is suggested that she is               struggling to cope  and  had  a
   nervous breakdown and panic attacks.               We  find  no  credible
   evidence that the child is significantly  suffering                    or
   put  at  risk  due   to   mother's   current   circumstances.    We   are
   informed that there  are  arrears  of  rent  and  she  is  facing  salary
          reductions.  But we are not persuaded that these circumstances are
   of                   sufficient  weigh  to  counterbalance   the   public
   interest in deporting a                   convicted drug dealer.


     9. It was found there is another family member in the UK,  namely  M's
        mother J. It was found the appellant had not substantiate his claim
        to the required standard to show that if he was deported the effect
        upon J will be such that she will be unable to parent  M  and  meet
        his basic and other relevant needs. Before me today J gave evidence
        and repeated the difficulties she will face but  also  stated  that
        she is a little better than she was, in herself. I  accept  she  is
        upset by the decision and there will have to  be  re-adjustment  to
        her lifestyle but I also formed the impression  she  is  a  capable
        woman and devoted mother who will do all she can to meet the  needs
        of her child.  It  may  be  difficult  but  there  is  insufficient
        evidence that she is incapable of doing so or that  M  will  suffer
        physical  or  emotional  harm  such  as  to   make   the   decision
        disproportionate when the appellant is deported.


    10. It is not disputed that the best interests of M are to  be  brought
        up by two loving parents and the Panel were aware of this. The fact
        of the  matter,  however,  is  that  when  considering  the  public
        interest, as defined in the case of Masih [2012]  UKUT  00045,  and
        balancing this against the factors relied upon  by  the  appellant,
        the legitimate aim relied upon by the  respondent  carried  greater
        weight. This is a finding reinforced on the facts by  the  judgment
        of Laws LJ in SS ( Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.


    11. A careful reading of the determination shows all  relevant  factors
        were considered with the degree of care required in a case of  this
        nature. I find the Panel gave adequate reasons for  their  findings
        and undertook the proportionally assessment in an appropriate  way.
        I find no public law grounds have been proved to apply to enable  a
        successful challenge to the proportionality assessment. The grounds
        are in effect a disagreement with the conclusions  reached  and  an
        attempt to re-argue point  already  considered  by  the  Panel.  No
        material error of law is proved. The decision is within  the  range
        of permissible decisions open to the Panel on the evidence.


Decision

    12. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Panel's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    13. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11th June 2013












