
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
DA/01779/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 June 2017                        |        On 20 June 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               farhan shabbir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan, instructed by Greenhall, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Farhan Shabbir, was born on 31 December 1994  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  By a decision  dated  20  August  2013,  the
    respondent made a deportation order against the appellant  pursuant  to
    Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  on  the  basis  that  his
    deportation would be conducive  to  the  public  good.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Brunnen;  Ms  S  E  Singer)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 18 December 2013 dismissed the
    appeal.  The appellant appealed to the Upper  Tribunal.   There  was  a
    hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley (as he then was) in  March
    2014.  Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley set aside the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision by way of a  direction  dated  25  March  2014  he  also  gave
    directions for a resumed hearing before  himself  at  Manchester  which
    took place on 23 July 2014.  The Upper Tribunal reserved  its  decision
    but, on 28 July 2014,  issued  further  directions.   These  directions
    recorded the fact that on 28 July 2014 Section 19  of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014 had been brought into force; "As a result, the  Tribunal  will
    be reconvened for the purpose of hearing any  further  submissions  the
    parties may wish to make on the definition as contained in Section 117D
    [of the amended 2002 Act] and on the application of Maslov v Austria if
    any to this appeal."

 2. Unfortunately, for reasons which are not at all clear, the hearing  was
    not reconvened until February 2015.  One  hearing  thereafter  did  not
    take place because Judge Chalkley was unwell and a further hearing  was
    aborted  when  Judge  Chalkley  refused  to  hear  submissions  on  the
    appellant's behalf from any representative other than Counsel  who  had
    appeared previously.

 3. Thereafter, a transfer order was made to  myself  and  I  attended  the
    Crown Court in Manchester on three occasions.  The appellant (who  had,
    by that date, been convicted of a further offence  and  was  serving  a
    prison sentence) no longer had  a  solicitor  and,  frustratingly,  was
    never produced so the hearings were unable to proceed.   Eventually,  I
    convened a For Mention hearing at Manchester on 6 June 2017 when I  was
    greatly assisted by the presence of Mr McVeety, for the respondent, and
    Mr O'Ryan of Counsel who had been instructed by new  solicitors  acting
    for the appellant  who,  I  understand,  has  now  been  released  from
    detention on licence.

 4. The position in this appeal is unsatisfactory.  Judge Chalkley has  now
    retired and does not sit regularly in the Upper Tribunal as a deputy in
    Manchester.  In any event, the hearing which took place before him  and
    at which he heard evidence from several witnesses  took  place  several
    years ago and it is difficult to see how he  would  be  able,  so  long
    after the event, to provide a proper  analysis  of  the  oral  evidence
    which he heard.  Judge Chalkley has, of course, already set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision  and  the  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to
    maintain the  original  decision  upon  which  these  proceedings  were
    founded.  At the hearing on 6 June  2017,  the  representatives  and  I
    agreed that the only prudent course of action in this case is  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Brunnen; Ms
    Singer) for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision.  Judge
    Chalkley has already directed that none of the findings of  fact  shall
    stand.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been  set  aside  by  an
    order of Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 25 March 2014, this appeal is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Brunnen;  Ms  E  Singer)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 19 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
