
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
da/01924/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham City Centre Tower     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 June 2016                           |On 20 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     CS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Haye of H & M Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant or any member of his family. This direction  applies
    to, amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I make this
    order in order to avoid a risk of serious harm to the children in  this
    matter.

 2. In a decision dated 21 March 2016, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  which  allowed  an  appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision of 16  September  2014  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order. That decision is appended. This decision remakes the
    appeal against the refusal to revoke the deportation order.

 3. The parties were in agreement that, in line with SSHD v  ZP  (India)  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1197, the correct legal  approach  was  to  follow
    paragraphs 390 and 391  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  provide  as
    follows:
       390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
       considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
       following:
       (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
       (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
       (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance of an
       effective immigration control;
       (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
       circumstances.
       ...
       391. In the case of a person who has been deported following
       conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation of a deportation
       order against that person will be the proper course:
       (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person
       was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years,
       unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the deportation
       order when, if an application for revocation is received,
       consideration will be given on a case by case basis to whether the
       deportation order should be maintained, or
       (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person
       was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years, at any
       time,
       Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to the
       Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to
       the Status of Refugees, or there are other exceptional circumstances
       that mean the continuation is outweighed by compelling factors.

 4. The parties were also in agreement that the  provisions  of  paragraphs
    398, 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules do not apply here.  This  is
    because someone with a sentence of less than 12 months only falls to be
    assessed under paragraphs 398,  399  and  399A  only  if,  set  out  in
    paragraph 398, the  respondent  considers  that  "their  offending  has
    caused serious harm or they are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
    particular disregard for the law". Mr Mills confirmed that is  not  the
    case here. The parties also agreed that  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 did not  apply
    here where the appellant, as someone with a sentence of  6  months,  is
    not a "foreign  criminal"  as  defined  therein  or  elsewhere  in  the
    legislation; see OLO and Others [para 398 - foreign  criminal")  [2016]
    UKUT 00056 (IAC).

 5. It should be noted, however, that the Court of Appeal was clear at [24]
    of ZP (India) that little substantive differences arises in  revocation
    case even where paragraphs 398 - 399A are not in play, stating:

         "The exercise required in a case falling  under  paragraph  391  is
         thus broadly the same as that required  in  a  case  falling  under
         paragraph 390A or  paragraph  398.  Decision-takers  will  have  to
         conduct an assessment of the  proportionality  of  maintaining  the
         order in place for the  prescribed  period,  balancing  the  public
         interest  in  continuing  it  against  the  interference  with  the
         applicant's private and family life; but in striking  that  balance
         they should take as  a  starting-point  the  Secretary  of  State's
         assessment of the  public  interest  reflected  in  the  prescribed
         periods and should only order revocation after a lesser  period  if
         there are compelling reasons to do so."

 6. That being so,  my  starting  point  is  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of the deportation order for ten  years,  the  respondent's
    assessment as contained in paragraph 391.  The  deportation  order  was
    made against the appellant on 2 June 2010 following  a  conviction  for
    possession of a false identify  document  and  sentence  of  6  months'
    imprisonment. The decision was  not  appealed  and  the  appellant  was
    deported from the UK to India in 2010, so 5 years ago. Only "compelling
    reasons" can lead to a revocation of the deportation order now.

 7. The evidence before me cannot show  those  "compelling  circumstances".
    The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  appellant  had  not  shown  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his own son or  his  step-son.
    That was a conclusion manifestly open to the judge where the  appellant
    has spent very little time with either child and has mostly lived in  a
    different country from them. There was nothing before  me  to  indicate
    otherwise. The appellant is the biological father of one child and step-
    father to the other but his lack of a strong relationship  with  either
    does not indicate that it is strongly in their best interests  for  him
    to return to the UK, certainly not so as  to  amount  to  a  compelling
    circumstance that should lead to  the  revocation  of  the  deportation
    order.

 8. The  appellant  gains  little  assistance  from  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 where he does not  have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the  children  and  where  his
    family life with his partner was established only whilst  he  was  here
    unlawfully, indeed after he was deported, his son being born thereafter
    also. The appellant and his wife clearly wish to  be  together  and  to
    bring up their children together but that cannot amount to a compelling
    circumstance in the context of a deportation appeal.

 9. If anything, the  scales  now  weigh  even  more  heavily  against  the
    appellant as, after the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  he
    attempted to enter the UK illicitly in breach of the deportation  order
    but was arrested and is currently in immigration detention.   Paragraph
    390  specifies  that  the  "maintenance  of  an  effective  immigration
    control" is a relevant factor and here it weighs  heavily  against  the
    appellant and the revocation of the deportation order.

10. It is my conclusion that compelling reasons are not shown here that can
    outweigh the public  interest  in  the  continued  exclusion  from  the
    appellant from the UK.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be re-made.

12. The appeal is re-made as refused.

Signed   [pic]                               Date 24 June 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



APPENDIX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION PROMULGATED ON 22 MARCH 2016

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01924/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham City Centre Tower         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2016                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr David, instructed by J Stifford Law

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


13. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant or any member of his family. This direction  applies
    to, amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

14. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 2  July  2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford which allowed  the  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 16  September  2014  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order.

15. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department as the respondent  and  to  CS  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.



16. The background to this matter is that the appellant entered the UK on a
    six month visit visa on 26 September 2004.  When that six  month  visit
    visa expired he remained as an overstayer.  On 10  March  2010  he  was
    encountered  by  the  immigration  authorities  and  found  to  be   in
    possession of a false Belgian  passport.   On  26  March  2010  he  was
    convicted of possession of a false identity document  with  intent  and
    sentenced to six months' imprisonment and recommended for  deportation.
    After making an asylum claim  which  he  then  withdrew  the  appellant
    requested return to India  under  the  Facilitated  Return  Scheme.   A
    deportation order was made  on  2  June  2010  and  the  appellant  was
    deported on the same day.

17. After his departure, the appellant's British partner  followed  him  to
    India.  She lived with him there from June  2010  until  October  2011.
    The appellant and his partner married in India on 2  July  2010.   They
    then relocated to Spain where the  appellant's  partner  exercised  her
    Treaty rights as an EEA national by working. The appellant was able  to
    obtain an EEA family residence permit and join her there.   The  couple
    continued to live together in Spain and had a child together,  G,  born
    on 3 June 2013 in the UK.

18. Whilst living in India and Spain, the appellant's  wife  had  left  her
    son, R, from a previous relationship  with  her  parents.   Finding  it
    difficult to live apart from him and wanting to bring  G  up  with  the
    support of her family in the UK, the appellant's wife moved back to the
    UK after G's birth and the appellant returned to  India.   He  made  an
    application for the revocation of his deportation order on 3 June 2013.
     As above, the respondent refused  that  application  on  16  September
    2014.

19. The family history as set out above was not materially disputed  before
    me.  The respondent accepts the  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with the appellant's wife and that he is the father of G and stepfather
    of R.

20. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford had this to say  about  the  appellant's
    relationship with the children, really the factor on  which  this  case
    turns, finding as follows at [35]:

         "Neither child has formed a strong bond with the  Appellant  as  of
         yet.  That is because the Appellant was in Spain when  G  was  born
         and I had no evidence before me to show that G would even recognise
         his father at this point in time.  Apart from  possibly  some  time
         spent in Spain visiting his mother and  the  Appellant,  R  has  no
         knowledge of the Appellant and no relationship with him"

    and at [39]:

         "39.     Paragraph 399 only refers to undue harshness if the  child
              is to remain in the UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
              deported and does not refer to  other  family  relationships.
              It refers to the genuine and subsisting parental relationship
              between the Appellant and the child.  I am not satisfied that
              the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
              R.  His relationship with G is limited due to the  fact  that
              the Appellant has not been living in the UK with G since  his
              birth almost two years ago."

21. The First-tier Tribunal went on as follows at [40], [42] and [43]:

         "40. The real issue in this case is not the  parental  relationship
             the Appellant has with G and/or with R.   The  real  issue  is
             whether, in order to enjoy any parental relationship with  his
             father, G should be obliged to move to Spain with his  mother,
             which involves the separation of R and G, or alternatively the
             separation of R from his maternal grandparents  with  whom  he
             has a very close relationship of emotional  dependency,  given
             that they have been his carers between 2010 and  2013  and  he
             has remained living with them  in  the  same  household  since
             then.

         ...

         42.  Having considered the matter carefully, and  bearing  in  mind
             the serious nature of the offence, the length of the sentence,
             the length of time the  appellant  has  been  outside  of  the
             United Kingdom, the fact that G is the Appellant's son and  it
             is in his best interests  to  have  a  relationship  with  his
             father which he  has  not  yet  been  able  to  form,  and  in
             particular the importance in the lives of both G and R of  the
             maintenance and continuation of their fraternal relationships,
             I am satisfied that this decision is unduly harsh  on  both  G
             and R.  I do not accept that the decision is unduly harsh  for
             [the Appellant's wife] as she formed her relationship with the
             Appellant at a time when she knew he had no immigration status
             and she married him after he was deported from the UK.  Whilst
             it is untrue to  suggest  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
             unaware of the relationship, I am  unable  to  find  that  the
             decision  is  disproportionate   taking   into   account   her
             relationship with the Appellant.  She is  a  British  national
             but as an adult she made a decision to enter into and pursue a
             relationship with the Appellant knowing the  difficulties  for
             that  relationship.   But  there  are  two  British   national
             children involved in this situation, and bearing in  mind  all
             of  the  factors  listed  above,  I  am  satisfied  that   the
             continuing deportation of the Appellant is disproportionate to
             the public interests of being protected.   The  Appellant  has
             served his sentence for his offence.  He has now been excluded
             from the United Kingdom for a  period  of  almost  five  years
             following his six month sentence.  The reality of this  family
             situation is that either (the Appellant's  wife)  takes  G  to
             live with her and the Appellant in Spain, thus denying  R  the
             continuing close relationship he currently has with his mother
             and his brother  G,  or  (the  Appellant's  wife)  severs  her
             relationship with the  Appellant  and  G  does  not  have  the
             opportunity to develop and enjoy  his  relationship  with  the
             Appellant.  It is not an option for R to move  to  Spain  with
             his mother and the Appellant because he is now almost 11 years
             of age and has lived his entire life in  the  United  Kingdom.
             It will be contrary to his best interests to remove  him  from
             the emotional support and stability  offered  to  him  by  his
             maternal grandparents.  It would also be contrary to his  best
             interests to remove him  from  the  education  system  in  the
             United Kingdom and expect him to adapt at the age of almost 11
             to living in Spain, a country of which  he  has  very  limited
             knowledge.  There is  no  evidence  to  show  that  he  speaks
             Spanish and he is at an  important  transition  point  in  his
             childhood.  He will be moving to  secondary  school  with  his
             cohort in September 2015.

         43.  I am satisfied that this decision is disproportionate  because
             the public interest of  maintaining  immigration  control  and
             preventing  crime  and  disorder  have  been  served  by   the
             Appellant's deportation, but it is highly questionable whether
             his continued exclusion is necessary to maintain  and  protect
             those  public  interests.   Also,  I  am  satisfied  that  his
             exclusion is unduly harsh for both  British  citizen  children
             involved in this case.  I am satisfied that the  circumstances
             have been materially altered by the birth of G in the  UK  and
             the relationships that have been formed between  G  and  other
             family members since then."

22. The First-tier Tribunal then goes on to allow the appeal "on Article  8
    human rights grounds".

23. At paragraph 14 of the grounds the respondent submits that:

         "The FTTJ has failed to provide any reason for concluding  that  it
         would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK  without
         the  Appellant,  other  than  the  speculative  hindrance  to   the
         development of a relationship with G.  It is respectfully  asserted
         that  the  conclusion  that  there  would  be  an  'unduly   harsh'
         consequence ... completely ignores the Tribunal's previous findings
         that the Appellant has no real relationship with  either  of  these
         children."

24. It is my view that this ground has merit such that the decision  cannot
    stand. The First-tier Tribunal found in very clear terms  at  [35]  and
    [39] that neither  of  the  children  had  a  "genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship" with the appellant. The provisions of  paragraph  399  of
    the Immigration Rules and section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 both require  there  to  be  such  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting relationship" before consideration is given as to whether  a
    particular child faces "unduly harsh" circumstances as a result of  the
    continued deportation. Any assessment under either  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 399 or s.117C regarding the appellant's relationship with the
    children is fatally flawed as a result. It was not open to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to allow the appeal on the basis of  undue  hardship  for
    the children where there was no "genuine and  subsisting  relationship"
    with those children.

25. In fact, the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  applying  those  statutory
    provisions at all as the appellant has a sentence of only six months so
    the deportation provisions set out in paragraphs 398-399A do not  apply
    to him and nor does s.117C.  The references to the appeal being allowed
    because the decision was  "unduly  harsh"  for  the  children  indicate
    clearly to me that  they  were  incorrectly  applied  here.  I  was  in
    agreement with Mr Mills that this in itself showed  material  error  as
    the outcome of an Article 8 assessment that  did  not  refer  to  those
    statutory provisions could not be said to be inevitably the same.

26. It is also not my judgement, contrary to argument  for  the  appellant,
    that the judge found a higher test  had  been  met  when  applying  the
    statutory provisions so a "lower", free-standing second stage Article 8
    "Razgar" assessment would inevitably have  succeeded.  The  failure  to
    factor in the fact of the appellant having very weak or no family  life
    with R and mere biological parenthood of G and how  that  might  affect
    the best interests assessment  in  any  proportionality  exercise  also
    amounts to material error.

27. I find an error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    these reasons such that it must be set aside and remade.

28. This is not a case where the nature or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact
    finding makes it necessary, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2, to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be re-made.

30. The appeal will be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

Directions

31. The appeal will be re-made on the basis of oral submissions subject  to
    written representations as to the need for  any  oral  evidence,  those
    representations being made no later than 21 days from the date of  this
    decision.

32. No later than 7 days before the hearing, both  parties  will  submit  a
    skeleton argument setting out the correct legal approach to  an  appeal
    against as decision refusing revocation of a  deportation  order  where
    the criminal conviction attracted a sentence of only six months.

Signed   [pic]                               Date 21 March 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

