
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01024/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 May 2013                                 |On 3 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |




                                   Before

                            MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                 adam nyami

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Kotak (of counsel) instructed by Kesar and
                  Company Solicitors

For the Respondent:   Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION

1.   Under challenge in these proceedings  is  the  Respondent's  Notice  of
    Decision dated 25th November 2010 that section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
    Act  2007  applies  to  the  Appellant.  Thereby  the  Respondent   has
    determined to deport the Appellant to Nigeria on the ground that he was
    convicted on 27th February 2009 of possession and/or  use  of  a  false
    instrument, namely a fabricated  passport.   By  its  earlier  decision
    promulgated on 9th November 2012, this  Tribunal  determined  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside  and  would  be
    remade in this forum. [The Decision and  Directions  of  this  Tribunal
    dated 9th November 2012 are annexed hereto.]  When  relisted  for  this
    purpose on 16th January 2013, the hearing was adjourned to enable  some
    further evidence to be obtained on behalf of the Appellant.

2.   In its earlier decision, this  Tribunal  found  that  the  Respondent's
    Notice of Decision and the Determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were vitiated by a misunderstanding of the case made by the  Appellant,
    particularly relating to the early phase of his  life  and  upbringing.
    As a result, the assessment of the Appellant's case as incredulous  was
    unsustainable. This Tribunal also held that the First-tier Tribunal had
    failed to take into account certain "country" evidence. At that  stage,
    the main focus was on the Appellant's asylum claim. The conclusion  was
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by  error  of
    law and should be set aside in consequence.   It  was  further  decided
    that the decision would be remade in this forum.

3.   At earlier  stages,  the  Appellant's  case  was  advanced  on  various
    grounds.  Ultimately, however, it was based exclusively on  his  rights
    under Article 8 ECHR. This entails a sharp refocussing of the issues to
    be determined.

THE EVIDENCE: A SUMMARY

4.   The Appellant did not testify at the hearing before us.   The  Tribunal
    did, however, hear evidence from the Reverend Evans, who  ministers  to
    an  evangelical  congregational  church  in  the  locality  where   the
    Appellant resides.  The  Reverend  was  an  impressive  and  persuasive
    witness.  He recounted that the Appellant has  been  a  member  of  his
    church congregation for some 3 � years.   He  normally  attends  church
    services twice on a Sunday and on  one  weekday  night  at  fortnightly
    intervals.  He visits the Reverend around twice a week  in  the  church
    office.  He is supported by the congregation,  which  has  "become  his
    family to care for him".  He is provided with basic  necessities  (food
    and money) when  required.   He  has  social  interaction  with  church
    members.  His mood is low and depressed at times. He is  neglectful  of
    his personal care. He continues to study the Bible.  The Reverend Evans
    testified that the Appellant would have great difficulty  in  surviving
    without the support and comradeship of the church circle .

5.   The evidence includes several expert  reports.   These  establish  that
    the Appellant suffers from a severe to profound hearing loss.  There is
    a related speech impediment and an associated difficulty in engaging in
    conversational speech.  He also suffers  from  a  cognitive  impairment
    with moderate learning disabilities.   His  literacy  skills  are  very
    limited.   Mr  Sellwood,  Chartered   Educational   Psychologist,   has
    expressed the following opinion:

         "Without such experience of independent living,  Mr  Niyami  is  at
         risk of exploitation .....


         [He] should be seen as a person with two significant  disabilities,
         hearing loss and cognitive deficit.  These interact with each other
         to significantly inhibit learning and independent living."


    A psychologist, Dr McNulty, has found the  Appellant's  expressive  and
    receptive language skills to be "very poor".  The symptoms described by
    him were consistent with "unusual levels  of  psychological  distress".
    He suffers from a range of abnormal psychological  difficulties.    His
    English is described as very crude and  his  vocabulary  limited.   The
    account given  by  the  Appellant  to  Natalia  Dawkins,  author  of  a
    trafficking report, confirms the strength  of  his  attachment  to  and
    dependence on the Reverend Evans' church and its congregation.    Based
    on the history provided by the Appellant, Ms Dawkins has formulated the
    following opinion:

         "It is my view that returning Mr  Niyami  to  either  Sudan  and/or
         Nigeria will exacerbate his vulnerability [with an] increasing risk
         of  destitution  and  possible  further  exploitation.   Mr  Niyami
         explained that he does not have any family or social connections in
         Nigeria or Sudan, that he does not know how to  do  anything  apart
         from domestic servant work.  He fears that because he is from Sudan
         and hearing impaired, a return to Nigeria would mean  he  would  be
         once again treated as a slave."


    Ms Dawkins opined that from childhood through adolescence and until his
    arrival in the United Kingdom the Appellant had been trafficked for the
    purpose of domestic slavery and had been exploited accordingly.


6.   In his witness  statement,  the  Appellant  (inter  alia)  details  his
    connections with and reliance on the local church.   He  describes  his
    church and faith activities and his interaction  with  church  members.
    He states:

         "I would miss the church and the people very much ......

         The church is my family, who help me a lot."


     His evidence on this issue chimes with that of the Reverend  Evans  and
    squares with what is documented elsewhere.






FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

7.   The final  framework  of  this  appeal  has  been  reduced  to  one  of
    comparatively narrow  dimensions,  having  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    reliance on Article 8 ECHR and nothing else.

8.   We have considered all of the evidence carefully  and  critically.   It
    is common case that the Appellant  has  been  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2nd November 2008. We find that he previously spent  most
    of his life in The Sudan, where he has no family and had no established
    family life in any real sense.  His period of residence in Nigeria, the
    country to which the Respondent proposes to deport  him,  was  of  some
    eight  years  duration  at  most.    The  Appellant's  case  has   been
    documented in several places since his arrival in the  United  Kingdom.
    The accounts thus recorded undoubtedly  exhibit  certain  imperfections
    and wrinkles.  Taken together, they exhibit some lack  of  harmony  and
    consistency.  However, in  our  evaluation  of  all  the  evidence,  we
    consider it important to have  particular  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    profound  hearing  loss,  his  psychological   difficulties   and   his
    significant cognitive impairment. We believe that these have  been  the
    cause of communication difficulties  which,  in  turn,  have  generated
    certain discrepancies more apparent than real.  Furthermore, we observe
    that the Appellant's account of his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    corroborated by the evidence of the Reverend Evans,  which  we  accept.
    On balance, we believe the essential core of the Appellant's story.  We
    are satisfied that  it  is  not  contaminated  by  anything  contrived,
    invented or exaggerated.

 9. Having regard to the decisions of the House of Lords in Razgar  -  v  -
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 25 and Huang - v
    - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11, we propose
    to adopt the following approach:

    (a)  Would the deportation of the Appellant from the United Kingdom  to
        Nigeria interfere with the exercise of his right to respect for his
        private or family life?

     (b) If "yes", does such interference have consequences of such  gravity
        as to engage the operation of Article 8?

     (c) If "yes", would such interference be in accordance with the law?

    (d)  If "yes", would this interference be  necessary  in  a  democratic
         society in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well being of the country, for the protection of  disorder
         or crime, for the  protection  of  health  or  morals  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


    (e)   If  "yes",  would  such  interference  be  proportionate  to  the
         legitimate public end sought to be achieved?


  10. The parties' respective representatives were united in their approach.
      There was no dispute that the deportation of the Appellant to  Nigeria
      would interfere with his  established  private   life  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  The legitimate aims invoked by the Respondent in its  Notice
      of Decision were  "the  prevention  of  disorder  and  crime  and  the
      maintenance of  an  effective  immigration  control".   There  was  no
      challenge to the legitimacy of these aims in principle.


  11. The parties were agreed that, in this  particular  case,  the  central
      question is that of proportionality.  Thus  a  balancing  exercise  is
      required of the Tribunal.  On the one hand, there is the general right
      of states to control the entry and residence of non-nationals  through
      a regime of restrictive immigration rules and  requirements.   On  the
      other hand, where the actual or proposed conduct of the state  entails
      interference with a person's right to respect for  private  or  family
      life, this is permissible only where proportionate to  the  legitimate
      aim in play.  This exercise will frequently require  consideration  of
      issues such as the age, health and vulnerability of the applicant, the
      closeness  and  previous  history  of  the  family,  the   applicant's
      dependence on the financial and emotional support  of  his  family  or
      private circle and the prevailing cultural traditions  and  conditions
      in the country of origin: per Lord Bingham in R (Ullah) - v -  Special
      Adjudicator  [2004] 2 AC 323, paragraph  [20].   We  remind  ourselves
      further that Article 8 cases are intensely fact sensitive,  frequently
      requiring "difficult evaluative exercises": per  Lord  Bingham  in  EB
      (Kosovo) - v - Secretary of State of the Home Department  [2008]  UKHL
      41, paragraph [12].

12.  It is proposed to deport the Appellant to Nigeria.  We  find  that  his
      links with that country are tenuous.  He is a  Sudanese  national  who
      has spent most of his life in The Sudan. He has  no  family,  friends,
      social circle, community or roots of any kind in Nigeria. We  consider
      it telling that the evidence indicates that the Appellant had only one
      acquaintanceship of note in Nigeria.  We find that  this  amounted  to
      nothing more than a limited association which has not  given  rise  to
      any continuing communications since the  Appellant's  arrival  in  the
      United Kingdom. There is  no indication of any enduring  relationship.
      Furthermore, the lack of any strong emotional or other  attachment  is
      illustrated by the Appellant's willingness to travel to  this  country
      with a view to remaining here permanently.  Taking into  account  also
      the passage of time, we further find  that  this  acquaintanceship  is
      unlikely to be revived in the event of the Appellant's deportation  to
      Nigeria.  Furthermore, we find that  if  returned  there  he  will  be
      exposed to a significant risk of the exploitation, ill  treatment  and
      slavery which characterised the first 35  years  of  his  life,  until
      arrival in the United Kingdom. He would arrive in Nigeria  friendless,
      jobless and as a foreign national suffering from significant physical,
      psychological and cognitive disabilities.

13.  We  find  that  the  Appellant  is  heavily  dependent  on  his  church
    congregation.  This is a source of substantial material,  psychological
    and social support to him.  Most of his private  life  is  immersed  in
    this circle.  Furthermore, the congregation has become his 'family'. He
    is a needy and dependent member of a helpful and  supportive  group  of
    human beings.  We find that this  dependence  has  increased  with  the
    passage of time. His  interaction  with  the  church  congregation  has
    become a central and  indispensable part of the Appellant's life.   The
    Appellant's private life in the United Kingdom is well established  and
    continues to develop.  This would be extinguished permanently, with  no
    realistic possibility of a comparable substitute, in the event  of  his
    deportation to Nigeria.  Furthermore,  the  evidence  suggests  clearly
    that the Appellant will continue to develop as a person if  he  remains
    in the United Kingdom, whereas regression is likely  in  the  event  of
    deportation.   The   contrast   between   the   two   scenarios   under
    contemplation is acute and unmistakable. In summary, we  consider  that
    to deport the Appellant to Nigeria would interfere profoundly with  his
    well established private life  in the United Kingdom.


14.  We address the other factors in  the  balance,  having  regard  to  the
    legitimate aims invoked by the Respondent.   We  acknowledge  that  the
    Appellant's offence of attempting to enter the United Kingdom  using  a
    false passport was one of  some  gravity  and  engages  the  legitimate
    policy aim of maintaining firm and effective  immigration  control  by,
    inter alia, punishing offenders and deterring the  individual  offender
    and others from further offending.  However, we note the absence of any
    suggestion that the Appellant is  likely  to  engage  in  any  form  of
    criminality in the  United  Kingdom  and,  having  regard  to  all  the
    evidence, we are satisfied that there is no realistic prospect of  this
    eventuating.  Furthermore, while the Notice of  Decision  mentions  the
    prevention of disorder, this  has  the  appearance  of  a  boilerplated
    formulation.  It has no evidential foundation and was not developed  in
    submissions on behalf of the Respondent.  As regards  the  aim  of  the
    prevention  of  crime,  we  consider  that  in  this  particular   case
    sufficient deterrence is provided by the  prosecution,  conviction  and
    imprisonment of the Appellant.

15.   Having regard to the facts found and the assessment set out above,  we
    consider that in the measurement of proportionality, the  balance  tips
    in favour of the Appellant.   Thus  we  conclude  that  to  deport  the
    Appellant to Nigeria would be disproportionate  and  would,  therefore,
    infringe his rights under Article 8 ECHR.


THE TRAFFICKING ISSUE

16.  In her presentation of the Appellant's  case,  Ms  Kotak  (of  counsel)
    urged the Tribunal to find that the Appellant  had  been  a  victim  of
    people trafficking in  contravention  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Action  Against  Trafficking  in   Human   Beings   ("The   Trafficking
    Convention"). This is a Council of Europe measure, signed by the United
    Kingdom Government in 2007 and ratified in 2008. It entered into  force
    on 1st February 2008, having received the necessary ten  ratifications.
    It has been ratified by the vast majority  of  the  Council  of  Europe
    Member States.  Article 10 provides:

         "Each party shall provide its competent  authorities  with  persons
         who  are  trained  and  qualified  in  preventing   and   combating
         trafficking in human beings, in identifying  and  helping  victims,
         including children and shall ensure that the different  authorities
         collaborate with each  other  as  well  as  with  relevant  support
         organisations, so that victims can be  identified  in  a  procedure
         ....."


     Where the relevant authority has identified a  victim  of  trafficking,
    the person concerned may qualify for a residence permit  under  Article
    14.  The Convention is a comprehensive measure,  focusing  particularly
    on the protection of victims of trafficking  and  the  safeguarding  of
    their rights. It is also designed to prevent and deter trafficking  and
    to prosecute the  perpetrators  thereof.   It  embraces  all  kinds  of
    exploitation, sexual exploitation, forced labour  and  kindred  abuses,
    whether national or transnational and irrespective of  whether  related
    to organised crime.  It  also  establishes  an  independent  monitoring
    mechanism for the purpose of securing compliance with its provisions by
    the Parties.


17.  In the United Kingdom, the Respondent is the  competent  authority  for
    the purposes of the Convention.  By its decision of 27th  August  2010,
    the Respondent determined that there were  no  reasonable  grounds  for
    believing that the Appellant is a victim of trafficking.  The  decision
    was made by the Criminal Case Work Directorate (Liverpool)  of  the  UK
    Border Agency.   This decision was entirely independent of the impugned
    deportation decision.  It was based on an assessment  of  (inter  alia)
    the circumstances of the Appellant's journey  to  and  entry  into  the
    United Kingdom, including the factors of  age and sponsor.  It is clear
    that an important ingredient of this decision was the rejection of  the
    Appellant's assertions of slavery on the  ground  that  they  were  not
    considered credible.

18.  Our evaluation of this argument is as follows.   In  the  first  place,
    there is no right of appeal to this Tribunal against  the  Respondent's
    trafficking decision: see Part V of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  2002.   Secondly,  the  Trafficking  Convention  cannot  be
    invoked as a freestanding  source  of  rights,  obligations  and  legal
    effects and consequences in domestic law, as it  is  an  unincorporated
    international treaty. Thus the long established principle that treaties
    are not self-executing in municipal law  applies.  This  principle  was
    expressed unambiguously by Lord Phillips in Ahmed -  v  -  HM  Treasury
    [2010] 2 AC 534, at paragraph [109], in the following terms:

         "Treaties entered into by the United Kingdom  do  not  take  direct
         effect.  Treaties are entered into  by  the  Government  under  the
         Royal Prerogative, but unless  and  until  Parliament  incorporates
         them into domestic law, they confer no powers  upon  the  executive
         nor rights or duties upon the individual citizen"


     This is frequently described as the principle in the International  Tin
    Council case
         ( [1990] 2 AC 418).  A  corollary  of  this  principle  is  that  a
    failure by a public authority to take into account the provisions of an
    unincorporated international treaty is  not  of  itself  a  ground  for
    impugning the exercise of a discretionary power: R v  the  Ministry  of
    Defence, ex parte Smith [1996] QB 517, page 558 (Per Sir Thomas Bingham
    MR).  It is, of course, established that  unincorporated  international
    instruments have a role in certain contexts, a paradigm  example  being
    the presumption that Parliament does not intend to  legislate  contrary
    to the United Kingdom's international obligations:  see  most  recently
    Assange - v - Swedish Prosecution Authority [2012] UKSC  22,  paragraph
    [122] (Per Lord Dyson).  Furthermore, a decision may be impugned  where
    a public authority purports to apply  an  unincorporated  international
    treaty provision but errs in doing so: R - v - Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department, ex parte Launder [1997] 1 WLR 839, page  867  (per
    Lord Hope).  However, none of these principles avails the Appellant  in
    the instant case.  Moreover, in the present  context,  the  measure  of
    international law in question was more than simply taken into  account:
    it was the subject of a  specific  application  by  the  Appellant  and
    ensuing decision by the designated organ of the State. In  passing,  we
    observe that the Trafficking Convention is one  of  over  200  treaties
    adopted by the Council of Europe since its inception in 1949, the  vast
    majority whereof belong exclusively to the domain of international  law
    (the ECHR and some of its Protocols being the most  notable  exceptions
    in the United Kingdom).

19.  Finally, we consider that it would have been open to the  Appellant  to
    challenge the Respondent's  trafficking decision by an application  for
    judicial review. The Tribunal was informed that  such  challenges  have
    occurred. However, he did not pursue this remedy. We are of the opinion
    that  backdoor  challenges  to  trafficking  decisions  made   by   the
    Respondent under the Trafficking Convention   are  not  permissible  in
    appeals of the present kind. They lie outwith  the  competence  of  the
    First-tier and Upper Tribunals. Whether the trafficking decision  will,
    or can, be reopened in the light of this Determination is not a  matter
    for this Tribunal.

20.  For this combination of reasons, we consider the  Appellant's  argument
    on this discrete issue misconceived.

DISPOSAL

21.  We remake the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  allowing  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR for the reasons explained in paragraphs [8]
    to [15]  above.

Signed:

Bernard McCloskey                            Date: 15 May 2013

Mr Justice McCloskey,

High Court of Justice of Northern Ireland



                       ANNEX

Representation:
For the Appellant:  Ms  Marisa  Cohen  (of  counsel)  instructed  by  Winson
                       Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:        Mr. L. Tarlow, (Home Office Presenting  Officer).





                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS



     Framework of this Appeal

   1. This appeal has its origins in the Notice of Decision of the UK Border
      Agency made  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department ("the Respondent").  This decision  took  the  form  of  an
      order deporting the Appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
      Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 and Section 32(5) of  the  UK
      Borders Act 2007.  Thereafter, the sequence of events was as follows:

      (i) The Appellant appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal, unsuccessfully.


      (ii)    He then appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the ground that  the
           first instance  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  in  refusing  his
           application for an adjournment in  circumstances  where  he  was
           unrepresented and  had  intimated  an  intention  to  attend  an
           imminent medical appointment for the purpose of having a hearing
           aid fitted.  The Respondent's representative conceded  that  the
           Appeal was meritorious and, by its decision promulgated on  12th
           September 2011,  the  Upper  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  and
           remitted it to the First-Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


      (iii)   A further hearing  before  a  freshly  constituted  First-Tier
           Tribunal ensued, on 23rd February 2012.   By  its  Determination
           promulgated on 1st June 2012, the First-Tier Tribunal  dismissed
           the appeal on asylum grounds; concluded that the  Appellant  did
           not qualify  for  humanitarian  protection;  and  dismissed  the
           appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  The Respondent's deportation order
           was, accordingly, affirmed.


      (iv)    On 22nd June 2012, permission to appeal to this  Tribunal  was
           granted, in the following terms:


                 "In an otherwise detailed determination ... the panel omits
                 any mention  of  the  Appellant's  written  submissions  on
                 nationality and findings of fact dated 27th  February  2012
                 ... It is at least arguable that the  panel  did  not  take
                 [these] into account ...


                 Not to  have  considered  those  important  submissions  is
                 arguably an error of law ...  All the issues raised in  the
                 grounds are arguable.


   2. The grounds to which the aforementioned grant of permission to  appeal
      to this Tribunal refers are the following:

      (i) The First-Tier  Tribunal  misdirected  itself  in  law  in  making
           certain findings in relation to removal to The Sudan.


      (ii)    The Tribunal  made  irrational  findings  in  respect  of  the
           Appellant's credibility.


      (iii)   The Tribunal  made  irrational  findings  in  respect  of  the
           Appellant's nationality and removal.


      (iv)    The Tribunal failed to take into account evidence relating  to
           the risks attendant upon the Appellant's return to Nigeria.


      (v) The Tribunal committed a material misdirection in law in  relation
           to jurisdiction.


      This latter ground was  expressly  abandoned  at  the  outset  of  the
      hearing of this appeal.


     Formulation of the Appellant's Case

   3. One commences with a generalisation.  In a large number  of  cases  of
      this genre, the way in which the  person  claiming  asylum  under  the
      Refugee Convention and/or humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C
      of the Immigration Rules and/or protection under  the  regime  of  the
      Human Rights Act 1998 (frequently invoked provisions being Articles 2,
      3, 4, 5 and 8 ECHR) assumes  substantial  importance  in  the  ensuing
      decision  making  process  and  decisions  of  the  Respondent.   This
      continues through the appeals process which ensues in so  many  cases.
      In short, what the individual claimant said, or what was said  on  his
      behalf, from the moment of his or her arrival in  the  United  Kingdom
      until the writing of the final chapter  is  very  often  a  matter  of
      unmistakable importance.

   4. This truism applies with full force  to  the  present  case.   In  the
      Notice of Decision, the Respondent purported to rehearse  the  various
      claims and assertions made by and on behalf of the Appellant from time
      to time, to construe and analyse them, to utilise them as key tools in
      assessments of credibility and consistency and to  make  findings  and
      conclusions accordingly.  In these circumstances, it is not less  than
      essential to examine the various formulations of the Appellant's case.
       While we have considered  these  in  full  and  have  conducted  this
      exercise with care, we confine ourselves to setting out in  this  part
      of the judgment some of the salient aspects thereof.

   5. One begins with certain uncontested facts.  The Appellant  arrived  in
      the United Kingdom on 2nd  November  2008,  having  flown  there  from
      Amsterdam.  He was unaccompanied.  He claimed asylum on this date.  He
      was arrested on suspicion of possessing  a  false  identity  document,
      namely  a  fabricated  passport  and  this  generated  his  subsequent
      conviction on 27th February 2009 (supra).  This conviction became  the
      impetus for the proposed deportation of the Appellant which, in  turn,
      has stimulated the series of Tribunal hearings rehearsed in  paragraph
      [1] above.  From the date of his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  the
      Appellant  has  been  the  subject  of   certain   inquisitorial   and
      investigative steps, including  interviews,  by  the  Respondent.   In
      particular:

      (i) In the "screening  interview"  dated  2nd  November  2008,  it  is
           recorded that he did not know his age; he did not know his  last
           permanent address in his asserted country of origin, The  Sudan;
           he had left the Sudan with his 'master' five  years  previously,
           travelling via Uganda to Nigeria; his journey to  Amsterdam  and
           the United  Kingdom  had  been  organised  by  his  master;  his
           master's name is "S. Brown" and he has known him from the age of
           seven years; he knew nothing about Nigeria; his master  informed
           him that if he came to the United Kingdom  his  life  "would  be
           saved"; he had no family in Nigeria; the "rebel" had killed  his
           parents; he could not remember his date of birth; his master had
           procured his Birth Certificate for him; he could not explain the
           fighting in The Sudan; and  its  bordering  countries  were  The
           Congo, Tanzania and Egypt.


      (ii)    In his "Formal Statement" he said:


                 "I chose to come to the UK as I wanted to seek asylum so  I
                 could escape all the fighting that is going on in Sudan.  I
                 feel that if you deport me back to Sudan I will be in great
                 fear of my life.  I feel that it is my human right to  seek
                 asylum in this country".


      (iii)    When  the  Appellant  was  interviewed  for  the  purpose  of
           compiling the "Statement of  Evidence  Form",  he  asserted,  in
           terms, that he was applying  for  asylum  on  the  basis  of  an
           alleged risk to his life which he linked in some unspecified way
           to his sale as a slave to a man called 'John' claiming to be his
           uncle.  He dated his story from 1983  when,  he  said,  the  war
           began.  He asserted that following a further  sale  transaction,
           he subsequently became enslaved to one Mr. Brown.  He  suggested
           that Mr. Brown was having unspecified problems with "a group  of
           people" demanding his  release  and  that  he  had  expressed  a
           preference to remain with Mr. Brown "...  as  this  group  would
           kill me".  His professed reason for fear  of  returning  to  The
           Sudan was "the problem Mr. Brown created... some people see  him
           as doing bad business ...": this, he asserted, had consisted  of
           the provision of unparticularised  information  to  unidentified
           Islamic Front Militants, stimulating a  desire  to  destroy  Mr.
           Brown, his household and  servants  (including  the  Appellant).
           Next, he asserted  that  his  reason  for  leaving  Nigeria  was
           "because my master wanted me to be free" and he would have  been
           "bullied" if Mr. Brown had left him there and  would  also  have
           been at risk  of  further  enslavement  to  one  'Abraham'.   In
           response to a specific question, he asserted that in  the  event
           of returning to The Sudan he "...would be killed ... [would] ...
           fall into the hands of the Government and  would  be  sent  back
           into slavery again ...".


   6. It is clear from various materials that during his initial sojourn  in
      the  United  Kingdom  the  Appellant  was   represented   by   Berri's
      Solicitors.  They represented the Appellant  in  connection  with  the
      proceedings in Isleworth Crown Court.  In this context, they  prepared
      a document entitled "Proof of Evidence".  This was clearly drafted  by
      one of the firm's solicitors (Mr. Nayager,  a  consultant  solicitor).
      This contains the following salient passages:

           "I was born in Sudan on 17th July 1973, my parents  passed  away
           (I don't know when) and my Uncle John brought me up ...


           My Uncle John lived with a white man called Mr. Smith Brown  and
           was employed doing domestic work for him.  I lived with my uncle
           and the white man in Sudan for years ...


           I did not know Mr. Smith Brown's nationality; he  spoke  English
           ...


           In Sudan my uncle eventually passed away (I cannot remember when
           or how old I was).  Before my uncle died he  gave  me  my  Birth
           Certificate.  When my uncle died I  continued  living  with  the
           white man, he took over the role of an adoptive parent.  I  took
           over my uncle's role doing domestic chores ...


           The white man changed his business and needed to live in Nigeria
           and wanted to take me with him as he was my  sole  guardian.   I
           had no family left or anywhere else to live in Sudan ...


           I think I was in my twenties around the time  we  moved  to  ...
           Abuja, which is a town in Nigeria.  I then continued living with
           the white man for years, I carried on doing  my  domestic  tasks
           for him.  The white man got me  a  private  tutor  to  teach  me
           reading and writing.  I was never allowed out of the house on my
           own.  The white man told me that my life was in danger."


      The  document  ends  at  this  point.   It  is  to  be  considered  in
      conjunction with a document, evidently  compiled  by  his  solicitors,
      entitled "Brief Instructions of  Adam  Naiyame",  dated  15th  January
      2009, which contains the following noteworthy passages:


                 "The white man was getting very old and decided to go  back
                 to his country of origin.  I don't  know  where  that  was.
                 The white man told me that he would make sure I went  to  a
                 country which was safe and where I could claim asylum."


      In the next passage, the Appellant acknowledges that  he  was  neither
      involved in nor the subject of any  of  the  "political  troubles"  in
      Nigeria.  He then claims that Mr. Brown ("the white man") arranged his
      travel, transported him to an airport in Nigeria and schooled  him  in
      what to say.


   7. One of the documents belonging to this  discrete  phase  is  a  letter
      dated 9th March 2009 from Berri's Solicitors to the Appellant, then in
      prison.  This letter recalled the Appellant's change of plea to one of
      guilty, on 27th February 2009 and his ensuing sentence  to  12  months
      imprisonment.  It noted that the Appellant's "immigration  solicitors"
      were Messrs. Howe & Company.  In a separate letter  bearing  the  same
      date, Berri's Solicitors wrote to Howe & Company, advising them of the
      Appellant's conviction and ensuing sentence and continuing:

           "Mr. Niyami would still like to pursue his asylum claim  failing
           which he would wish to return to Nigeria.  Mr. Nyami would  need
           assistance with the Home Office and the Nigerian High Commission
           to make his return to Nigeria possible  as  he  has  a  Sudanese
           Birth Certificate."


      The Respondent's Notice of Decision alludes to a third letter  written
      by Berri's Solicitors on 9th  March  2009,  containing  the  following
      passage:


           "... Mr. Nyami has informed us that if his asylum claim were not
           successful he would wish to return to Nigeria.   The  reason  is
           that both his parents were Nigerian nationals.  They  have  both
           passed [sic] now.  Mr.  Nyami  was  born  in  Sudan  and  has  a
           Sudanese Birth Certificate and lived in Nigeria for  many  years
           before he came to the UK.  Mr. Nyami has no family or other ties
           in Sudan, but has a partner and support  in  Nigeria,  which  he
           came to see as his home country ...".


      There is yet another  letter  written  by  Berri's  Solicitors  which,
      surprisingly, does not feature in any of  the  sources  in  which  one
      would expect to find it - in particular, the Notice of  Decision,  the
      various materials (written submissions, grounds  of  appeal  et  alia)
      compiled by this Appellant's present  legal  representatives  and  the
      several Tribunal decisions to date.  This letter, which  is  dated  25
      February 2009, states:


           "I write in relation to the above  matter  and  further  to  our
           meeting yesterday.  I confirm that we are trying  to  list  your
           matter for change of plea on Friday 27th February  2009  so  you
           can get as much credit as possible  on  your  sentence,  however
           credit will be reduced accordingly as it was not entered at  the
           earliest opportunity ...


           The reason you are being advised to change your plea is  because
           of the new instructions you gave your  advocate  and  I  at  the
           legal visit, which is essentially your life was not in danger in
           Nigeria and therefore you are not a genuine  refugee  under  the
           definition provided under Section 31 Immigration and Asylum  Act
           1999, therefore the defence cannot apply to you."


      [Emphasis added].


   8. In the course of the series of Tribunal proceedings in  which  he  has
      been involved the Appellant has made two written  witness  statements.
      The first is dated 16th August 2011.  The main focus of this statement
      is the disadvantages to which he claims to have been subjected at  the
      original first instance appeal hearing (paragraph [1], supra).  In  it
      he also provides some context for the written representations made  by
      his former legal representatives, Berri's Solicitors.   The  Appellant
      claimed that he did not remember everything he said to his  solicitors
      while in prison and that he  was  "very  depressed"  there.   He  then
      recounts a consultation with his counsel on the morning of his trial:

           "I said to him ... that they should send me back to where I come
           from, either Holland or Nigeria,  because  I  cannot  return  to
           Sudan.  He said they cannot send me to Holland.  He asked me  if
           I have anyone in Nigeria and I told him I have a partner  called
           Mary.  Mary is a lady who used to provide items to my master and
           who said she would marry me if I was set free.  We did not  have
           an affair but she made this promise to me. ...


           I have lost her number ...


           I never said that my parents are from Nigeria.   I  am  sure  of
           this.  They were from Sudan ...


           I did not know that Berri Solicitors were writing  to  the  Howe
           office.  I did not see a copy of this letter  until  my  current
           legal representative has shown it to me.  The first I knew of it
           was when the Howe office were talking about it at my hearing."


      This witness statement is signed and dated.  Notably, it  contains  no
      assertions by the Appellant of linguistic,  intellectual,  medical  or
      cultural complications affecting or infecting  communications  between
      Berri's Solicitors and him.

   9. The Appellant's second witness statement, also signed by him, is dated
      9th February 2012.  This contains the following material passages:

           "[1] In my earliest memory I was living  in  Juba,  Sudan,  with
           John and the white man, Mr. Smith Brown ...

           [4] John was a black man, like me.  He told me that  my  parents
           sold me to him because my father owed money to him.   I  do  not
           remember how old I was when I separated from my parents,  but  I
           might have been about five.  I must have been young because I do
           not remember it ...


           [6] In 1983 John went to try to find my parents to give me  back
           to them ... he was not able to find my parents because  the  war
           broke out and my father was killed and my mother was taken  into
           slavery ...


           [8] From as far back as I remember  I  lived  in  Juba,  in  May
           Street, in Mr. Brown's house.  May Street is a  big  street.   I
           remember that there was a hospital and a Catholic Church, but  I
           do not remember anything else.  I did not go out much and it was
           a long time ago ...


           [9] I do not know what nationality Mr. Brown was.  He was  white
           man and he spoke English...


           [11] John worked for Mr. Brown and so did I.  Mr. Brown  treated
           me as a slave.  I was his property ...


           [23] Mr. Brown told me he had some problems ...


           [24] John died in 1999 ...


           [25] After John died Mr. Brown told me that he had paid money to
           John for me and that I was his slave ...


           [26] About one year after John died, Mr. Brown said he was going
           to Nigeria.  He said he was not safe in Juba ...


           He told me that it would not be safe for me if I did not go."


      According  to  this  statement,  the  Appellant  and  Mr.  Brown  then
      travelled  separately  to  Nigeria,  where  their  previous   personal
      relationship and arrangements continued and Mr. Brown "...  said  that
      he was leaving and he would take me to a place where I would  be  free
      ..." and arranged  for  the  Appellant  to  receive  some  classes  in
      English.   The  Appellant's  second  witness  statement  ends  in  the
      following terms:


           "[34] I am scared of being sent to Sudan or to Nigeria.  I would
           be on my own.  I have nobody there.  I am scared that I would be
           forced to work as a slave again  and  that  I  will  be  treated
           badly."


      In the final passages, the Appellant eulogises the better life that he
      enjoys in the United Kingdom.


  10. As recorded  in  paragraph  [1]  above,  Judge  Osborne,  in  granting
      permission to appeal, questioned whether the First-Tier  Tribunal  had
      taken into account "the Appellant's written submissions on nationality
      and findings of fact dated 27th February 2012."  This is  a  reference
      to a document entitled "Appellant's Written Submissions on Nationality
      and Findings of Fact".  This was a written  submission,  prepared  and
      signed by Ms Cohen (of counsel), following the first instance  hearing
      conducted on 23rd February 2012.  It is dated 27th February 2012.   At
      the  hearing,  this  Tribunal  was  alerted  to  a   documentary   fax
      transmission record, dated 28th February 2012,  indicating  that  this
      further submission was received by  the  Field  House  Upper  Tribunal
      secretariat on this date.  We find that this occurred and  we  further
      find, by inference and in the absence of any contrary  evidence,  that
      the written submission was  then  brought  to  the  attention  of  the
      members of the First Tier Tribunal and  considered  by  them.   Having
      regard to the terms in which permission to appeal to this Tribunal was
      granted, it is important to appreciate the context  within  which  the
      further written submission by counsel for the Appellant was  compiled.
      According to paragraph 1, its impetus was  ...  an  enquiry  from  the
      Tribunal members -

           ".......as to the Appellant's case if the Panel were  unable  to
           reach  a  finding  as  to  his  nationality  on   the   evidence
           available".


      The submission advanced the contention that the Tribunal would have to
      consider three issues:


      (i) Whether the Appellant is a national of Nigeria.


      (ii)     If  not,  whether  the  Appellant  could   acquire   Nigerian
           nationality.


      (iii)   In any event, whether the Appellant could be lawfully  removed
           to Nigeria, given his claims for protection.


      It is apparent from the submission that at the first instance  hearing
      an issue had arisen,  firstly,  about  whether  "South  Sudan"  was  a
      separate country and, secondly, one  to  which  the  Respondent  could
      remove  the  Appellant.   Counsel's  submission  contended  that  such
      removal could occur only pursuant to  a  fresh  immigration  decision.
      The remainder of this submission makes clear that the  only  "removal"
      issue of which the Tribunal was seised was the  Respondent's  proposal
      to remove the Appellant to Nigeria.




      The Deportation Decision


  11. Having outlined above the  various  formulations  of  the  Appellant's
      claims and assertions in his quest to  obtain  appropriate  protection
      from the United Kingdom Government, it is appropriate to turn  to  the
      text of the Respondent's Notice of Decision.  This  recites  that  the
      impetus for the proposed deportation of the Appellant from the  United
      Kingdom was his conviction of the offence of possessing and/or using a
      false  instrument,  which  generated   a   sentence   of   12   months
      imprisonment.  As noted above, the actus reus of this offence was  the
      deployment by the Appellant of a false passport  in  his  attempts  to
      secure entry to the United Kingdom on 2nd November 2008  and  he  duly
      pleaded guilty.  His conviction and sentence triggered  Section  32(5)
      of the UK Borders Act 2007 which,  in  essence,  makes  provision  for
      automatic deportation in such circumstances.  The Notice  of  Decision
      recorded that the Appellant's resistance to deportation was threefold:

      (i) He was claiming asylum on the basis of an assertion that he had  a
           well founded fear of persecution, consisting of a real  risk  of
           unlawful  killing  and/or  torture  or  inhuman   or   degrading
           treatment, in The Sudan.


      (ii)    He was also claiming humanitarian protection  under  paragraph
           339C of the Immigration Rules.


      (iii)   Thirdly, and finally, he was contending that to deport him  to
           The Sudan would infringe his rights under Articles 4,  5  and  8
           ECHR.


  12. The Notice of Decision recorded the Appellant's assertion that he  was
      born on 3rd May 1973 in  Nyala,  Sudan  and  is  a  national  of  this
      country.  It  then  rehearsed  his  life  story,  beginning  with  his
      assertion that he had been engaged to work as a slave in "a big house"
      in May Street, Juba.  The Appellant, according to the decision, linked
      the beginning of his slavery with the outbreak of war in 1983 (when he
      was, on his  case,  aged  ten  years),  following  which  he  had  two
      successive masters until around 1999/2000, when his second master took
      him to an agent in Uganda for the purpose of  travelling  to  Nigeria.
      This duly materialised, following which the second master  joined  the
      Appellant in Nigeria, where his enslavement continued for "about 5 - 7
      years" until 2008, when both left Nigeria (in November  2008),  flying
      to Amsterdam and becoming separated permanently at the airport  there.
      The Appellant complied with previous instructions given to him,  which
      enabled him to fly from Amsterdam to the United Kingdom. [There is  no
      dispute that the Appellant made this flight and arrived in the  United
      Kingdom on 2nd November 2008]. The decision continues:

           "Because you have no family in Sudan you would  be  killed,  you
           will fall into the hands of the Government and will be sent back
           into slavery ...".


      According to the decision, the Appellant had made the case that he had
      been a slave to one Mr. Brown from the age of  five  years;  that  his
      problems dated from the outbreak of internal war in 1983; that he then
      stayed with an uncle (John) as his slave; and that Mr. Brown then paid
      John for the Appellant, whereupon he became Mr. Brown's slave.  It  is
      appropriate to highlight at this juncture the statement  in  paragraph
      [18] of the Notice of Decision:


           "Your claim that you was [sic] taken by your  Uncle  John  as  a
           slave in 1983 and that he later sold you on to Mr.  Brown  as  a
           slave from the age of five is not accepted".






  13. In paragraph [17] of the Notice of Decision one finds a key passage:

           "However, there are many discrepancies in your claim and  it  is
           considered that there are issues within your account that cannot
           be accepted and as such you have failed to  establish  that  you
           are a genuine refugee in need of international protection".


      This is followed by a further rehearsal of  certain  aspects  of  the
      Appellant's case, as portrayed by the Respondent.  In paragraph 18 of
      the Notice of Decision, the factual error  noted  in  [21]  infra  is
      repeated, giving rise to the following conclusion:


           "It is therefore concluded that your claim of being a  slave  is
           not accepted and that your claim for  asylum  is  not  based  on
           factual events".


      Next, the decision adverts to the Appellant's Birth Certificate, which
      represents that he was born on 17th July 1973  in  the  Kalma  Refugee
      Camp.  This assertion is rejected resoundingly, on the basis that  the
      European Country of Origin Information Report for  Sudan  states  that
      this camp was not established until February 2004.  The decision  then
      rejects the Appellant's assertion that he  was  Mr.  Brown's  domestic
      slave,  giving  rise  to  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  accept   the
      Appellant's assertion that he would be at risk on account  of  certain
      problems generated by Mr. Brown having given  unspecified  information
      to Islamist Front Militants.


  14. In the next part of the decision, the Respondent adverts to  a  letter
      from the Appellant's former solicitors stating  that  the  Appellant's
      parents were both Nigerian nationals and indicating that Nigeria would
      be his preferred country of return.    This  letter  further  asserted
      that the Appellant has "a  partner  and  support  in  Nigeria".   This
      prompted the Respondent to embark upon a consideration of whether  the
      Appellant could acquire Nigerian nationality.  Following  an  analysis
      of certain provisions of the Constitution of Nigeria,  the  Respondent
      provided an affirmative answer.  The  Respondent  concluded  that  the
      Appellant is  Nigerian,  rather  than  Sudanese.   The  decision  then
      questioned the credibility of the Appellant's alleged  historic  links
      with The Sudan.  The text continues:

           "The fact that  you  failed  to  provide  a  consistent  account
           throughout the asylum process strongly suggests that you did not
           leave  Sudan  or  Nigeria  for  the  reasons  claimed.   It   is
           considered that your own versions of events are so  inconsistent
           to the point of not retaining any credibility".




      The Deportation Decision: A Brief Analysis


  15. In  summary,  the  Appellant's  claims  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
      protection  were  founded  on  a  life  story  spanning  a  period  of
      approximately thirty years, beginning at the age of  around  five  and
      founded on the rock of the twofold assertion that he had been born  on
      17th July 1973 and that  his  place  of  birth  was  The  Sudan.   The
      Respondent, in its Notice of Decision, highlighted various aspects  of
      the Appellant's story (as understood and portrayed by the Respondent),
      purported  to  find  certain  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies  and
      concluded, in consequence, that the factual  matrix  advanced  by  the
      Appellant was not believable, impelling to a rejection of  his  claims
      for  protection.   On  any  showing,  the  crucial  element   in   the
      Respondent's Notice of Decision is the assessment and finding that the
      Appellant's story is incredulous.  This  assessment  and  finding  are
      inextricably linked to the Respondent's  expressed  understanding  and
      portrayal of his story, as expressed in the text of the decision.



      The First-Tier Tribunal Decision


  16.  The  impressively  substantial  quantity  of  documentary   materials
      considered by  the  Tribunal  is  listed  in  paragraph  [35]  of  the
      Determination.  This included a series of official reports relating to
      The Sudan, written medical evidence and some of  the  other  materials
      identified expressly or by implication  in  the  foregoing  paragraphs
      hereof, including the Appellant's (admitted) false  passport  and  his
      Sudanese Birth Certificate.  In addition, the Tribunal heard  evidence
      from the Appellant and the Reverend Evans.   In  paragraph  [76],  the
      Tribunal describes the Appellant's evidence  as  "vague  and  sparse",
      while simultaneously acknowledging  his  hearing  loss,  his  learning
      difficulties and cultural differences.  It found that the  Appellant's
      Birth Certificate was demonstrably false:  see  paragraph  [78].   His
      claims  of  Sudanese  nationality  were  seriously   questioned:   see
      paragraphs [79] - [81].  In paragraph [82], it is stated:

           "... whilst the Appellant claimed to have  been  born  in  1973,
           with war commencing in Sudan in 1983, when he  had  been  handed
           over to his Uncle John for money by his parents  he  would  have
           been 10 years old but he claimed that he had been 5.  This is an
           important  inconsistency  and   goes   towards   the   core   of
           credibility".


      [Emphasis added].


      This is, self-evidently, a finding of substantial importance.   It  is
      not difficult to trace its  origins  to  the  Respondent's  less  than
      accurate Notice of Decision.


  17. The Tribunal concurred  with  the  Respondent's  assessment  that  the
      Appellant was not  a  Sudanese  national:  see  paragraph  [83].   The
      Tribunal preferred the written representations  from  the  Appellant's
      solicitors  to  his   contrary   assertions:   see   paragraph   [87].
      Continuing, the Determination states:


           "We note that he claimed that he  had  been  living  in  Nigeria
           prior to entering the EU and that he had travelled out of  (sic)
           a Nigerian airport.  We also note that he claimed that he was in
           a relationship with  a  woman  called  Mary  in  Nigeria.   Such
           evidence does have a ring of truth to it.


           [88] We do not consider that it is plausible that Mr. Brown whom
           the appellant claimed had kept him enslaved  would  subsequently
           wish to grant freedom to the Appellant to such  an  extent  that
           his master would pay for his travel to the UK and organise false
           papers so that he could exit Nigeria".


      On the issue of Nigerian citizenship the Tribunal concluded:


           "[89] ... there is no evidence before us that the appellant  has
           resided in Nigeria for at least fifteen years and  we  therefore
           find  that  the  appellant  cannot  avail  himself  of  Nigerian
           citizenship under this provision".


      The Determination continues:


           "[90] Our assessment of the evidence in the round  is  that  the
           appellant is Nigerian".


      His claim that he is of Sudanese nationality was expressly rejected in
      the same paragraph.


  18. The immediately ensuing passages in the Determination  embody  certain
      key findings:

           "[97] We have found that the appellant is not a credible witness
           ...


           We have considered all  the  evidence  in  the  round.   We  are
           concerned as to the lack of credibility in his account ...


           We do not consider on the totality of the evidence  that  it  is
           reasonably likely that the appellant has been trafficked to  the
           UK from Nigeria, or indeed Sudan.


           [98] We find that as the appellant is  not  a  credible  witness
           that he has not established that he is at risk  of  serious  ill
           treatment on return to Sudan or Nigeria  so  as  to  engage  the
           Refugee Convention or Article 3 ECHR ...


           whilst he states that he will not be  supported  in  Nigeria  he
           travelled from that country where he claimed that he  had  lived
           and where he had the support of Mary".


      From this latter passage one extracts a discrete finding  that,  prior
      to leaving Nigeria, the Appellant knew and had a certain  relationship
      with this lady.  From this it is appropriate to infer  that,  contrary
      to other assertions made by him and on his behalf,  his  situation  in
      Nigeria was not - and, in the event of deportation  to  that  country,
      would not necessarily be - one of  lonely  isolation.   The  remaining
      paragraphs of the Determination consider in particular the Appellant's
      Article 8 ECHR claim.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.


      Consideration and Conclusions


  19. The assessment in the Respondent's  Notice  of  Decision  and  in  the
      Determination of the First -Tier Tribunal that the Appellant's  claims
      for protection  are  characterised  by  and  imbued  with  significant
      discrepancies and inconsistencies must be scrutinised with  care.   We
      remind ourselves that the central function  of  this  Tribunal  is  to
      determine whether the Determination  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  is
      contaminated by an error of law. The framework for determining whether
      an error of law has occurred is constituted by  the  Appellant's  four
      grounds of appeal. We turn to consider each in turn.

      First Ground : the Removal Issue

  20. It is argued that the First-Tier Tribunal misdirected itself on law on
      this issue.  True it is that the Tribunal considered the  question  of
      whether the Appellant could be lawfully returned to The Sudan.  We are
      of the opinion that this was an  inappropriate  diversion,  since  the
      decision under challenge made clear, notwithstanding the imperfections
      of its text, that the Respondent was proposing to deport the Appellant
      to Nigeria.  It seems likely that this diversion was stimulated by the
      varying  formulations  of  the  Appellant's  case  (supra)   and   the
      submissions of the Respondent's representative at the  first  instance
      hearing.  Whatever the full and true explanation for  this  "excursus"
      is, we conclude without hesitation  that  the  Tribunal  committed  no
      material error of law in this respect.  The Respondent, as a matter of
      law, is, at this point in time, restricted to deporting the  Appellant
      to Nigeria and nowhere else.

     Second Ground: Irrational Credibility Findings

  21. We have, in paragraphs [11] -  [18]  above,  set  out  and  juxtaposed
      certain salient passages in the Respondent's Notice  of  Decision  and
      the First-Tier Tribunal's Determination.  The main  argument  advanced
      by Ms Cohen on behalf of the Appellant to this Tribunal was that  both
      agencies fell into error on the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  date  of
      birth.  We consider that there is substance in this argument.  We find
      that both  the Respondent and the First-Tier  Tribunal   misunderstood
      and  inaccurately  portrayed  the  facts  alleged  by  the   Appellant
      concerning his date of birth and related issues.  In our judgment, the
      Respondent's Notice of Decision betrays a misunderstanding of the case
      made by the Appellant, particularly relating to the early phase of his
      life.  The portrayal in the Notice of Decision of the Appellant's case
      being that he had been a slave to one Mr Brown from the age of 5 years
      and that following an outbreak of war in the Sudan he then stayed with
      his Uncle John as his slave, subsequent to which Mr  Brown  paid  John
      and the Appellant became Mr Brown's slave  is  materially  inaccurate.
      As appears from the summaries contained in paragraphs [5] - [6] above,
      the Appellant, from the outset, clearly made the case that he had been
      a slave to two masters successively, initially  to  "Uncle  John"  and
      subsequently to Mr Brown. He asserted that Uncle John was, in turn, Mr
      Brown's slave until the former's death.  He claimed to have  known  Mr
      Brown from the age of 7 years (viz  circa  1980,  on  his  case).   He
      suggested that he had been sold by Uncle John to Mr Brown  before  the
      former's death. Notably, these claims are  basically  consistent  with
      the story contained  in  the  Appellant's  second  witness  statement:
      paragraph [9] supra.  The First-Tier Tribunal in its "findings of fact
      and credibility" clearly adopted the Respondent's evaluation of  these
      issues.  See paragraph [82]:

           "The Secretary of State in the refusal letter did not accept the
           appellant was from Sudan as he  noted  the  discrepancy  in  the
           Appellant's claim and noted that he had claimed in  part  to  be
           born in 1973 using a false birth certificate.  However,  it  was
           noted that whilst the appellant claimed to  have  been  born  on
           1973, with war commencing in Sudan in 1983,  when  he  had  been
           handed over to his Uncle John for money by his parents, he would
           have been 10 years old but he claimed that he had been 5.   This
           is an important inconsistency  and  goes  towards  the  core  of
           credibility."

     [Emphasis added]

             For  the  reasons  elaborated,  we  consider  this   assessment
unsustainable.

22.  These misunderstandings and inaccuracies are  unquestionably  material,
      as they bear  directly  on  a  key  conclusion  of  the  two  agencies
      concerned,  namely  an  assessment  that  the  Appellant's  story   is
      incredulous.  An assessment of this nature is sustainable as a  matter
      of  law  only  if  demonstrably  based  on  a  correct  understanding,
      appreciation  and  portrayal  of  the  case  being  made.   Both   the
      Respondent and the First-Tier Tribunal were required, as a  matter  of
      law, to base their findings and conclusions on a correct understanding
      and appreciation of the case made by the Appellant.  For  the  reasons
      explained, we consider that both agencies failed in this respect.   We
      conclude that both the Respondent and  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  fell
      into error in this respect, that this is clearly an error of  law  and
      that this error is indisputably material.

      Third Ground: Irrational Findings re Nationality


23.  Having regard to the presentation of the parties' respective cases,  we
      consider that it was  entirely  appropriate  for  the  first  instance
      Tribunal to examine the separate questions of whether  the  Appellant,
      on all the evidence available, is either a national of  Nigeria  or  a
      person capable of  acquiring  Nigerian  nationality/citizenship.   The
      Tribunal made an unequivocal finding that the Appellant is a  national
      of Nigeria.  We consider this finding unimpeachable.  It is undermined
      neither by the Tribunal's finding that the Appellant would  be  unable
      to acquire Nigerian citizenship - which was clearly predicated on  the
      hypothesis (later rejected) that he is not a Nigerian  citizen  -  nor
      the Tribunal's finding that the Appellant  could  be  removed  to  The
      Sudan.  The exploration of the question of whether the Appellant might
      suffer proscribed treatment if returned  to  The  Sudan  was  entirely
      understandable  in  our  view,  having  regard  to  the  confused  and
      inconsistent terms in which the Appellant had claimed protection  from
      the outset (see paragraphs [5] - [9] supra), coupled with  the  stance
      adopted by the  Respondent's  representative  at  the  first  instance
      hearing. This was to the effect that the Tribunal had jurisdiction  to
      consider removal of the Appellant to South Sudan (see paragraph  5  of
      Counsel's further submission, dated 27th February 2012).  We  consider
      that the finding that the Appellant  does  not  require  international
      protection vis-�-vis The Sudan does  not  undermine  in  any  way  the
      Tribunal's series of findings and conclusions relating to the proposed
      deportation of the Appellant  to  Nigeria.  The  latter  were  clearly
      relevant to the Tribunal's consideration of the Appellant's claim  for
      asylum. We conclude that, as regards this ground, on any  showing,  no
      material error of law has been demonstrated.

     Fourth Ground: Risk on Return to Nigeria

24.  By the fourth ground of appeal it  is  contended  that  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal erred  in  law  in  failing  "...to  take  into  account  the
      objective background evidence in relation to the risks [the Appellant]
      faces on his disabilities...".  There is clear and undisputed evidence
      that  the  Appellant  suffers  from  a  hearing  impairment  and  some
      intellectual impairment.  In this respect, the case made to the  first
      instance Tribunal invoked  certain  features  of  "country  evidence",
      including a Country of Origin Report.   Reliance was  also  placed  on
      the report of Dr. Sellwood, a consultant psychologist who examined the
      Appellant on 17th November 2011.  He concluded that the Appellant  has
      "cognitive impairment amounting to learning  difficulties",  which  he
      duly characterised according to the recognised standards.   He  opined
      that memory  difficulties  are  "fairly  common  amongst  people  with
      learning difficulties".  He considered the  Appellant's  participation
      in the tests administered genuine.  He opined that the Appellant would
      have been "at a severe disadvantage" during the  interviews  conducted
      by the Respondent.  He described  the  Appellant's  hearing  loss  and
      cognitive deficit as "two significant disabilities", interacting  with
      each other "to significantly inhibit learning and independent living".



25.  The ground of appeal which we are required  to  address  is  not  of  a
      qualitative nature.  Nor does it sound on  the  merits  of  the  first
      instance  decision.   Rather,  it  is   correctly   characterised   an
      assertion.  This assertion  is  to  the  effect  that  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal "failed to take into account evidence as to risk on return to
      Nigeria".  In evaluating and determining this  ground  of  appeal,  we
      remind ourselves of the function of every appellate court.  It is well
      established that it is not  incumbent  on  first  instance  courts  or
      tribunals to spell out in minute detail every aspect of  the  evidence
      considered by them and their evaluation thereof.  Thus, this appellate
      tribunal should adopt a broad and panoramic view in  determining  this
      type of ground of appeal.  In appropriate cases,  this  tribunal  will
      readily infer that certain materials were  indeed  considered  by  the
      First-Tier Tribunal.  The present case is a paradigm  illustration  of
      this  proposition  in  one  particular  respect:   we   have   already
      concluded, by inference, and without  any  hesitation  that  counsel's
      supplementary  post-hearing  submission   was   transmitted   to   and
      considered by the Tribunal.


  26.  The  issue  on  which  the  'country  evidence'  bore  was   one   of
      unmistakeable importance.  While we are conscious  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal's primary findings in relation to the appeal,  in  particular
      those relating to the incredulity of the Appellant's story,  we  would
      expect to find within the text of the Determination a clear indication
      that evidence of this importance  had  been  duly  considered.   As  a
      matter of pure textual analysis, there is no such  indication.   While
      one readily characterises the present case as moderately  complicated,
      convoluted and factually intricate, we consider, nonetheless, that  an
      assessment  of  this  discrete  body  of  evidence,   the   Tribunal's
      evaluation thereof and its consequential findings should have featured
      clearly in the Determination.  This did not occur.  The error  of  law
      in which we find in consequence is a failure to consider, properly  or
      at all, evidence that was plainly important.   We  conclude,  for  the
      reasons elaborated, that an error of law has been demonstrated in this
      respect.

      Decision and Directions

27.  Giving effect to the conclusions expressed  above,  this  Tribunal  has
      decided that the decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
      aside and will be re-made in this forum.

28.  Accordingly, the appeal will be  listed  for  further  hearing,  on  16
      January 2013. At the next hearing the parties must be in a position to
      make submissions as to what, if any, findings of fact  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal should be preserved.

29.  No later than 14 days from the date on  which  this  decision  is  sent
      out, the appellant must notify the Tribunal in writing of the specific
      type of interpreter required for the hearing. The Tribunal understands
      that the appropriate classification of the  interpreter  needed  is  a
      "sign lip-speaker",  which  interpreter  the  Tribunal  is  minded  to
      arrange for the next hearing.

Signed:
                           [pic]
                           Mr Justice McCloskey
                            sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the  Upper   Tribunal




                           Dated:   9th November 2012
