
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01748/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 April 2014                               |On 3 April 2014              |
|Decision given orally                         |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

                              NIKOLA OBLAKOVIC

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Grigg, Counsel, Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Croatia where he was  born  on  7  March
    1989.   He appeals with permission the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes and Dr  J  O  de  Barros  who,  for  reasons  given  in  a
    determination dated 15 January 2014, dismissed the appeal  against  the
    decision to  make  a  deportation  order  dated  20  August  2013  with
    reference to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
     This decision followed the appellant's conviction on 22  October  2012
    at Nottingham Crown Court of conspiracy  to  handle  stolen  goods  for
    which the appellant was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  three
    years and seven months.  He has now completed  his  custodial  sentence
    and has been  released on licence

 2. The Secretary of State explained in her decision to make a  deportation
    order that she had regard to Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations  and
    was satisfied that the appellant would  pose  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the interests of  public  policy  if  he
    were  allowed  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and   consequently
    considered that deportation was justified.  She therefore decided  with
    reference to Regulation 19(iii)(b) that the appellant should be removed
    and that an order be made requiring him to leave the United Kingdom and
    prohibiting him from re-entering whilst that order is in force.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision on grounds that the  decision  was
    unlawful under the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  in  breach  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and that the decision was not otherwise in accordance  with
    the law.  In dismissing the appeal the Tribunal concluded  at  [33]  of
    its determination that:

         "The appellant continues to present a present and serious threat to
         the fundamental interests of society  by  his  involvement  in  the
         commission of large  scale  criminal  activity  with  international
         elements and that this is a danger that he continues to present."

 4. The determination is challenged on four grounds.  In summary these  are
    that the Tribunal erred in directing itself at [11] that it was for the
    appellant to show on a balance of probabilities that he should  not  be
    deported.  The  second  ground  is  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    assessment under Regulation 21.  The third ground is that the  Tribunal
    had erred in failing to consider and make findings on  the  appellant's
    engagement with his rehabilitation and  the  reduction  in  risk  as  a
    result  with  reference  to  the  Tribunal  decision   in   Essa   (EEA
    rehabilitation, integration)  [2013]  UKUT  00316  (IAC).   The  fourth
    ground is that the Tribunal's findings and conclusions under Article  8
    were erroneous.

 5. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Miss  Everett  accepts  that  the
    Tribunal erred in its direction as to  the  burden  of  proof  and  she
    further accepts that the materiality of that error is compounded  by  a
    failure by the  Tribunal  to  specifically  direct  itself  as  to  the
    consequences of the appellant having a  permanent  right  of  residence
    which had been approved in January 2011.  This required the Tribunal to
    consider whether there were serious grounds of public policy or  public
    security and so above the base level protection which an  EEA  national
    or family member has under Regulation 21.

 6. I am readily persuaded that Miss  Everett  was  correct  to  make  that
    concession.  In [2] of its determination the Tribunal began a series of
    directions.  Para [2] indicates that the Tribunal was aware of the role
    of Regulations 19 and 21.  Rather than specifically directing itself as
    to the higher level of protection the  appellant  is  entitled  to,  it
    observed that with the appellant having been in the United Kingdom  for
    less than ten  years,  the  circumstances  did  not  engage  "the  Rule
    relating to imperative grounds of public  security".   It  is  not  the
    appellant's case nor would he be able to successfully argue it even  if
    it were, that he has been here for ten years in the light of the impact
    of his period of imprisonment in 2012.

 7. Thereafter the Tribunal directed itself as [3] to [8] with reference to
    the  Immigration  Rules,  the  Refugee  Convention,  the  Qualification
    Directive and to humanitarian protection.  None of these  matters  were
    issues that the Tribunal was concerned  with.   Having  regard  to  the
    nature of the direction at [2]  and  these  irrelevant  directions  the
    question must be asked whether the Tribunal fully understood  the  task
    that it was required to undertake.

 8. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the misdirection as to the  burden  of
    proof was a material misdirection, particularly having  regard  to  the
    language of the determination and the failure to identify  and  address
    the higher level of protection the  appellant  is  entitled  to.   This
    deals with grounds 1 and 2.  As to ground 3, the Tribunal  reached  its
    conclusion regarding the appellant's rehabilitation  and  concluded  at
    [32]:  "We find that his claims to have reformed are not allowable  and
    we do not accept them".  If this were a sustainable  finding  it  would
    mean that rehabilitation had no role  in  this  appeal  but  since  the
    Tribunal approached its findings through the prism of  misdirection  as
    to the burden of proof, I find also that this ground is made  out.   As
    to the final ground, Mr Grigg accepts  that  this  is  not  a  material
    challenge since the rights protected  under  Regulation  21  are  of  a
    higher order than those encompassed by Article 8.

 9. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and preserve none of its findings.  Having regard to the nature of  the
    error and the need for detailed findings to be made, the correct course
    pursuant to s. 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and
    the Senior President's Practice Statement, is  for  the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  its  reconsideration  of  the
    issues.

10. Mr Grigg has indicated that the appellant wishes to obtain  an  updated
    probation report from his  probation  officer.   It  will  be  for  the
    appellant to persuade  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  accept  that  new
    evidence and I make no direction in this regard.









11. On this basis the appeal is allowed and the matter is remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a further decision by a judge  or  panel  other
    than FtTJ Parkes and Dr J O Debarros.






Signed                                  Date 1 April 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson




















