
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01038/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 March 2019                     |On 29 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    I P T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Dieu instructed by NLS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (IPT).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.



Introduction

 2. This appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal having been remitted by the
    Supreme Court as one of a number  of  cases  considered  by  it  in  KO
    (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

 3. It was common ground that the appeal is by way of a re-hearing  of  the
    respondent's appeal (whom I shall hereafter refer to as the "claimant")
    challenging the decision of the Secretary of State taken on 9 May  2014
    refusing to revoke a deportation order made against the claimant on  29
    October 2009 pursuant to the automatic deportation provisions  in  s.32
    of the UK Borders Acts 2007.

Background

 4. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 28 February  1966.
    He is, therefore, 53 years old.

 5. The claimant arrived in the  UK  on  23  September  1988  as  a  family
    visitor.  His leave was extended on a  number  of  occasions  until  28
    March 2002.

 6. On 2 December 2000, the appellant married  a  British  citizen  whom  I
    shall refer to as "MT" and who was born on 2 August 1965.  She  already
    had three children as a result of a previous relationship.

 7. On 30 September 2002, the claimant and MT had a son ("R").  He  is  now
    aged 16 years old.  He is in year 11  and  is  taking  his  GCSEs  this
    summer.

 8. On 23 January 2009,  at  the  Bristol  Crown  Court  the  claimant  was
    convicted of four offences  of  supplying  class  A  controlled  drugs,
    namely cocaine.  On 11 February 2009, he was sentenced  to  42  months'
    imprisonment.

 9. On 29 October 2009, the Secretary of State  made  a  deportation  order
    against him under the UK Borders Act 2007.

10. The appellant appealed and, on 14 January 2010,  an  Immigration  Judge
    dismissed his appeal.  The claimant was deported to Jamaica on 21  July
    2010.

11.  On  23  September  2013,  the  claimant  sought  revocation  of   that
    deportation order.  That application was refused on 9 May 2014.

12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  a  decision
    given  on  5  September  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal.  The Tribunal  concluded  that  the  consequence  of
    maintaining the deportation order were "unduly  harsh"  on  R  who  has
    special  education  needs  and  medical  problems  associated  with   a
    condition with which he was born, namely microcephaly.  On that  basis,
    the First-tier Tribunal allowed the claimant's appeal.

13. The Secretary of State unsuccessfully appealed to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which dismissed his appeal on 12 January 2015.

14. The Secretary of State further appealed to the Court  of  Appeal  which
    allowed the Secretary of State's appeal and remitted the appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

15. However, the  claimant  further  appealed  to  the  Supreme  Court  was
    dismissed (at [39] - [45]) but the Supreme Court confirmed the order of
    the Court of Appeal  remitting  the  claimant's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Hearing

16. Thus, the appeal came before me on 29 March  2019.   The  claimant  was
    represented by Mr Dieu and the respondent by Mr Howells.

17. It was common ground between the parties that the sole issue that I had
    to decide was whether the maintenance of the deportation order  against
    the claimant was "unduly harsh" on his wife, MT or upon his son, R.

18. In support of the claimant's appeal, Mr Dieu relied upon an appellant's
    bundle of 79 pages.  He indicated  to  me  that  there  were  no  other
    relevant documents upon which the claimant relied.

The Law

19. As I have already indicated, it was common ground before  me  that  the
    only relevant issue in determining whether the claimant's appeal should
    succeed under Art 8 was whether  the  maintenance  of  the  deportation
    order was "unduly harsh" upon MT or R.

20. That position, undoubtedly flows, from the relevant  Immigration  Rules
    dealing with the revocation of a deportation order in paras 390  -  392
    (read with paras 398 and 399) of  the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
    amended).  As the claimant had been convicted of an offence  for  which
    he was sentenced  to  42  months'  imprisonment,  namely  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least twelve months but less than  four  years,  his
    deportation would not be in the public interest if the impact upon  his
    partner, with whom he has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,  or
    upon his child (who is a British citizen) with whom he  has  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship would be "unduly harsh".  That  is
    the effect of reading across, by virtue of para 390A, the provisions in
    para 398(b) and 399(b) and 399(a).

21. It was not in dispute, any more than it was before the  Supreme  Court,
    that although this appeal concerned the  revocation  of  a  deportation
    order, rather than the making  of  a  deportation  order,  the  "public
    interest question" under Art 8 had to be determined in accordance  with
    Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  NIA
    Act 2002"), in particular s.117C(3) and (5) that provide respectively:

         "(3)     In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         ...

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

22. The appeal had proceeded since the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on
    the basis that the claimant has a "genuine and subsisting relationship"
    with his partner and child.  Mr Howells, before  me,  did  not  suggest
    otherwise.

23. Mr Dieu did not seek to rely upon s.117C(6) which, even in the case  of
    a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  less  than  four  years'
    imprisonment but more than twelve months, that, even where Exception  2
    does  not  apply  an  individual  may  resist   deportation   (and   by
    extrapolation to revoke a deportation  order)  where  there  are  "very
    compelling circumstances, over and above those described" in  Exception
    2 (see NA(Pakistan) and another v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662  and  RA
    (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT  123
    (IAC))

24. The position taken before me in respect of s.117C(6) no doubt  reflects
    the fact that the totality of the circumstances relied upon by Mr  Dieu
    related either to the impact upon MT or on R if the  deportation  order
    were maintained.  In other words, all the relevant  circumstances  fall
    to be considered under the "unduly harsh" test in s.117C(5)  such  that
    the claimant either succeeded on that  basis  and  that  there  was  no
    conceivable prospect of  identifying  circumstances  "over  and  above"
    those  circumstances  and  which  could  amount  to  "very   compelling
    circumstances".

25. In relation to  the  "undue  harsh"  test,  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) clearly identified that the public interest was not a  factor
    to be taken into account  in  applying  that  test.   In  that  regard,
    therefore, the Supreme Court overruled the earlier  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 617.   In  other  words,
    the "undue harsh" test does not entail a balancing  exercise  balancing
    the public interest in deportation against the circumstances or  impact
    upon individual partner or child.

26. Giving the judgment of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), Lord Carnwath
    approved earlier statements of the Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra  Leone)
    [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) at [46] that:

         "By way of self- direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh' does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something more severe,
         or bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raised an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

27. Lord Carnwath at [23] noted that the expression "unduly harsh":

         "seems clearly intended to introduce a higher hurdle than  that  of
         'reasonable' under section 117B(6)."

28. He continued that:

         "Further, the words 'unduly' implies an element of comparison.   It
         assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is a level
         which may be acceptable or justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.
         'Unduly' implies something going beyond that level.   The  relevant
         context is that set by section 117C(1), that is the public interest
         in the deportation of foreign criminals.   One  is  looking  for  a
         degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved
         for any child faced with the deportation of a parent."

29. Lord Carnwath added that  the  test  could  not  be  equated  with  the
    requirement to show "very compelling circumstances" (at [23]).

The Submissions

30. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Dieu relied on the fact  that  there  had
    now been some 8-9  years  since  the  claimant  was  deported  and,  he
    submitted, it was now clear what effects that had had upon his wife and
    R.  He relied upon the bundle of documents.  He drew  my  attention  to
    two letters from R's GP dated 7 November 2018 (at pages 9 - 10) and  13
    February 2019 (at page 7).

31. Mr Dieu relied upon these documents as identifying  R's  circumstances,
    including that  he  had  a  congenital  condition,  microcephaly  which
    resulted in him having learning disabilities or difficulties.   He  has
    been 'statemented' and has a special needs co-ordinator  providing  1:1
    support at  school.   He  struggles  and  requires  extra  support  for
    examinations and the outcome of his GCSEs this summer is "likely to  be
    below average".

32. Mr Dieu also relied upon the impact upon R at home where he  "struggles
    with his fine motor skills" and is unable  to  use  a  knife  and  fork
    together and struggles with other daily living activities.

33. Mr Dieu particularly relied upon the final paragraph in the GP's letter
    dated 7 November 2018 which states:

         "[R's] continued separation from his father is having a significant
         impact on his current wellbeing.  This is due to a lack  of  father
         figure present in the family home  and  additional  support  he  is
         missing out on from not having his father around to assist him with
         his learning needs at school, and at home.   His  father's  absence
         also means that there is less support to his mother surrounding his
         behavioural problems.  Most significantly he is missing the love of
         a father to support his  general  wellbeing  as  he  grows  up.   I
         therefore feel that the continued separation  from  his  father  is
         having a profound negative impact on [R]."

34. Mr Dieu also relied upon a brief letter from R himself (at  page  6  of
    the bundle) in which R says he has not seen his father for nearly  nine
    years and that he wants him to come back home.

35. In addition, in relation to MT, Mr Dieu relied upon  a  letter  (again)
    from the GP dated 11  March  2019  (at  page  5)  which  refers  to  MT
    struggling in raising R due to his learning difficulties.  The GP notes
    that she suffers from depression and that the  court  proceedings  have
    had "quite a detrimental impact on  her  mental  health".   Her  mental
    health is also affected by "concerns over  her  finances"  due  to  her
    being unable to work at times due to her depression  and  lost  income.
    The letter goes on to note that in November 2018, MT  restarted  taking
    an anti-depressant drug, namely sertraline on a daily basis.

36. Mr Dieu submitted that, although there was no documentary  evidence  to
    support this, MT's evidence was clear that R suffered from  a  fear  of
    flying and that was why he had not accompanied MT to visit the claimant
    in 2010, 2013, 2015 and 2018.  She had gone, she said in her  evidence,
    with her cousin and there was no reason why R would not have  travelled
    unless it was the case that he suffered from a fear of flying.  Mr Dieu
    relies, in essence, upon this in support of the view that there was  no
    realistic prospect of MT and R joining the claimant in Jamaica.

37. Mr Dieu submitted that taking all  these  features  into  account,  the
    family were suffering in a number of ways that resulted in  a  profound
    and  severe  impact  upon  them  which  was  not  "mere  difficulty  or
    undesirability".  He pointed  out  that,  ordinarily,  the  deportation
    order, made in 2009,  he  could  apply  to  re-enter  in  October  2010
    following a period of ten years abroad.

38. Mr Dieu submitted that the impact of maintaining the deportation  order
    would be unduly harsh.

39. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    effect of maintaining the deportation order was not "unduly  harsh"  on
    either MT or R.  He submitted that  while  MT  and  R  have  had  their
    difficulties they have coped  without  the  claimant  since  2010.   Mr
    Howells submitted that the  evidence  showed  that  there  was  regular
    contact between R and his father, the evidence was that he spoke to him
    one or two times a week, sometimes by video  calls.   Mr  Howells  also
    relied on the fact that MT had visited Jamaica on a number of occasions
    in October 2010 (for two weeks), in 2013 (for two weeks), in 2015  (for
    two weeks) and in May 2018 (for three weeks).

40. As regards MT's mental health, Mr Howells submitted that, although  the
    GP letter identified that she suffered from depression and  since  2018
    had again been taking sertraline, her evidence was that she had stopped
    taking sertraline in 2015 and so there was a gap of  three  years.   He
    submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that   her   mental   health
    difficulties required counselling or any other therapy.   In  addition,
    Mr Howells relied upon the fact that MT, in her evidence, had said that
    she had family  living  nearby  and  had  regular  contact  with  them,
    including three brothers and one sister.

41. As regards R, Mr Howells accepted that R has learning difficulties  and
    microcephaly.  Nevertheless, Mr Howells submitted that he was receiving
    support and care  both  under  the  community  paediatric  team  which,
    according to the GP's letter, had last reviewed  his  circumstances  in
    May 2015.  He was also receiving special education needs support  on  a
    1:1 basis in school.  Mr Howells pointed out that R, according  to  the
    GP's evidence, would be  sitting  his  GCSEs  this  year  although  the
    outcome was likely to be below average.  Other than  that  support,  MT
    had said that R's health was in general good.

42. Mr Howells submitted that it would not be unduly harsh for MT and R  to
    join the claimant in Jamaica and, if they did not, the  impact  of  the
    separation had not reached the threshold of being "unduly harsh".

Discussion and Findings

43. In reaching my factual findings, I have fully taken  into  account  all
    the evidence relied upon by the parties, in particular the documents to
    which I was referred by Mr Dieu in the claimant's bundle and  the  oral
    evidence of MT.

44. The claimant was deported to Jamaica on 21 July 2010.  Since that time,
    I accept the evidence of MT that she has made four visits to see him in
    October 2010 (for two weeks), in 2013 (for two weeks), in 2015 (for two
    weeks) and in May 2018 (for three weeks).  On each of those visits, she
    was accompanied by her cousin.

45. Despite the separation, I accept that she has maintained a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the claimant as his partner.   Indeed,  Mr
    Howells did not suggest otherwise.

46. R is the son of the claimant and MT.  He is now 16 years old.  He is in
    year 11 and is taking his GCSE exams this summer.

47. I accept MT's evidence that he maintains contact with the  claimant  by
    telephone (and sometimes video calls) between once and twice a week.

48. MT accepted that R had not accompanied her on her  visits  to  see  the
    claimant in Jamaica.  She explained that R had a  fear  of  flying  and
    will not accompany her to visit  the  claimant.   As  I  will  turn  to
    shortly, R's ongoing microcephaly has significantly impacted  upon  his
    development and has resulted in ongoing learning  difficulties.   There
    is no reference to R's 'fear of flying' in the supporting documents, in
    particular the GP's letter at pages 5, 7 and 9.  In  cross-examination,
    Mr Howells asked MT whether there  were  any  supporting  documents  in
    relation to R's 'fear of flying'.  MT accepted there were none but that
    she had mentioned it to the GP.  Mr Dieu submitted that I should accept
    MT's evidence on this issue as there was  no  reason  why,  apart  from
    this, that R had not accompanied MT on  her  four  visits  to  see  the
    claimant.  I accept that submission.  MT's evidence,  on  this  matter,
    was persuasive.

49. I accept on the evidence that the claimant has a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with R.

50. Turning now to the circumstances of MT and R, MT has, in  my  judgment,
    coped with the claimant's absence and caring  for  R.   The  supporting
    documents (in particular the GP's letter at page 5) identify  that  she
    suffers from depression and struggles to work as a consequence of being
    a single parent with a teenage son  with  learning  difficulties.   Her
    concerns over her finances have also contributed to that.   The  letter
    notes that she has been unable to work at times and  in  November  2018
    she restarted taking the anti-depressant sertraline daily.  The  letter
    notes that the "court battle  itself"  has  had  "quite  a  detrimental
    impact on her mental health".

51. MT, in her evidence, told me  that  her  parents  and  siblings  (three
    brothers and one sister) live nearby and she has regular  contact  with
    them.  Her father now has dementia and is  in  residential  care.   Her
    mother is 92 years of age.  The  support  she  can  obtain  from  them,
    therefore, is no  doubt  limited.   However,  in  addition  to  R,  the
    appellant's  25  year  old  daughter,  as  a  result  of   a   previous
    relationship, also lives with MT.  MT works part-time in a supermarket.
     She told me that when she visited Jamaica her sister looked  after  R.
    She told me that she could not concentrate moving  to  Jamaica  because
    her parents needed her, including her father who, as I have said, is in
    residential care.

52. R, as I already stated, suffers from microcephaly  which  has  impacted
    upon his development  and  resulted  in  him  having  ongoing  learning
    difficulties.  He  is  supported,  however,  in  school  by  a  special
    educational needs teacher who provides frequent 1:1 support.   Although
    I accept that he needs extra support in school, on  the  basis  of  the
    documentation, it is clear to me that that is being provided to him and
    that he is able to take his GCSEs this summer albeit, in the  words  of
    the GP, "the outcome is likely to be below  average".   I  also  accept
    that  R  requires  support  for  his  daily  activities  due   to   his
    neurodiversity.  Since 2010, and indeed since  the  claimant's  earlier
    imprisonment, MT (together with her family and  others,  have  provided
    the necessary support to R both in school and outside  school.   He  is
    under the care of the community paediatric team  but  his  last  review
    took place in May 2015 and there is nothing  in  the  documentation  to
    suggest that his needs have not been, or will not be in the future, met
    by the support he presently receives.  Although MT has undoubtedly  had
    to struggle with raising R alone, with the  support  provided  she  has
    clearly been able to do so despite suffering from  depression  herself.
    MT  accepted  that  between  2015  (when  she  was  previously   taking
    medication)  and  November  2018  (when  she  re-started  treatment  on
    sertraline) she  had  not  needed  any  medication  to  deal  with  any
    depression or anxiety from which she suffered.

53. Mr Howells put the Secretary of State's case on two bases.   First,  he
    submitted that it was not "unduly harsh" for MT and R to go to  Jamaica
    and live with the claimant.  Secondly, it was not unduly harsh  for  MT
    and R to remain in the UK without the claimant.

54. I bear in mind the test  for  "unduly  harsh"  set  out  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in MK at [46] which was  approved  by  the  Supreme
    Court in  KO  (Nigeria).   It  does  not  equate  with  "uncomfortable,
    inconvenient,  undesirable  or  merely   difficult"   but   imposes   a
    "considerably more  elevated  threshold".   The  "harsh"  denotes  that
    something is "severe, or bleak".  The need to be "unduly harsh"  raises
    "an already elevated standard still higher".  I bear in  mind,  as  the
    Supreme Court pointed out in KO  (Nigeria)  at  [23]  that  the  phrase
    "unduly  harsh"   introduces   a   "higher   hurdle"   than   that   of
    "reasonableness".  Further, it introduces "a degree of harshness  going
    beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with  the
    deportation of a parent".

55. Given the circumstances of MT and R, I find that it would not  only  be
    unreasonable but it would also be unduly harsh for them to relocate  to
    Jamaica.  Although MT, as she accepted in her evidence, is of  Jamaican
    heritage, she has lived all her  life  in  the  UK  and  is  a  British
    citizen.  R is also a British citizen and has lived his entire life  in
    the UK.  MT has an elderly father, who suffers  from  dementia,  and  a
    mother aged 92.  R has a fear of  flying  and  cannot  be  expected  to
    travel by the, only practicable way to Jamaica, by aeroplane.  He  also
    suffers from microcephaly with attendant impact  upon  his  development
    and he suffers from learning difficulties which require support both in
    school and at home.  In her evidence, MT said she  had  made  enquiries
    about support for R in Jamaica but had not seen any support  there  and
    it would not be as good  as  here.   She  accepted  that  she  had  not
    approached any health professionals in Jamaica.  Consequently, there is
    no evidence in this appeal as to the professional support that R  would
    receive in Jamaica.  It cannot be assumed, in the absence of  evidence,
    that support would not be available or  that,  the  support  which  was
    available, would be inadequate.

56. Nevertheless, to uproot MT with R  -  bearing  in  mind  his  'fear  of
    flying' - in order to relocate to Jamaica would, in  my  judgment,  not
    only against R's best interests but also reaches the  heightened  level
    of being "unduly harsh" on both MT and R.  If R  cannot  relocate  then
    neither can MT as his parent and primary carer.

57. That, however, is not enough for the claimant to  succeed.   The  issue
    remains whether the separation of MT and R from the claimant is "unduly
    harsh".  I do not accept that for MT and R  to  remain  in  the  UK  is
    unduly harsh.  R's health and wellbeing is catered for by  the  support
    of MT, the family  and  professional  assistance  provided  to  R.   Of
    course, I accept what the GP says in her letter of 7 November 2018 that
    R's separation from his father has had  a  significant  impact  on  his
    wellbeing and that in the absence of his father there is  less  support
    to MT dealing with his behavioural problems.  It would, no doubt, be in
    R's best interests to have both parents in the UK.  He is, however,  at
    least able to maintain contact with the claimant  in  Jamaica  and  has
    done so for some  time  even  though  he  cannot  travel  to  see  him.
    Nevertheless,  the  evidence  simply  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
    circumstances of MT or R in the UK (without the claimant) are  "severe"
    or "bleak" such as to be "harsh" let alone "unduly  harsh".   MT  (with
    the support of others) has coped since at least 2010 when the  claimant
    was deported and R has been provided with the needed  support  both  at
    home and elsewhere, such as in school.  His special  educational  needs
    have been catered for.  MT's own mental health (depression and anxiety)
    has, when needed, been treated first in 2015 and  more  recently  since
    November 2018.  R was last reviewed by the community paediatric team in
    May 2015.  There is no evidence of any ongoing review or need  that  is
    not being met.  R, although the outcome is likely to be below  average,
    is taking his GCSEs as a year 11 student.  MT accepted that his general
    health was good apart from that arising from his microcephaly.

58. Looking  at  all  the  circumstances,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    maintenance of the  deportation  order  against  the  claimant  has  an
    "unduly harsh" impact upon MT or R.

59. For these reasons, I am not satisfied that Exception 2 in s.117C(5)  of
    the NIA Act 2002 applies.

60. Mr Dieu did not rely upon s.117C(6), namely that, even though Exception
    2  did  not   apply,   there   were   nevertheless   "very   compelling
    circumstances, over and above those  described  in  "Exception  2"  (my
    emphasis).  That test could not be met in this  appeal  since  all  the
    relevant circumstances have already been taken into account in reaching
    my decision that Exception 2 does not apply.

61. Consequently, as  the  impact  of  maintaining  the  deportation  order
    against the claimant is not unduly harsh  upon  MT  or  R,  the  public
    interest requires the maintenance of that deportation order against the
    claimant.

Decision

62. As a result, the claimant's appeal based upon Art 8 of the  ECHR  fails
    and his appeal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              23, April 2019









