

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01874/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 7 July 2016                                |On 19 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                             MRS FIONA  RWAMBIWA

                        (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, against a decision of
the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew hereinafter "the Judge") made after a
hearing of 19 June 2015 to dismiss her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision of 25 September 2014 refusing to revoke a deportation order.

2.    By way of background, the appellant is a female  citizen  of  Zimbabwe
and was born on 26 July 1983.  She has a total of three children,  one  of
whom is resident in  Zimbabwe and is a national of that country and  two  of
whom are resident in the United Kingdom and who are British citizens.

3.    The appellant entered the United Kingdom,  for  the  first  time,  on
20 June 2002.  She was granted leave to enter as a student and subsequently
obtained further periods of leave on the same basis.  However, she  returned
to Zimbabwe in July 2005 and on 14 April 2006 (as I understand  it  while
still in Zimbabwe) she gave birth to her first child.  She returned  to  the
UK and, indeed, in February 2007  sought  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
student but that was refused on 27 July 2007.  Her leave expired  and  she
was served with notice as an overstayer in  October 2007.   It  would  seem
that, at some point after that, she left  the  UK.   Records  show  that  on
12 November 2008 she approached the British Embassy in South Africa seeking
a Visit Visa under a false identity and that that application  was  refused.
Nevertheless, she managed to find a way of securing entry into  the  UK  and
it is recorded that on 8 April 2009, whilst in the UK, she claimed asylum.
It seems it was at that stage that her previous deception came to light  and
this led to her facing criminal  charges  and  on  3  August 2009  she  was
convicted,  at  Croydon Crown  Court,  of  seeking  leave  to  enter   the
United Kingdom  by  deception  and  received  a  sentence  of  six  months
imprisonment  along  with  a  recommendation  that  she  be  deported.    On
8 June 2010 her asylum claim  was  refused  and  an  appeal  against  that
decision was dismissed on 26 July 2010.  Shortly after that permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  and  she  became  "appeal  rights
exhausted".  Some considerable time after that, in fact  on  12 June 2012,
she was served with a decision to make a deportation  order  in  respect  of
her.   She  appealed  that  decision  but  the  appeal  was   dismissed   on
26 November 2012.  In the  meantime,  however,  she  had  entered  into  a
relationship with  one  Philip Jack Baker,  a  British  citizen,  (it  was
accepted by the Judge that the two had been in a  relationship  since  2011)
and on 18 January 2013 she gave birth to  her  second  child  who  is,  as
mentioned earlier, a British citizen.  On 26 March 2013 she and  Mr Baker
married each other  and  on  15 September 2014  the  respondent  signed  a
deportation order in respect of her.  On 25 September 2014 the  respondent
refused to revoke the deportation order (a  decision  which  has  ultimately
led to this appeal) and on 30 October 2014 she gave  birth  to  her  third
child, also a British citizen.  It is my understanding that Mr Baker is the
father of her two youngest children.

4.    The appellant's appeal was, as indicated, heard on 19 June 2015. In a
determination promulgated on 29 June 2015 that appeal was dismissed.   The
Judge considered, inter alia, the content of paragraph 390 and 390A of the
Immigration Rules and sections 117A-D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002.  In so doing the Judge did resolve  some  matters  in  the
appellant's favour.  She concluded that the offending could not be  said  to
have caused "serious harm" despite its nature, and that  the  appellant  was
not a "persistent offender" (there was only one offence).  This  meant  that
paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules  had  no  application  with  the
consequence that "the regime set out in paragraphs 398, 399 and  399A"  did
not apply.  Further, the Judge accepted that  the  appellant  did  not  fall
within  the  definition  of  "foreign  criminal"  under   section 117D(2).
Nevertheless, in light of the public interest in the deportation of  persons
who have committed crimes, the Judge concluded that  her  deportation  would
be proportionate such that revocation of the deportation order was  not  the
proper course.

5.    In considering whether the order should be revoked  it  was  necessary
for the Judge to consider the family  situation  and  the  position  of  the
British  citizen  partner  and  the  two  British  citizen   children.    In
addressing those sorts of considerations the Judge said this:

      "     38.  Nevertheless I have considered  the  position  of  the  two
      children, in accordance with section 55, both  of  whom  are  British
      citizens.  The children are both very young and,  as  such,  will  not
      have formed any life outside their family.  It is clear they cannot be
      removed from the United Kingdom and to this extent it is the choice of
      the appellant and her  husband  as  to  whether  the  children  should
      accompany her to Zimbabwe if she is deported, stay with  Mr Baker  in
      the United Kingdom, or in the alternative Mr Baker and the  children
      can, of course, accompany the appellant to Zimbabwe.

            39.  I had no submissions  before  me  that  Mr Baker  and  the
      children would be unable to do so, other than he was not qualified and
      would not be able to obtain employment and that the children would  be
      better off remaining  in  the  United Kingdom  where  they  would  be
      educated, in the case of [the second born child], and in the  case  of
      [the third born child] he would be able to have medical treatment  for
      his eczema.  However, I have  no  evidence  before  me  to  show  that
      Mr Baker would not be able to find some sort of employment to provide
      for his family in Zimbabwe.  I note that he has been employed  in  the
      same company in the United Kingdom since he left school at 16 and thus
      he must be a loyal and respected worker.

            40.  So far as 'the second born child's' education is  concerned
      I note the evidence that Mr Baker  pays  for  the  appellant's  son's
      schooling in Zimbabwe and thus it is apparent  there  are  educational
      facilities there.  I have no medical evidence before me to  show  that
      [the third born child's] eczema would be made any worst by  his  going
      to live in Zimbabwe and I have nothing before me to show that he would
      be unable to receive treatment there either.

            41.  I  accept  the  children  would  be  separated  from  their
      extended family in the United Kingdom.  However, they also have family
      in Zimbabwe, including a stepbrother.  The children  are,  of  course,
      British citizens and there would  be  nothing  to  prevent  them  from
      coming to the United Kingdom for visits.

            42.  If the choice was made for the appellant  to  return  alone
      to Zimbabwe I accept that this would  mean  separation  from  her  two
      children here.  However, she has already chosen to be  separated  from
      her child in Zimbabwe, who it would appear, she has  not  seen  for  a
      considerable period of time.  In  addition  the  appellant  does  have
      other family members in Zimbabwe, in particular her parents.  Although
      the evidence was vague it is apparent that the appellant's father  has
      some kind of employment in that country and lives in  his  own  house.
      The appellant would not be without support in that country.

            43.  Although Mr Baker works at present  there  is  nothing  to
      prevent him from caring for the children.  If he  wished  to  continue
      working then it may be that other members of his family would step  in
      to assist.  I do not know and it would be wrong of  me  to  speculate.
      If not then he may have  to  seek  professional  assistance  with  the
      children.  Mr Baker could take the children to visit the appellant in
      Zimbabwe and in  the  meantime,  although  I  accept  it  is  no  real
      substitute, contact with the children could continue by letter, cards,
      and electronic means.  Once again I bear in mind that this is all  the
      appellant's child in Zimbabwe has.

            44.  It  would,  of  course,  mean  separation  from  Mr Baker.
      However, both should have known full well when their relationship  was
      developing that a time may well come when separation would  be  forced
      upon them because of the appellant's lack of status and  also  because
      she was already subject to a  recommendation  for  deportation.   They
      took the risk, such as it was, to allow their relationship to  develop
      and to have the children knowing that the appellant should,  in  fact,
      have left the United Kingdom and because she had not  might  well  be
      removed at any time."

6.    The appellant, who was at that stage  represented,  sought  permission
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds contended that the Judge  had
erred in failing to consider the best interests of the two  British  citizen
children,  in  failing  to  properly  consider,  from  the  perspective   of
proportionality in the context of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
Human Rights (ECHR) what the position might be with  respect  to  the  three
possible options it had identified at paragraph 38 of the determination and
in (so far as I understand this ground  at  all)  failing  to  consider  the
question of revocation first before considering "other human rights  issues"
and finally in failing to  attach  weight  to  delay  on  the  part  of  the
Secretary of State in seeking to implement deportation.

7.    The Judge who granted permission said this:

      "On 3 August 2009 at Croydon Crown Court, A  was  sentenced  to  six
      months imprisonment for seeking leave to enter the UK by deception;  a
      recommendation was also made for deportation.  She was served  with  a
      decision to  make  a  deportation  order  on  12 June 2012  and  the
      deportation order was signed on 15 September 2014.  The Judge  found
      that A's offence cannot be said to have caused  'serious  harm',  that
      she is not a persistent offender, that this is her only conviction and
      that she does not come within the definition of a  'foreign  criminal'
      in para 117D(2).  Moreover, it is arguable that  the  Judge  has  not
      adequately considered whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  A's
      British husband and children to join A in Zimbabwe and/or whether such
      a course of action would be in the best interests of the  two  British
      children or be proportionate in all the circumstances of the case."

8.    The matter was then listed for a hearing  before  the  Upper Tribunal
(before me) so that consideration could be given to the question of  whether
the Judge had, in fact, erred in law and, if so, what  ought  to  flow  from
that.  The appellant, by this time, had lost her legal  representation  (she
explained to me at the hearing that this was because public funding  was  no
longer available to her) so she represented  herself  though  she  did  have
some assistance, by way of  support,  from  a  McKenzie  friend.  Mrs Aboni
represented  the  respondent.  The  appellant  had   lodged   some   further
documentation for the purposes of the hearing and copies  were  provided  to
Mrs Aboni but it is clear that that documentation was relevant to potential
remaking of the decision if I were to set the Judge's decision aside  rather
than with respect  to  the  error  of  law  issue  itself.   Directions  had
indicated that the hearing was to be confined  to  a  consideration  of  the
error of law  issue  unless  any  necessary  remaking  could  be  undertaken
without the need for any further oral evidence.

9.    Mrs Aboni submitted that the determination of the Judge was full  and
complete.  She argued that  the  Judge  had  properly  considered  the  best
interests of the children and  had  correctly  treated  such  as  a  primary
consideration (albeit that it is not the primary consideration  and  nor  is
it a paramount consideration) even though she had not actually said she  was
doing so.  She had properly considered the  various  available  options  for
the family and had factored all of that into her  overall  consideration  of
the case.  There was no error of law.  The appellant argued that  the  Judge
had not considered the best interests of her two youngest  children  in  any
meaningful way.  Her third born child has some  breathing  difficulties  and
would not be able to cope in Zimbabwe.   Her  second  born  child  is  in  a
nursery and it is not fair to make her cease that education.

10.   As I indicated to the parties, I have decided  that  the  decision  of
the Judge did involve  an  error  of  law  and  that,  in  consequence,  the
decision should be set aside.  I set out my reasoning below.

11.   It was, of course,  as  the  Judge  fully  appreciated,  necessary  to
consider the situation of the two British citizen children.   In  the  event
of the deportation order not being revoked the options appeared to  be  that
the children would remain in the UK with their father and thus be  separated
from their mother, that they would go with the appellant  to  Zimbabwe  with
Mr Baker remaining in the UK such that they would be separated  from  their
father or the whole family would relocate to  Zimbabwe  together  such  that
they would lose much of the enjoyment or privilege (if it is to  be  thought
of in that way) of being British citizens.  So, whatever option  was  to  be
chosen, it was clear  that  there  would  be  some  impact  upon  those  two
children.

12.   There is no doubt that the interests of the two British  children  had
to represent a primary consideration for the Judge.   That is  not  to  say,
as Mrs Aboni correctly points out, that those interests would be  the  only
primary consideration or that  they  would  be  a  paramount  consideration.
Further, it is right to say that, in general terms, citizenship  is  not  to
be regarded as a trump card with respect to Article 8 considerations or  as
to a consideration as to whether it would be proper to revoke a  deportation
order.  However, the Judge did not say in her  determination  that  she  was
regarding  the  interests  of  those  two  children  as  being   a   primary
consideration.  Mrs Aboni argued that that did not matter  because  it  was
clear she had done so from  what  she  had  said  at  paragraph 38  of  her
determination to the effect that she had:

      "Considered the position of  the  two  children,  in  accordance  with
section 55"

and that that amounted to the same thing.  Clearly that was a  reference  to
section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  but  the
mere passing reference to that section does not demonstrate that  the  Judge
appreciated she had to treat the interests of  the  British  children  as  a
primary consideration or that she actually and consciously did  so.   Whilst
the matter might be finally balanced I have decided I cannot  simply  assume
or infer from the various comments the Judge made about  the  children  that
she  did  treat  their  interests  as  a  primary  consideration.   Further,
although the Judge did clearly note  the  three  possible  options  for  the
family,  which  I  have  identified  above,  she  did  not  embark  on   any
consideration or make any findings as to the extent to which  any  of  those
options would impact adversely upon the  interests  of  the  children  other
than what was said quite briefly at paragraphs 40 and 41 regarding what the
position might be if the whole family were to relocate  to  Zimbabwe.   What
was said even in that context though does not, in my judgment, amount  to  a
proper evaluation of what the children  would  be  giving  up  in  terms  of
rights as British citizens. As to the  other  options  there  is  no  proper
consideration as to the impact of  separation  from  one  or  other  of  the
parents.

13.   I do not mean the above to sound like criticism of the Judge  who,  in
many ways, can be said to have undertaken  quite  a  full  evaluation  of  a
number of relevant matters.  However, I do think that there  was  not  quite
the sufficiently holistic examination and consideration as to the  interests
of the children as was needed.

14.   My having informed the parties of my decision there was  some  further
discussion as to whether it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to  the
First-tier Tribunal or whether the decision should be remade  on  a  future
date when oral evidence  could  be  given,  by  the  Upper Tribunal.   Both
Mrs Aboni and the appellant expressed a preference for remittal.   It  does
seem to me that there  will  be  a  need  for  some  further  oral  evidence
concerning the interests of the  children  regarding  the  various  possible
scenarios and it may be there would be a  need  for  some  further  evidence
concerning the implications for the appellant's husband if he was to  go  to
Zimbabwe or was to be separated either from one or other of the children  or
from his wife.  It also seems to me, in general terms, that  the  taking  of
oral evidence and the subsequent finding of facts is a task best  suited  to
the First-tier Tribunal given its status as  an  expert  fact-finding  body.
Accordingly, and with the agreement  of  the  parties,  I  have  decided  to
remit.  There are  set  out  below,  some  directions  for  the  new  First-
tier Tribunal which I hope will assist it in its task.



Directions for the  First-tier Tribunal  concerning  the  remaking  of  the
Decision

      A.    This case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier Tribunal  for  the
           remaking of the decision.  Nothing shall be preserved  from  the
           determination. The appeal shall be heard by a Judge  other  than
           Judge Andrew.

      B.    The new First-tier Tribunal will be  required  to  undertake  a
           full rehearing of the appeal and make fresh factual findings and
           reach fresh conclusions with respect to all  matters  raised  by
           the appeal.

      C.     There  are  no  interpreter  requirements.   If,  however,  the
           appellant does consider, for whatever reason, that the  services
           of a professional interpreter  will  be  required  at  the  next
           hearing  she  should  notify   the    First-tier Tribunal   in
           Birmingham, as to that requirement, forthwith.

      D.    The new  hearing  shall,  if  practicable,  take  place  at  the
           Birmingham Hearing Centre (Sheldon Court) with a  time  estimate
           of three hours.

      E.    Either party may file further documents  in  addition  to  those
           which  were  before  the  Upper Tribunal  at  the  hearing  of
           7 July 2016.  However, any further documentation is to be served
           in the form of an indexed and paginated bundle.  A copy  of  any
           such bundle should be lodged with  the  First-tier Tribunal  at
           Birmingham and a copy should be sent, at the same time,  to  the
           other party.  Any such bundles must be  filed  with  the  First-
           tier Tribunal and served upon the other party in sufficient time
           to be received at least five working  days  prior  to  the  date
           which will be fixed for the hearing.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error of law and is set
           aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made (none was sought and none had  been  made  by
           the First-tier
Tribunal).

Signed                                  Date 19 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable there can be no fee award.

Signed                            Date 19 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

