
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01312/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 December 2013                            |On 17 December 2013          |
|Extempore                                     |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant



                                     and



                            Subash Manilal Mehta
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richmond of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, (a panel comprised of  First-
    tier Tribunal O'Garro and Mr Olszewski, non-legal member),  promulgated
    on 7 October 2013 in which they allowed the appeal of Mr Subash Manilal
    Mehta, whom I refer to as the claimant, against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 21 June 2013 to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him by virtue of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The facts of this case are set out in detail in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  There is no  dispute  about  the  fact  that  the
    appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for a substantial  period  of
    time.  He is married to a British citizen and has been  living  in  the
    United Kingdom since 1982.  He has a daughter who  is  also  a  British
    citizen and the claimant has had indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom since 26 October 1984.  On 29 November he was  convicted
    and sentenced to three years  imprisonment,  on  charges  of  obtaining
    money by deception and conspiracy to defraud.  His sentence was reduced
    on appeal to two years.

 3. The Secretary of State  in  her  refusal  letter  considered  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  that
    is paragraphs 397 to  399A  nor  was  she  satisfied  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances such that he should be given leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal on 6 September 2013
    the panel found that the claimant did not fall within the terms of  the
    Immigration Rules, specifically  finding  that  he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 399B on the basis that the claimant  had  not
    shown  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to   family   life
    continuing with his wife outside the United Kingdom  and  therefore  he
    did not fulfil the requirement of paragraph 399 (b)(ii).

 5. The panel then went on to consider whether despite that the decision to
    deport the claimant was contrary to his rights set out in Article 8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.  They adopted that  course  of
    action following the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  MF  (article  8
    new rules) Nigeria[2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC)  handed  down  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It is accepted by both parties that of course  in  light  of
    the decision in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 in  the  Court
    of Appeal that that is not the route that they should have  taken,  but
    it does not necessarily  follow  that  their  decision  to  do  so  was
    material.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  out  of  time  and
    permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
    on 5 November 2013.

 7.  In summary, the respondent's challenge to the  decision  is  that  the
    Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for findings in respect of the
    public interest in deporting a foreign  criminal,  the  argument  being
    that they failed to consider the public  interest  extends  beyond  the
    issue of the likelihood of the claimant reoffending.  It is also argued
    that the Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for finding that  his
    Article 8 rights would be breached by deportation given that there were
    no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in India.  It  is
    also submitted that the panel failed to make any findings of whether he
    had engaged with his role in  crime  despite  a  finding  that  he  was
    guilty,  failing  properly  to  engage  with  the  decision  in   Masih
    (deportation public interest basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46.



 8. In the grant of permission Judge Brunnen drew  attention  to  the  fact
    that the panel may, as they had not had the benefit of the judgement of
    the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria), misdirected themselves as  to  the
    nature of an insurmountable obstacle that would need  to  be  shown  in
    order for the appellant to have succeeded under the Immigration  Rules.
    Judge Brunnen found that it was arguable that the panel  had  erred  in
    considering  only  the  seriousness   of   the   appellant's   offence,
    considering only the risk of reoffending  giving  no  consideration  of
    weight to the wider policy considerations of deterrence.

 9. I should add that subsequent to the grant of permission being given and
    served on the claimant, his solicitors served a letter before action to
    the First-tier Tribunal on 19 November  2013  arguing  that  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  had  erred  in  granting  permission  to  the
    respondent to appeal eight days out of time.  That letter which was  in
    accordance with the pre-action protocol applicable to  judicial  review
    was followed by an application for judicial review which  was  made  to
    the Upper Tribunal, and as I understand it is still pending.

10. There was subsequent to the issue  of  judicial  review  proceedings  a
    request for an adjournment of these proceedings.  That application  was
    refused and Mr Richmond did not renew the application  before  me  this
    morning.

11. Mr Duffy sought permission to amend the grounds of appeal to include  a
    reference to a failure on the part of the First-tier Tribunal to follow
    the guidance given in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550  in  failing  to
    take into account the proper weight and  the  serious  and  significant
    weight that should be attached to  the  public  interest  in  deporting
    foreign criminals given that is  now  enjoined  by  statute  passed  by
    Parliament through the UK Borders Act 2007.

12. Mr Richmond objected to that application and I  refused  permission  to
    amend the grounds of appeal.  It is not  a  good  reason  for  amending
    grounds of appeal that the point was obvious;  if it was  obvious  then
    it should have been raised.  Second, there has been ample time  for  an
    application to be  made  for  the  grounds  to  be  amended.   No  such
    application was made until the day of the hearing  and  this  was  done
    without notice to the claimant.  In all  the  circumstances  I  am  not
    satisfied that it would be a proper exercise of judicial discretion  to
    admit an amendment of the grounds of appeal at this stage. This is  not
    a case where the amendment has been sought because of new facts  coming
    to light or in light of a supervening binding decision.

13. Mr Duffy's submission is that the Tribunal  did  not  in  reaching  the
    decision explain adequately what weight they  attached  to  the  public
    interest, failing to set out in any detail or any adequate  detail  why
    they had come to the conclusion that  it  was  proportionate  and  that
    there was insufficient indication that they had taken into account  the
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals which extends beyond the
    risk of reoffending and into the factors set out in AM  v  SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1634.

14. Mr Richmond's submitted that the Tribunal gave sufficient  reasons  for
    the  finding  that  the  decision  to  deport  the  appellant  was  not
    proportionate, and it is evident from the determination  at  paragraphs
    46, 47, 48 and 49 that the panel had taken these factors into  account;
    that it was clear also from paragraph 28 of the determination that they
    have considered the Secretary of State's policy on deportation; and, it
    was also evident from their consideration of paragraphs 397 to  399  of
    the Immigration Rules which are set out in the determination that  they
    have borne in mind the public policy as shown in the Rules in  reaching
    their decision.

15. In reply, Mr Duffy's submission is in relation to paragraph 46 and  the
    following paragraphs that there was no reasoning shown as to the effect
    that these considerations, if they had taken them into account, had  in
    the proportionality analysis.

16.  I  have  considered  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    carefully.  I consider that there is significant merit in Mr Richmond's
    submissions.  It is evident  that  the  panel  had  set  out  the  Rule
    properly, it is evident that they have taken account of the  policy  on
    deportation on foreign criminals within chapter 13 of the IDIs  and  it
    is clear at paragraph 28 that they said "we have had full regard to the
    Secretary of State's policy when coming to our decision".  It is  clear
    also that they have had regard to the public interest  which  I  accept
    goes beyond the need to deter reoffending, and it is clear from what is
    said at paragraph 46 and 47 that these have been  taken  into  account.
    Their consideration of these matters was adequate  and  the  panel  has
    addressed themselves fully to the  Maslov  factors  as  is  clear  from
    paragraph 49.

17. The claimant has lived in the United Kingdom for 30  years  with  leave
    and is married to a British Citizen who has  lived  here  for  over  40
    years.  It is not arguable on the facts of this case that this decision
    is in any way perverse or is not one that the panel could properly have
    come to taking into account all the factors which they  said  they  had
    taken into account.  I am satisfied when  read  as  a  whole  that  the
    determination shows in adequate detail why on the particular  facts  of
    this case  the  panel  considered  that  deporting  the  appellant  was
    disproportionate.  On that basis I find that there was no error of  law
    disclosed in the  determination  which  is  capable  of  affecting  the
    outcome of the appeal.

18. Having said that, it is agreed between the parties that in light of the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) that the exercise  that
    the panel has conducted in  considering  Article  8  should  have  been
    carried out within paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.   Whilst  it
    is implicit  in  the  determination  that  the  panel  found  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules  and  went  on  to
    consider Article 8  as  a  separate  ground  of  appeal,  they  do  not
    expressly say so in the conclusion.  This however, is not material;  as
    the Court of Appeal noted in MF (Nigeria) there is no  real  difference
    in the consideration of proportionality within paragraph 398  or  under
    article 8; it is a difference of form rather than substance, and  I  am
    satisfied that had the Tribunal  considered  proportionality  within  a
    consideration within paragraph 398 of whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances, they would inevitably, given their sustainable findings,
    have concluded that there were.

19. I therefore uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  subject  to
    the clarification that the appeal should have been  allowed  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  on  the   basis   that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances such that the claimant met the requirements of  paragraph
    398 and subject to substituting that as the basis on which  the  appeal
    is allowed I uphold the determination.



SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error of law and I uphold it,  subject  to  the  clarification
       that the appeal was allowed under the immigration rules.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

