
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01227/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 05 March 2015                     |On 10 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                     ARN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr Bandegani (of Counsel), instructed  by  Kesar  and  Company
                    Solicitors (Dover)
Respondent:   Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

ANONYMITY
I maintain the anonymity order made instance and have adjusted the
description of the Appellant in the title above accordingly.


                                  DECISION
Introduction

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    the Respondent  herein,  dated  19  June  2014,  to  make  a  so-called
    "automatic" deportation order.  The outcome of the  Appellant's  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was thus:

         (a)  The asylum limb of the appeal was dismissed.


         (b)  The appeal succeeded, however, under Article 8 ECHR.


    This is the Upper Tribunal's determination of the Appellant's appeal on
    the asylum issue and the Secretary  of  State's  cross  appeal  on  the
    Article 8 issue. At the conclusion of the hearing I gave an ex  tempore
    judgment allowing the Appellant's appeal and dismissing  the  Secretary
    of State's  cross  appeal.  I  summarise  below  my  reasons  for  thus
    deciding.


The Asylum Appeal

 2. I have decided that this appeal succeeds on the two grounds  which,  in
    essence, form the grant of permission to appeal.

 3.  The  first  ground  relates  to  the  sustainability  of  the  Judge's
    assessment that the Appellant's asylum claim was lacking in credibility
    by virtue of its timing. The burden of the  Appellant's  case  is  that
    there is no tenable basis for this assessment  and,  further,  that  it
    disregards the case made by him in response  to  the  Form  ICD/0350/AD
    questionnaire accompanying the  "minded  to  deport/one  stop  warning"
    letter sent on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  together  with  the
    Appellant's letter which accompanied his  response  and  certain  other
    evidence generated at an earlier stage.  The exercise for this Tribunal
    is to juxtapose all of these sources with the determination of the FtT.
     Having performed this exercise, I conclude that this ground of  appeal
    is established.  There is, in my judgment, a failure on the part of the
    FtT to acknowledge these various strands of evidence and to assess them
    accordingly.   Had  the  FtT  performed  this  exercise,  I  cannot  be
    confident that its adverse  credibility  assessment  of  the  Appellant
    would nonetheless have been made.  Thus this error of law is material.

 4. The second error of law which I have found, based on the second of  the
    permitted grounds of appeal, relates to the manner  in  which  the  FtT
    considered the various risk factors on which the Appellant's  case  was
    advanced.  There were several such factors: his own  historic  conduct;
    the asserted anti - government conduct of members  of  his  family  and
    events  relating  to  them,  including  their  alleged  execution;  the
    Appellant's drugs offences  convictions  in  the  United  Kingdom;  his
    illegal departure from  Iran;  his  enforced  return  from  the  United
    Kingdom; his non-possession of a passport; and his  status  of  Iranian
    Arab.  The first two of these factors were conflated by  the  FtT:  see
    [55] of the determination.  The Judge failed to  recognise  that  these
    were separate considerations.  The Judge then considered in extenso the
    drugs offences factor.  No consideration was given to  the  factors  of
    non-possession of a passport, enforced return from the  United  Kingdom
    to Iran and  the  Appellant's  Iranian  Arab  status.   The  Judge  did
    consider the illegal departure factor.  The relevant  passages  in  the
    determination are [56] - [58].

 5. In addition to the conflation and omissions noted above, I consider  it
    clear  that  the  risk  factors  which  the  Judge  did  identify  were
    considered by him disjunctively.   This  I  consider  to  amount  to  a
    further, free standing error of law since, having regard to the Country
    Guidance decisions in this sphere, it was incumbent  on  the  Judge  to
    consider these factors cumulatively, in the round.   See  SB  (Risk  on
    Return: Illegal Exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053, BA (Demonstrators  in
    Britain: Risk on Return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and  SA  (Iranian
    Arabs - No General Risk) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 41 (IAC).

The Article 8 ECHR Cross - Appeal

 6. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State  on  three
    grounds. The first of these grounds complains, correctly, that the  FtT
    erred in law in its assessment that whereas the new provisions of  Part
    5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  governed  the
    appeal, the associated new amended provisions of the Immigration  Rules
    did not. However, it was acknowledged by Mr Richards that this error of
    law was not material since the Judge had,  in  substance,  applied  the
    correct test, namely  undue  harshness.   I  consider  this  concession
    properly made. It follows that this error of law is not material.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the further ground that the FtT had
    engaged  in  impermissible  speculation  in  its  assessment   of   the
    seriousness of the Appellant's offending in [67] of the  determination.
    The focus of this complaint was the Judge's expression of opinion  that
    the Appellant's attack on his victim was not "sustained".  In the  very
    concise sentencing transcript, the  Crown  Court  Judge  described  the
    attack as "serious" and stated unequivocally that it consisted of  "one
    blow", causing a single injury.  Furthermore,  it  is  clear  from  the
    remainder of the transcript that, having regard to  the  considerations
    that the Appellant had committed no previous crime of  violence  -  and
    was thereby  acting  "totally  out  of  character"  -  and  his  health
    problems, the sentence would be tailored in a manner which would permit
    him to be released from custody "relatively soon", with full  allowance
    for his remand detention pre-trial (188 days).  Having  regard  to  the
    contents of the sentencing transcript, I conclude that this  ground  of
    appeal has no merit.

 8. The third ground on which the Secretary of State was  given  permission
    to cross appeal is couched in the language of "irrationality/inadequate
    reasoning/no reasoning". The gist of the  reply  by  Mr  Bandegani,  of
    Counsel, on behalf of the Appellant, is that this  amounts  to  a  mere
    disagreement with the Judge's findings  and  conclusions.   As  I  have
    highlighted above, it is common case that the Judge, in considering the
    impact of the proposed deportation of the Appellant  on  his  wife  and
    daughter, applied the correct test of  undue  hardship.   This  is  the
    criterion ("unduly harsh") introduced by section 117C(5)  of  the  2002
    Act, as amended.  It is common case that  the  Appellant's  wife  is  a
    "qualifying partner" and his daughter is a "qualifying child".

 9. In my judgment, it is important to recognise that the FtT  was  engaged
    in  an   exercise   of   evaluative   assessment.    Furthermore,   the
    determination must be considered as a whole.  I further consider  that,
    in the context of this case, the threshold for intervention  on  appeal
    by this error of law Tribunal is that of irrationality.   There  is  no
    suggestion that the Judge committed any material error of fact or  that
    any material fact or consideration was disregarded or  that  any  alien
    fact or consideration was permitted to intrude. Furthermore, the  Judge
    correctly acknowledged the importance of section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizens  and  Immigration  Act  2009.   In  [63]  and  [64]   of   the
    determination, the Judge considered, separately, the predicted  impacts
    on the Appellant's spouse and daughter of his deportation. In doing so,
    he identified material facts and  considerations,  concluded  that  the
    test of undue hardship was satisfied  and,  in  my  view,  provided  an
    adequate explanation of this conclusion.  I am satisfied,  accordingly,
    that this ground of appeal has no merit.

DECISION

10. As a result:

    (a)  I set aside the decision of the FtT whereby the Appellant's asylum
         appeal was dismissed.


    (b)  I affirm the decision of the FtT whereby  the  Appellant's  appeal
         under Article 8 ECHR was allowed.


    (c)  I consider that remittal to a differently constituted FtT for  the
         purpose of remaking the  decision  on  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
         appropriate.  This is influenced by the nature of the error of  law
         which I have found and the inability of the Appellant to proceed to
         a remaking hearing in the wake of the decision which  I  pronounced
         on 05 March 2015.






                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                         Date: 05 March 2015
