

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01365/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |       Determination           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 7 October 2015                          |       On 4 January 2016       |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                             MR ARY MOHAMMED ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Stuart King of Counsel, instructed by J D
Spicer Zeb
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against  a  decision  by  a  panel  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal comprising Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Easterman and Mr M E
   Olszewski JP.  The panel dismissed an appeal by the appellant  on  asylum
   and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant is a national of Iraq.  His appeal was  brought  against  a
   decision to deport him as a persistent offender.  The panel of the First-
   tier  Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  convictions  were
   sufficient to show that his  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
   conducive to the public good.  The panel then turned to the  question  of
   whether the appellant should be protected from deportation either on  the
   grounds of asylum or humanitarian protection or under Article 3.

3) The panel noted the appellant's original claim that he could  not  return
   to Iraq because of a fear of the regime of Saddam Hussein.  By  the  time
   of the hearing this was no longer the  appellant's  case  but  he  sought
   protection as a Kurd.  The panel was not satisfied that the appellant was
   a refugee  but  considered  the  question  of  Article  3  protection  or
   protection under the Qualification Directive on the basis that there  was
   an internal armed conflict in Iraq  which  would  put  the  appellant  in
   danger merely by his presence.

4) The panel observed that  the  appellant  comes  from  Kirkuk,  which  was
   currently in a conflict zone.  The  panel  accepted  that  the  appellant
   could not return to those areas of Northern  Iraq  which  were  currently
   overrun by ISIL forces.  The panel noted from the country guidance  case,
   HM & Others [2012] UKUT 00409, at paragraph 47, that Kurds would be  safe
   in the Kurdish controlled area of Iraq and that there were a large number
   of Kurds living around Baghdad.

5) The panel rejected the suggestion that because the appellant was  a  Kurd
   he could not live in Baghdad.  The  panel  were  of  the  view  that  the
   possibility of internal relocation was viable for the  appellant  and  he
   could return to Baghdad.  The position in Baghdad was not easy but it was
   not a contested area.

6) The panel also considered the appellant's position under  Article  8  and
   found that his deportation would not be a  disproportionate  interference
   with his private life.

7) The application for permission to appeal contended that the panel of  the
   First-tier Tribunal had failed to have regard to evidence from the  UNHCR
   dated 27 October 2014 on returns to Iraq.  The panel had failed  to  have
   regard to the extent of the problems in Baghdad at the present time.   In
   addition, the panel did not give adequate consideration to  the  question
   of the appellant's documentation.  His Civil Status ID (CSID)  could  not
   be replaced in Baghdad and this had implications for the appellant  which
   had not been taken into account by the Tribunal.  The appellant would  be
   returning to Iraq as someone without ID documents and without a  CSID  in
   particular.  He would not be able to replace these.  Without a  CSID  the
   appellant might not be able to attain an Iraqi nationality certificate or
   a public distribution system card.  Reliance was placed on the case of MK
   (documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00126.  The lack of  a  CSID
   would affect his entitlement to food rations and was plainly relevant  to
   the reasonableness of requiring the appellant to relocate internally.  In
   noting that many Kurds lived outside the  Kurdish  controlled  area,  the
   panel failed to  distinguish  between  the  situation  of  Kurds  already
   established and  a  returnee  who  would  be  joining  over  two  million
   internally displaced people in Iraq.

8) Permission was granted on these grounds.

9) A rule 24 notice dated 30 January  2015  was  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
   respondent.  This submitted that the panel's findings on the availability
   and reasonableness of internal relocation were well made.   Although  the
   panel might have gone into greater detail regarding the reasonableness of
   internal relocation, any lack of consideration  of  this  issue  did  not
   materially affect the outcome of the appeal.

Submissions

10) At the hearing before me, Ms Stuart  King  began  by  referring  to  the
   panel's alleged lack of regard to the  UNHCR  guidelines  on  returns  to
   Iraq.  She nevertheless acknowledged that since the panel's decision  the
   position had been affected by the issuing in September 2015 of a decision
   in the country guideline case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT
   00544.  She suggested that in the light  of  this  decision  the  panel's
   decision was perverse.

11) For the respondent Mr Melvin submitted that the  panel  had  taken  into
   account the UNHCR report in question, and  he  referred  me  to  passages
   where the country information was  mentioned,  and,  in  particular,  the
   UNHCR report at paragraph 103 of the decision.   He  submitted  that  the
   panel had given adequate consideration to all the country information and
   guidance.

12)  He  acknowledged  that  the  panel  had  not  mentioned   this   report
   specifically in relation to internal relocation but the panel's  decision
   should be considered as a whole.  The panel had found it  was  reasonable
   for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad where numerous Kurds resided.

13) There was then a discussion  of  the  decision  in  AA.   After  this  I
   indicated that I was satisfied there was an error of law in  the  panel's
   decision in relation to internal relocation because the panel  had  given
   inadequate consideration to  the  issue  of  reasonableness.   I  further
   indicated that the appeal would be allowed under Article 3.  My  detailed
   reasons would follow.

14) After the hearing Mr Melvin wrote to me requesting that I reconvene  the
   hearing for further submissions to be made on behalf of the respondent in
   relation to AA.  I considered, however, that the content of  Mr  Melvin's
   letter did not show that he had anything to add that had not been already
   discussed at the hearing.  Accordingly, I  have  proceeded  to  issue  my
   reasoned decision.

Discussion

15) In making a  decision  in  this  appeal  the  panel  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal were undoubtedly in a difficult position because it did not have
   the benefit of the up to date country guideline case of AA.  The  greater
   part of the panel's decision is, however, unaffected by any error of law.
    It was only when the panel turned to the question of internal relocation
   that an error was made.   This  error  was  that  having  regard  to  the
   available country information,  including  the  UNHCR  guidelines  of  27
   October 2014, the panel did not give adequate reasons for finding that it
   would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh  to  expect  the  appellant  to
   relocate to Baghdad in order to avoid indiscriminate violence in his home
   area of Kirkuk.

16) The other findings made by the  panel  in  their  decision,  apart  from
   internal relocation,  are  unchallenged  and  remain.   It  is  therefore
   appropriate for the decision to be re-made  on  the  sole  issue  of  the
   reasonableness of  internal  relocation  on  the  basis  that  the  other
   findings made by the First-tier Tribunal are still intact.

17) Nevertheless the respondent's position at the hearing, as  expressed  by
   Mr Melvin, was that the panel of the First-tier Tribunal further erred by
   not taking proper account of  the  appellant's  lack  of  Iraqi  identity
   documentation.  In this  regard  Mr  Melvin  relied,  in  particular,  on
   paragraph 7 of the headnote to AA, which states:

    "7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)  and
    Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1276, an international protection claim made by  P  cannot  succeed  by
    reference to any alleged risk of harm arising  from  absence  of  Iraqi
    identification documentation, if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is
    not currently feasible, given what is known  about  the  state  of  P's
    documentation."


18) Essentially Mr Melvin's argument was that the panel erred in  proceeding
   to consider internal relocation because, as  an  undocumented  Iraqi,  it
   would  not  be  feasible  to  return  the  appellant  to  Iraq.   As  the
   appellant's return was not feasible, the issue of an alleged risk of harm
   arising from absence of Iraqi identification document did not require  to
   be determined.

19) The rule 24 notice on behalf of the respondent was of course made  eight
   months before the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AA.   The  rule  24
   notice records, at paragraph 4, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly
   considered the appellant's claim to come from Kirkuk, which was currently
   in a conflict zone, and made well reasoned and  sustainable  findings  on
   the availability and reasonableness of  internal  relocation.   There  is
   then in the succeeding paragraph an acknowledgement that the panel  might
   have gone into greater detail on the issue of reasonableness.

20) I have already stated that the reasoning or lack of  reasoning,  by  the
   panel in relation to the reasonableness of internal relocation amounts to
   an error of law and this part of its decision  must  accordingly  be  set
   aside.  This is, however, the only part of  the  decision  which  is  set
   aside.  There was no cross-appeal by the respondent challenging any  part
   of the decision.


21) Nevertheless at  the  hearing  Mr  Melvin  strongly  disagreed  with  my
   approach and argued that the decision should be re-made in  its  entirety
   on the basis that the appellant was an  undocumented  Iraqi.   I  do  not
   consider this is appropriate or necessary.  I am supported in my decision
   by the terms of the decision in AA itself.  In that  case  the  appellant
   was also a Kurd from  Kirkuk.   The  Upper  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
   appellant would face an Article 15(c) risk if he returned  there.   There
   was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  access  to  Iraqi  identity
   documentation and the Tribunal found that  he  would  not  be  returnable
   until he was able to supply sufficient documentation to the Iraqi Embassy
   in London.  Nevertheless, the Tribunal went on  to  state,  at  paragraph
   207, the following in relation to internal relocation:

    "Given that the appellant's return is not currently feasible  it  could
    be said that it is unnecessary to hypothesise any risk to him upon  his
    return to Iraq.  However, as identified in paragraph 169 and 170 above,
    there may be cases where it will be evident that the  person  concerned
    would be at real risk of persecution or serious  harm  irrespective  of
    the lack of documentation and that an applicant should not be precluded
    from pursing a  claim  to  international  protection  in  circumstances
    whereas the asserted risk of harm is  not  (or  not  solely)  based  on
    factors (such  as  lack  of  documentation)  that  currently  render  a
    person's actual return unfeasible."

22) The Upper Tribunal then remitted the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
   for findings of fact to be made on these matters, including the  question
   of relocation to Baghdad.

23) Accordingly, it is clear from the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AA
   that in some cases it will be appropriate to  consider  the  question  of
   humanitarian protection and internal relocation even for an  undocumented
   Iraqi.  It is not necessarily an error of law to  do  so,  as  Mr  Melvin
   seemed to suggest.  In  this  appeal  it  should  be  observed  that  the
   appellant's  risk  of  serious  harm  arises  not  from   his   lack   of
   documentation but from the indiscriminate violence in his  home  area  of
   Kirkuk, similarly to the appellant in AA.

24) This brings me to the factors set out by the Upper Tribunal in AA to  be
   taken into consideration in assessing whether it would be unreasonable or
   unduly harsh to expect an Iraqi national to  relocate  to  Baghdad.   The
   factors are summarised at paragraph 15 of the headnote as follows:

    "(a)   Whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one...;

        b) Whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely  to
           find employment);

        c) Whether P has family members  or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
           accommodate him;

        d) Whether P as a lone female (women face greater difficulties than
           men in finding employment);

        e) Whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or  rent
           accommodation;

        f) Whether P is from a minority community;

        g) Whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind  there
           some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers  are  provided
           with the support generally given to IDPs."


25) In the present appeal the First-tier Tribunal found  the  appellant  was
   from a minority Kurdish  community.   The  appellant  performed  national
   service in Iraq and it may be assumed  that  he  has  some  knowledge  of
   Arabic.  In his evidence the appellant claimed that his parents were dead
   and he had lost contact with his brother and sister.  He was  brought  up
   in Kirkuk and there is no evidence that he has family members or  friends
   in Baghdad able to accommodate him, or any sponsor there.   There  is  no
   evidence of any support available for him there taking into  account,  in
   particular, that the appellant does not have a CSID and will not be  able
   to obtain one.   According to AA, a person's ability to obtain a CSID  is
   likely to be severely hampered if the person  is  unable  to  go  to  the
   Governorate where his or her CSID was originally issued because it is  an
   area of conflict.  Without a CSID there is a serious possibility that the
   appellant would not be able  to  access  financial  systems,  employment,
   education, housing and  medical  treatment.   On  the  issue  of  medical
   treatment the appellant's evidence was that he has a back problem that he
   suffers from Hepatitis B, and from depression.

26) If I have understood Mr Melvin's  argument  properly,  it  was  that  in
   terms  of  AA  the  appellant's  lack  of  a  CSID  or  any  other  Iraqi
   documentation would make his return to Iraq unfeasible and  therefore  it
   was not necessary to consider his entitlement to humanitarian or  Article
   3 protection.  For the reasons I have already given, I do not consider Mr
   Melvin's argument to be material because  it  is  only  the  question  of
   internal relocation which has arisen in the appeal from the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal.  It is clear that the lack of a CSID is relevant
   both to the feasibility  of  return  and  to  the  question  of  internal
   relocation but it is only the  issue  of  internal  relocation  which  is
   before me.  I am satisfied that the appellant's  lack  of  a  CSID  is  a
   crucial factor in finding it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
   appellant to internally relocate to Baghdad.

27) How is the decision to be re-made?   Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   was satisfied that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  Article  15(c)
   serious harm in his home area, he would not necessarily on this basis  be
   entitled to humanitarian protection were he to be  subject  to  exclusion
   under paragraph 339D of the Immigration  Rules.   This  provision  states
   that a person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian  protection  where
   one of several considerations applies, including where there are  serious
   reasons for considering that he constitutes a danger to the community  or
   to the security of the United  Kingdom.   The  Tribunal  is  required  to
   consider the application of paragraph 339D even where  it  has  not  been
   raised by either party, having regard to the decision in  LP  (St  Lucia)
   [2010] EWCA Civ 493.

28) It is not suggested in this appeal  that  the  appellant  constitutes  a
   danger to the security of the United Kingdom  but  there  is  a  question
   based on his convictions of whether he is a danger to the community.  The
   First-tier Tribunal found at paragraph 101 that the matters of which  the
   appellant had been convicted were sufficient to show that his presence in
   the United Kingdom was not  conducive  to  the  public  good.   He  is  a
   persistent offender.  Taking this into account I am  satisfied  that  the
   appellant should be excluded from humanitarian protection as a danger  to
   the community.

29) Nevertheless, as the appellant is at risk of indiscriminate violence  in
   his home area and as I have found, contrary to the finding of the  First-
   tier Tribunal, that it would not be reasonable to expect him to  relocate
   to Baghdad, he is accordingly entitled  to  the  protection  afforded  by
   Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

30) I therefore substitute for the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  a
   decision that the appeal is allowed under Article 3.


Conclusions

31) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

32) I set aside the decision.

33) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Anonymity

34) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  have
   not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason for doing so.


Fee Award        Note: This is not part of the determination

No fee was paid or is payable and therefore no fee award is made.





Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


