
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01143/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 November 2013                             |On 6 February 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AS
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Soloman, IAS (Sheffield)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the  respondent  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  the
    "appellant" (as she was before the  First-tier  Tribunal)  and  to  the
    Secretary of State as the "respondent".  The appellant, AS, was born on
    29 May 1993 and is a  female  citizen  of  India.   The  appellant  has
    appealed against a decision of the respondent  dated  22  May  2013  to
    deport her to India.  Her appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Kelly and Dr Ravenscroft) in a determination promulgated  on  17
    September 2013.  The particulars of the appellant's immigration history
    and offending are set out in the First-tier Tribunal's determination at
    [3]:

    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on the 11th September 2011,
    with leave to remain as a student until the 30th October 2014. She  was
    sentenced to 12 weeks imprisonment in respect of two counts of theft on
    the 21st April 2012. She was released from that  sentence  on  the  1st
    June 2012. She committed further offences of theft on the 27th June and
    6th September 2012, for which she was sentenced to a total period of 12
    months imprisonment at Isleworth Crown Court on the 19th October  2012.
    The appellant gave birth to a son in  December 2012. Both the appellant
    and her son were made the subject of deportation  orders,  pursuant  to
    Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007, on the 22nd  January  2013.  The
    appellant claimed asylum on the 22nd February 2013 and the  deportation
    orders of the 22nd January 2013 were revoked. The instant decisions  to
    deport the appellant and her son were made on the 22nd  May  2013.  For
    reasons that we do not understand, the instant decision was not made on
    the basis that the appellant is liable to  automatic  deportation,  but
    rather was made solely pursuant  to  respondent's  discretionary  power
    under Section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The Tribunal carried out its assessment  of  the  risk  of  persecution
    and/or Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment which the appellant  may  encounter
    in India at [24] et seq:

    We are not satisfied that the appellant would be at risk of  harm  from
    Mr Anthony in India. This is for several reasons.

    Firstly, we do not accept that the appellant would be prepared (subject
    to their agreement) to return to her parents'  house  in  India  if  Mr
    Anthony genuinely constituted a  genuine  and  present  threat  to  her
    safety and to that of her child. Her willingness to return to India  if
    permitted to live with her parents in our view provides clear  evidence
    that her continued fear of Mr  Anthony,  though  possibly  genuine,  is
    irrational.

    Secondly, we are not satisfied that Mr Anthony would have the means  to
    discover her whereabouts in India. This is not  a  case  in  which  the
    appellant claims that the person whom she claims to fear is one who has
    the necessary influence or network of spies that would  enable  him  to
    track her down in a country the size of India.

    Thirdly, and despite the threats that he made against the appellant and
    her parents on the occasion of the final telephone conversation of  the
    2nd February 2013, the general tenor of the Mr Anthony's statements was
    that he intended to move to another country and wished to have  nothing
    more to do with the appellant, having now  realised  that  he  was  not
    going to get his hands on a dowry from her father.

    We have assumed that women in India are members of a particular  social
    group. However, we find for the above reasons that the appellant  would
    not be at risk on return to India by reason of her membership  of  this
    group. It follows from this that her deportation would  not  contravene
    the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  33  of  the  Refugee
    Convention. We thus turn to consider whether  the  appellant  would  be
    destitute upon return to India so as to constitute a flagrant breach of
    her right not to be subjected to inhuman or degrading  treatment  under
    Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

    Assessment of risk of destitution on return to India (Article 3)

    The respondent accepted that the appellant would be returning to  India
    as a single mother, but also noted that she had not at that stage asked
    her mother directly whether should would be permitted to stay with  her
    until she had established herself on an independent basis. However,  in
    view of the recently-expressed uncompromising position  of  her  mother
    (see paragraph 8, above) we have no doubt that living with her  parents
    would not be a practical option.

    Mrs Soloman drew our attention to various passages  in  the  background
    country information reports that are contained within  the  appellant's
    bundle of documents. We agree with her submission  that  these  show  a
    high level of societal discrimination against single mothers in  India.
    We also note that those who were quoted by The Times of India as making
    positive comments regarding single motherhood by  way  of  a  lifestyle
    choice, were generally professional women who  were  located  within  a
    city environment [see the article dated the 15th June 2012,  quoted  in
    the respondent's explanatory letter to the appellant,  dated  the  22nd
    May 2013].

    Nevertheless, the threshold for engagement of Article 3 is a  high  one
    and the burden  of  proof  is  firmly  upon  the  appellant.  This  was
    emphasised by the Tribunal in MA  (Prove  Destitution)  Jamaica  [2005]
    UKAIT 00013:

         Appellants seeking to make points of that  kind  [that  they  would
         face destitution upon return to their country of origin] must prove
         their case and do it in a way that shows that they  have  seriously
         addressed their minds to returning to their country of  origin  and
         have  made  proper  enquiries  about  how  they   could   establish
         themselves. If they fail to do that it will  be  most  unusual  for
         them to be able to show that they would be destitute in  the  event
         of return.

    We do not have any evidence that the appellant has  made  enquiries  of
    the kind envisaged by the Tribunal in MA, and we are not persuaded that
    the background country information that has been drawn to our attention
    is such as to  establish  the  near-inevitability  of  the  appellant's
    destitution on return to India. Overall,  we  share  the  view  of  the
    respondent's official, that whilst  return  to  India  will  involve  a
    significant degree of hardship for the appellant, it does not meet  the
    high threshold necessary for engagement of her Article 3 rights.

 3. Those findings have  not  been  challenged  by  the  appellant  in  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.  I therefore have not  revisited
    the findings and conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal as regards  the
    Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.
    At [33] et seq the Tribunal wrote this:

    33.  Ms Soloman did not argue that Article 8 was potentially engaged by
    the facts of this case. However, having regard to the modest  threshold
    for engagement, we are prepared to assume that the appellant's  removal
    does potentially engage the operation of Article 8. We  have  therefore
    also considered the other relevant considerations under Article 8.

    34.  We are satisfied that the decision is in accordance with  the  law
    (i.e. Section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 and paragraph  363  of  the
    Immigration  Rules)  and  that  the  appellant's  removal  (though  not
    necessarily by way of deportation)  is  one  that  is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society for the prevention of crime and in order to maintain
    the economic well being of the country through an effective  system  of
    immigration  control.  We  therefore  turn  to  consider  whether   the
    appellant's deportation is proportionate to achieving those ends.

    35.  We approach our task on the basis that the appellant's deportation
    not only involves the appellant's removal but  also,  potentially,  her
    exclusion from the United Kingdom for a period to ten years.

    36.  We have  had  little  if  any  evidence  that  the  appellant  has
    significant cultural or social ties to the United Kingdom. On the other
    hand she does have significant cultural ties to India, where she  spent
    the formative  years  of  her  life.  She  also  has  parents  who  are
    permanently resident there and, whilst we are  in  no  doubt  that  she
    would be unwelcome were  she  to  return  to  their  home  village,  we
    consider it likely that they would  provide  her  with  some  financial
    assistance if only to discourage her from causing them embarrassment by
    returning to their village with an illegitimate son (see paragraph  22,
    above). Furthermore, the appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    temporary basis in the knowledge that she might be required  to  return
    to India when her leave to remain had expired.

    37.  In the above  circumstances,  we  consider  that  the  appellant's
    removal is a proportionate means of maintaining the economic well-being
    of the country by the consistent application of  immigration  controls.
    However, we consider that removal by the vehicle of deportation -  with
    the consequence that the appellant would be excluded  from  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of  ten  years  -  would  be  disproportionate  in
    seeking to further the legitimate objectives of  preventing  crime  and
    protecting the rights and freedoms of  others.  We  have  reached  this
    conclusion for the following reasons.

    38.  Although it is clear from her remarks that  the  sentencing  judge
    was fully aware of the straightened financial  circumstances  in  which
    the appellant was living at the  time  when  she  committed  the  index
    offences, it is equally clear that she was unaware that  the  appellant
    had (as we  find)  committed  those  offences  under  duress  from  her
    partner. We have already explained (at  paragraph  18  above)  why  the
    appellant did not put forward this potential  defence  to  the  charges
    that she faced in October 2012, and we have no doubt that  the  threats
    that her partner had made to her own safety and that of  her  baby  had
    been considerably reinforced by his  presence  in  the  public  gallery
    throughout the court proceedings. Had she been free  to  explain  fully
    the circumstances in which she had committed these offences, we have no
    doubt that either she would have been acquitted of them altogether,  or
    that the additional mitigation  they  provided  would  have  led  to  a
    considerable reduction in the length of the sentence that she  in  fact
    received. In either case, her culpability for these offences was either
    absent or minimal.

 5. The Tribunal concluded;

    43.  Although it is clear from her remarks that  the  sentencing  judge
    was fully aware of the straightened financial  circumstances  in  which
    the appellant was living at the  time  when  she  committed  the  index
    offences, it is equally clear that she was unaware that  the  appellant
    had (as we  find)  committed  those  offences  under  duress  from  her
    partner. We have already explained (at  paragraph  18  above)  why  the
    appellant did not put forward this potential  defence  to  the  charges
    that she faced in October 2012, and we have no doubt that  the  threats
    that her partner had made to her own safety and that of  her  baby  had
    been considerably reinforced by his  presence  in  the  public  gallery
    throughout the court proceedings. Had she been free  to  explain  fully
    the circumstances in which she had committed these offences, we have no
    doubt that either she would have been acquitted of them altogether,  or
    that the additional mitigation  they  provided  would  have  led  to  a
    considerable reduction in the length of the sentence that she  in  fact
    received. In either case, her culpability for these offences was either
    absent or minimal.

 6. The parties agree that the Tribunal misdirected itself  as  regards  to
    paragraph 364 of HC 395 (as amended) which had been deleted before  the
    immigration decision in the present appeal.  At  [6],  the  grounds  of
    appeal assert:

         The panel have sought to go behind the sentencing  judge's  finding
         by accepting her reasons for failing to plead in defence  that  she
         was under duress from her partner, a matter that  could  have  been
         taken into consideration by the sentencing  judge  when  sentencing
         her.  The appellant has not sought to appeal her convictions.   Her
         index offence leading  to  twelve  months'  imprisonment  had  been
         preceded by a previous conviction for  theft.   The  appellant  has
         therefore had more than  one  opportunity  before  the  appropriate
         jurisdiction to enter a plea in mitigation for her  offences.   The
         panel have failed to give adequate consideration to the appellant's
         risk of reoffending.  The panel have erred  materially  in  law  by
         abdicating  the  appellant  from  any  culpability  for  her  crime
         whatsoever when assessed  alongside  her  previous  conviction  for
         theft, it is submitted that this amounts to  a  material  error  of
         law.

 7. With respect to the First-tier Tribunal which has prepared a thoughtful
    and thorough determination, I consider that assertion  to  be  correct.
    The Tribunal had before it the sentencing remarks of Her  Honour  Judge
    Dean.  The judge  emphasised  the  "established  pattern  of  offending
    behaviour" of the appellant and noted that the appellant's  "only  real
    mitigation" was that she was "still young."   The  judge  recorded  the
    very considerable inconvenience and distress which  the  appellant  had
    caused to passengers at Heathrow Airport by "helping herself" to  their
    personal possessions.  There is no mention in the  judge's  remarks  of
    the mitigating factors which so concerned the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    [38] although I appreciate that the judge may  not  have  observed  the
    conduct of the appellant's former partner at the trial.  I  find  that,
    whilst the Tribunal was right to have regard to all  the  circumstances
    of the case, it has strayed into an area which it should have  avoided.
    The appellant was represented by lawyers before the Crown Court and, as
    the grounds of appeal note, she did not seek to appeal  against  either
    her conviction or  sentence.   In  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  the
    sentencing remarks of the Crown Court Judge should constitute the first
    and last text to which the Tribunal should turn for  information  about
    the offending of an appellant.  The Tribunal should have  declined  any
    invitation to go behind the conviction of the appellant especially when
    the sentencing remarks of the judge gave a very clear an indication  of
    the seriousness of  the  offending.   By  basing  its  Article  8  ECHR
    assessment on its finding that the appellant's "culpability  for  these
    offences was either absent or minimal" I find  that  the  Tribunal  has
    erred in law such that its determination is vitiated.

 8. I am concerned also by the suggestion made  at  [40]  that,  whilst  it
    found that deportation would cause a  disproportionate  breach  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights, removal  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 might not do so.  The Tribunal  appears
    to have moved away from a focus upon the strength  of  the  appellant's
    ties to  the  United  Kingdom  balanced  against  the  public  interest
    concerned with her  removal  towards  an  assessment  of  how  easy  or
    difficult it would be for the appellant to get  back  into  the  United
    Kingdom having left it.  I do not  consider  it  appropriate  that  the
    Tribunal should have  given  such  weight  (indeed,  possibly  decisive
    weight) to the particular consequences of the method of the appellant's
    removal.  Such an approach has the potential for producing  paradoxical
    results; for example, there might be no breach of  Article  8  when  an
    overstayer who  has  been  otherwise  law-abiding  is  administratively
    removed, whereas another individual with a similar family/private  life
    in the United Kingdom may be entitled to  Article  8  leave  to  remain
    because, after he has committed serious criminal offences,  a  decision
    is made to deport him.  I find that the emphasis which the Tribunal has
    given to the particular method and consequences of enforcement has,  as
    with its observations and findings regarding the  appellant's  criminal
    offending, seriously distorted its Article 8 ECHR analysis.

 9. I  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Tribunal's findings as regard  persecution  and  Article  3  ECHR  ill-
    treatment in India are preserved.  The Article 8 ECHR appeal will  have
    to be considered again and I consider that it is appropriate  that  the
    decision should be remade by the First-tier Tribunal which will need to
    look at all the evidence as at the date of the next hearing before it.





DECISION

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    17 September 2013 is set aside.  The findings and  conclusions  of  the
    Tribunal as regard the Refugee Convention, Humanitarian Protection  and
    Article 3 ECHR are preserved.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Kelly/Dr Ravenscroft) to  remake  the  decision  in
    respect of Article 8 ECHR only.






Signed                              Date 20 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

