
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01554/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 February 2014                           |On 27 February 2014          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                                   mr f l
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION WITH REASONS


1.   The appellant is  a  citizen  of  the  DRC  born  9  April  1984.   The
    appellant originally appealed against a notice of decision to refuse to
    revoke a deportation order.  That appeal came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Pirotta and a non-legal member at a hearing at Birmingham
    on 14 November 2013.  Both parties were represented.
          Mr Plowright appeared  for  the  appellant.   In  a  determination
    dated 18 November the  panel  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   In
    reaching its conclusions the panel found that neither the appellant nor
    his witnesses were credible.

2.   The appellant sought leave  to  appeal  that  decision.   Mr  Plowright
    drafted the grounds seeking leave.  Those  grounds  contained  some  28
    paragraphs divided into three separate grounds.

3.   Ground 1  challenged  the  credibility  findings,  describing  them  as
    "unsafe".  This allegation is explained by reference to the panel's own
    reference to Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 given that this Section was not  referred  to
    in the respondent's original decision.  The allegation also  refers  to
    the panel's conclusions at paragraph 65 of the determination  and  with
    regard to the panel's failure  to  deal  with  evidence  regarding  the
    appellant's claimed abstinence from drugs.

4.   It was also suggested that the  panel  failed  to  properly  deal  with
    documentary evidence from the appellant's wife and with regard to their
    claimed subsisting relationship.

5.   It is alleged that at paragraph  70  of  the  determination  the  panel
    found that the appellant and  his  witnesses  were  not  "witnesses  of
    truth" and gave no reason.

6.   The second ground is that the panel  failed  to  properly  engage  with
    Article 8 ECHR and that at no point does the panel properly engage  the
    best interests of  the  children.   Doubt  is  raised  in  the  grounds
    regarding the panel's consideration of "proportionality".

7.   The ground further alleges that the  panel  had  not  properly  engaged
    with the immigration history of the appellant in that he arrived in the
    United Kingdom when he was 5.

8.   Ground 3 alleges that the panel appeared not to have  engaged  with  Mr
    Plowright's submissions made to them.

10.  In granting leave to appeal another Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    engaged with the grounds and came to the conclusion:-


         "For  reasons  explained  in  the  application  for  permission  at
         considerable length all the grounds are arguable.  The  application
         for permission is granted."

11.  Hence the matter appears before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.

12.  Mr Plowright simply submitted  that  he  relied  upon  the  grounds  as
    drafted but he did produce further  documents  alleging  an  additional
    error based upon the appellant's risk of return to DRC.
13.  Mr Richards in response objected to the  additional  grounds.   It  was
    never suggested during the original appeal that the appellant would  be
    at risk.  Mr Richards noted that no Rule 24 response had been filed but
    he opposed the appeal.  The panel were entitled to consider the  effect
    of Section 8 of the  2004  Act  and  they  were  entitled  to  come  to
    conclusions with regard to credibility.  Mr Richards took issue with Mr
    Plowright regarding the word "proportionality".  The word  proportional
    was used by the panel.  The best interests of  the  children  had  been
    dealt with and the panel had carried out a  proper  balancing  act  and
    found that the decision was proportionate in the circumstances.   There
    was no error of law and the appeal should be dismissed.

14.  Mr Plowright  made  no  response  save  for  accepting  that  the  word
    proportional was used.

15.  At this stage I indicated that I did consider, for the  reasons  to  be
    set out herein, that a material error of law was contained  within  the
    determination.  I indicated that as the findings on  credibility  could
    not be sustained it appeared to me to be a proper case under the Senior
    President's Direction to  remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

16.  I now propose to set out my reasons for reaching a conclusion that  the
    panel's determination contained a material error of law.

17.  A reading of the determination as a whole shows that the panel's  views
    were based to a very large extent on the credibility of  the  appellant
    and his two witnesses.  At paragraph 10 of the determination the  panel
    referred themselves to Section 8 of the 2004 Act.   That  reference  is
    perfectly proper.  However, no reference was made to  that  section  in
    the  respondent's  decision  and,  more  importantly,  there   was   no
    suggestion during the course of the hearing that  they  were  going  to
    refer themselves  to  that  Section.   That  Section  contains  various
    scenarios for when Section 8 should be considered.   Fairness  dictates
    that an appellant should be  given  the  opportunity  to  address  that
    particular scenario or scenarios that might well cause Section 8 to  be
    appropriate. The determination is silent as to which scenario the panel
    felt applied.

18.  At paragraph 70 of the  determination  the  panel  make  findings  with
    regard to the credibility of the appellant and both his witnesses  (his
    wife and mother) but no real explanation is given as to why  the  panel
    considered those persons to be lacking in credibility in  the  evidence
    they gave.

19.  Again, during the course of the examination of the evidence  the  panel
    drew conclusions from letters written by the appellant's wife.   Whilst
    these letters contained reference to instability within  the  marriage,
    the letters also contained declarations of love and  a  willingness  to
    make the relationship work.

20.  These three aspects bring into doubt the findings made by the panel  as
    to credibility.  For these reasons those findings are  unsafe  and  the
    conclusions must be set aside.

21.  It is not necessary nor appropriate for me to comment  further  on  the
    determination or the grounds of appeal save to  say  that  the  panel's
    treatment of any Article 8 claim is equally unsafe and that claim  must
    be looked at afresh.

22.  As referred to above I am satisfied that by reason of paragraph 7.2  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement it is  appropriate  to  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  Any directions  for  the  listing
    thereof shall be at the discretion of the appropriate Resident Judge.

23.  As an  anonymity  direction  has  already  been  made  and  no  further
    application was made to me I maintain that direction.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge N Poole

