
[pic]


                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham
On: 20 June 2014                  Decision Promulgated: On 30 June 2014



                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                                     NU

                            (Anonymity Order Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Kullar, instructed by SH & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and was born in 1980.

The appeal is brought against the decision promulgated on 7 January 2014  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett and Mr G F Sandall  which  dismissed  the
appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of  6  August  2013  to
make a deportation order against him under Section 32 of the UK Borders  Act
2007 and the decision of 6 September  2013  refusing  an  asylum  and  human
rights claim.

The appellant fell to be deported as he  was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
conspiring or supplying a controlled drug - Class A. On 20 July 2012 he  was
sentenced to 2 years' and 6 months' imprisonment for those convictions.

The appellant's asylum claim was made on  the  basis  that  on  a  visit  to
Pakistan  in  2010/11  he  was  kidnapped  by  the  Pakistani  Taliban   and
imprisoned and tortured by them. He was released after his  family  borrowed
money from money lenders to pay a ransom. The family cannot  pay  the  money
lenders. The appellant maintained that he would be at risk  on  return  from
both the Pakistani Taliban and the money lenders.  The  appellant  submitted
that the trauma of this  incident  had  led  to  significant  mental  health
problems and lay  behind  his  offending  in  the  UK.  The  appellant  also
maintained that he was in need of protection as he is gay.

The first ground argued before me was that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
finding that the appellant is not gay.

Firstly, it was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  at  [45]  in
finding that the appellant's ex-wife visited him in prison.  The  panel  had
misread an entry  on  the  prison  visitors  log  which  did  not  show  the
appellant's ex-wife had visited. Ms Kullar argued that this  error  of  fact
was material as the panel had placed weight on  it  when  finding  that  the
appellant was not gay. Mr Smart conceded the error of  fact  but  maintained
that against the findings as a whole the point could not be material.

The First-tier Tribunal set  out  their  consideration  of  the  appellant's
claim to be gay from [40] to [52]. The reasons given for the  panel  finding
that the appellant is not gay were numerous. Prominent amongst them was  the
fact that the man with whom he claims to have had a  relationship  for  some
years, from prior to going to prison and  afterwards,  was  not  present  to
give evidence. The panel considered this at  [46].  They  were  entitled  to
find that the failure to appear undermined the evidence of this witness  and
the appellant's claim where closed proceedings and  a  non-disclosure  order
could have been requested if there were concerns about identification.

The panel also found at [46] that the prison phone records provided did  not
show telephone contact  with  the  claimed  partner  and  nothing  had  been
produced to confirm money sent by the partner to  the  appellant  whilst  he
was in prison. The panel went on to find at [47] and [48] that the  evidence
of the appellant and his partner's witness statement  were  inconsistent  in
numerous ways.

At [49] and [50] the evidence of a further witness, the appellant's brother-
in-law,  was  found  to  be  additionally  inconsistent,  stating  that  the
appellant had seen his partner after coming out of prison but the  partner's
witness statement saying they had  not  met  after  the  appellant's  prison
sentence had ended.

Further, neither the appellant nor his partner indicated  at  all  in  their
evidence that they had been  attacked,  a  claim  made  by  the  appellant's
brother-in-law, nor was  there  any  reference  to  such  an  event  in  the
appellant's medical records. The argument at paragraph  17  of  the  grounds
that the panel was in error regarding the date of the park attack  and  when
the appellant was in prison is not  material  where  there  was  this  clear
inconsistent evidence before them as to whether the attack occurred at  all.
The  panel  were  clearly  entitled  to  find  the   brother-in-law   lacked
credibility because of the inconsistencies in his evidence and paragraph  16
of the grounds arguing otherwise has no merit

Further negative credibility findings on the appellant's sexuality are  made
at [40] to  [43]  regarding  numerous  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
statements made as part of his asylum claim regarding his sexuality.

It was not my view that the error concerning the appellant's ex-wife  was  a
sufficiently material matter, when set  against  the  weight  of  all  these
findings, such that the panel could have reached a different conclusion  had
they placed no weight on this point. The error  as  to  the  ex-wife  having
visited the appellant in prison is not material.

It was argued, secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal made a  further  error
of fact at [52] when stating that there was a "lack of  supporting  evidence
with neither prison medical records nor his  own  GP  referring  to  a  male
partner". It was submitted that an entry in the appellant's  prison  medical
records at Q19 of the appellant's bundle had referred to his  homosexuality.


I can deal with this aspect of the ground quite simply. The entry at Q19  is
merely that "[h]e reported that he had a boyfriend and feared this would  be
discovered as he is a muslim and would be killed if this  were  known."  The
prison medical records therefore contain this  one  assertion  made  by  the
appellant. It is in no way objective  or  corroborative  evidence  from  the
prison authorities as to  their  view  of  the  appellant's  sexuality.   It
cannot be characterised as material and no error arises from it.

The second main ground was that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  finding
that the appellant had not shown that he was kidnapped in Pakistan.

It was argued that the criminal justice authorities had  accepted  that  the
appellant had been kidnapped in Pakistan. Ms Kullar conceded before me  that
the First-tier Tribunal was not bound by the approach taken in the  criminal
proceedings to the appellant's claim to have  been  kidnapped  in  Pakistan.
The panel gave reasons for not doing so at [27]. Where that was so  and  the
First-tier Tribunal also  gave  detailed  reasons  from  [17]  to  [39]  for
finding that the appellant was not kidnapped or ransomed,  I  did  not  find
that any error arose from the panel taking a different view on  the  claimed
kidnap to that taken in the criminal justice proceedings.

The grounds at paragraph 6 argue that the panel had  "independent  evidence"
that  the  kidnapping  had  occurred   from   Dr   Qureshi,   a   Consultant
Psychiatrist. The First-tier Tribunal indicated at  [23]  that  less  weight
accrued to the opinion of Dr Qureshi concerning the appellant's  ability  to
give evidence where he had been able to give very  detailed  evidence  about
his kidnap during the asylum process.  At  [29]  they  point  out  that  the
information given to the psychiatrist by the appellant  was  not  consistent
with his other evidence. In addition, Dr Qureshi sets out on page 2  of  his
report his instructions.  They  were  not  to  provide  an  opinion  on  the
appellant's credibility. There is nothing in the report that comes close  to
commenting on those matters and it is  really  only  an  assessment  of  the
appellant's mental health and ability to give evidence. I did not find  that
the report amounted to had "independent  evidence"  of  the  kidnapping  and
could have amounted to determinative evidence in that regard, certainly  not
when considered against the  wide-ranging  shortcomings  identified  by  the
First-tier Tribunal at [17] to [39].

I can indicate conveniently here that the consideration given to the  report
of Dr Qureshi and findings at [53] and [54] also show  that  the  suggestion
at paragraph 6 of  the  second  set  of  grounds  that  the  panel  "largely
disregarded" the medical evidence has no substance.

I have  indicated  above  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  sustainable
findings on inconsistencies between the evidence of the appellant  and  that
of his claimed partner regarding their relationship  and  were  entitled  to
draw an adverse inference  from  the  partner  failing  to  attend  to  give
evidence. At [18] the  panel  identified  a  further  inconsistency  in  the
accounts given by the appellant and his partner regarding  the  kidnap.  The
submission at paragraph  8  of  the  grounds  that  the  partner's  evidence
corroborated that of the  appellant  is  misconceived  therefore  and  their
approach to the witness statement of the claimed partner does  not  disclose
an error of law.

The grounds argue at paragraph 9 that the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  not
have  placed  weight  on  inconsistencies  in  newspapers  reports  of   the
kidnapping. The same ground  suggests  that  this  was  not  permissible  as
newspapers are not always accurate. These newspaper reports  were  submitted
by the appellant in support of his claim. It is misconceived  to  argue  now
that the  panel  should  not  have  drawn  an  adverse  inference  from  the
inconsistencies in the information reported as they  were  poor  sources  of
evidence.

The grounds also refer to the First-tier Tribunal  failing  to  address  the
certification of the humanitarian protection claim. That cannot be  material
where there is no substantive case made out for humanitarian protection  and
the humanitarian protection certification would  stand  and  fall  with  the
panel's decision on the asylum certification which was upheld.

The grounds also state that the panel failed to consider Article 8. That  is
correct. It is now settled case law that only "a very  strong  case  indeed"
can outweigh the public interest in deportation; see  SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
[2013] EWCA Civ 550. The  Court  of  Appeal  has  expressed  the  same  high
threshold in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  as  "exceptional"  or
"something very compelling". Neither the grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal, submissions before me  or  evidence  provided  indicated  how
this appellant could meet such a high threshold where it was found  that  he
was not kidnapped, is not gay and has immediate family in Pakistan  who  can
assist with his mental health problems and general support on return. I  did
not find that a material error arose from a failure to  provide  a  detailed
Article 8 assessment.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 20 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Anonymity


Under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I
continue the non-disclosure order of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  basis
of the appellant's mental health. This order precludes  publication  of  any
information regarding the proceedings which would be likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the appellant.


