
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01246/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 March 2014                            |On 24 March 2014           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      THE HON MR JUSTICE KENNETH PARKER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR R G F
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
                            For the Appellant: Mr L Tarlow a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
                            For the Respondent: Mr K Mak a Solicitor
           from MKM Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Jamaica  who  was
      born on 15 November 1981 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of State  has
      been  given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  a   panel
      consisting of First Tier Tribunal Judge Lindsley and non-legal  member
      Dr J O de Barros ("the  panel")  who  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision of 6 June  2013  to  make  a
      deportation order against him and that section 32 (5) of  the  Borders
      Act 2007 applied, following his conviction at Inner London Crown Court
      on 5 January 2011 for possession with intent to supply of  a  Class  A
      drug (crack cocaine) and a Class B drug (cannabis) for  which  he  was
      sentenced to 4 years imprisonment.


   2. The claimant entered the UK as a visitor on 14 September 2002 and then
      extended his leave  as  a  student  until  31  July  2003.  A  further
      extension was refused. On  15  November  2004  he  married  a  British
      citizen and on 5 February 2005 he applied for leave  to  remain  as  a
      spouse. Their daughter, who is also a British citizen, was born on  27
      June 2005. Leave to remain as a spouse was refused  but  the  claimant
      was granted discretionary leave on the basis of  his  marriage  for  a
      period from 3 July 2009 to 2 July 2012.


   3. In the decision letter dated 6 June 2013 the Secretary of  State  said
      that under section 32 (5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 she  was  obliged
      to make a deportation order in respect of a foreign national  who  had
      been convicted in the UK of an offence and had  been  sentenced  to  a
      period of imprisonment of at least 12 months unless he fell within one
      of the exceptions set out in  section  33  of  the  same  Act.  Having
      reviewed the known facts she concluded that the claimant did not  fall
      within any of the exceptions.


   4. The Secretary of State quoted at length from  the  sentencing  judge's
      remarks and said  that  she  regards  as  particularly  serious  those
      offences involving violence, sex, arson and drugs. She considered  the
      claimant's Article 8 human rights and the provisions of paragraph  398
      of the Immigration Rules. Because of the nature of the offence and the
      length of the sentence the claimant's deportation was conducive to the
      public good. Neither paragraphs 399 nor 399A applied so that it  would
      only be in exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
      deportation would be outweighed by other  factors.  The  Secretary  of
      State went on to consider the claimant's family life  with  his  child
      and his wife. It was accepted that the claimant was living  with  them
      in subsisting relationships and that both were British  citizens.  The
      Secretary of State accepted that there were  insurmountable  obstacles
      to family life continuing with the claimant's  wife  and  daughter  in
      Jamaica and that as British citizens it was in their best interests to
      remain in the UK. The claimant's private life was considered  together
      with any other possible exceptional circumstances.  The  Secretary  of
      State  reached  the  conclusion  that  there   were   no   exceptional
      circumstances which outweighed the public interest in deportation.


   5. The claimant appealed and the panel heard his appeal  on  22  November
      2013. Both parties were  represented,  the  claimant  by  Mr  Mak  who
      appears before us. The panel heard evidence from the claimant and  his
      wife. In a lengthy and detailed determination the panel concluded that
      deportation  would  have  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
      claimant's family  so  as  to  make  the  circumstances  of  the  case
      exceptional. The appeal was allowed on Article 8 human rights grounds.


   6. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal. The judge who granted permission thought that there was little
      merit in most of the grounds which argued that the panel erred in  law
      by failing give reasons or adequate reasons for findings  on  material
      matters. These appeared to be  no  more  than  disagreement  with  the
      findings made by the panel. However, he accepted that the reference to
      paragraph 399 rather than paragraph 398 of the  Immigration  Rules  in
      paragraph 51 of the determination might indicate the application of an
      incorrect test rather than a typographical error.  However,  leave  to
      appeal was granted in respect of all the grounds.


   7. Mr Tarlow submitted that not enough  weight  had  been  given  to  the
      public interest. In reply to our question he did not accept  that  the
      reference to paragraph 399 was inevitably a  typographical  error.  He
      relied on the grounds of appeal but made no further submissions.


   8. Mr Mak submitted that there was no error of law. It was clear that the
      reference in paragraph 51 was a typographical  error  rather  than  an
      error of principle. Everything else in the grounds was  no  more  than
      disagreement with conclusions  properly  reached.  We  were  asked  to
      uphold the determination.


   9.  We reserved our determination.


  10. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal submit that the panel erred
      in law by failing to give reasons or adequate reasons for findings  on
      material matters. We find that the panel took  into  account  all  the
      material evidence. Inordinate weight was not placed  on  the  risk  of
      reoffending or the assessment by the Probation service, even though we
      are surprised that in the  circumstances  of  the  claimant's  offence
      there was a recommendation for a  non-custodial  sentence.  The  panel
      took into account the judge's sentencing remarks as well as the length
      of the custodial sentence. The point raised  in  paragraph  9  of  the
      grounds is misconceived. The panel did not say that the  claimant  had
      been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four years. At
      this point the panel was considering what the position might have been
      had he been sentenced to a period of less than four years. It is clear
      that they made their assessment on the basis that the sentence was one
      of four years which triggered the "exceptional circumstances" test  in
      paragraph 398 (c) of the Immigration Rules so that paragraphs 399  and
      399A did not apply. We find that the panel did give  adequate  reasons
      for their findings and that the grounds are in substance no more  than
      a disagreement with conclusions properly reached on all the evidence.


  11. The reference to paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules  in  paragraph
      51 is clearly incorrect. In the light of all that the  panel  said  in
      the rest of the determination we find that  this  is  a  typographical
      error and that the  intention  was  to  refer  to  paragraph  398.  In
      paragraph 3 the panel set out the reasons for the Secretary of State's
      decision that the claimant did not qualify  under  paragraphs  399  or
      399A and that it would only be in exceptional circumstances  that  the
      public interest in deportation would be outweighed by  other  factors.
      Under the heading of the panel's Decision and Reasons in paragraph  35
      the correct test was  set  out  and  amplified  by  reference  to  the
      Immigration Directorate's Instructions. The relevant case  law  in  MF
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 was set out in paragraph 36.  In
      paragraph 51, where the mistake occurs, it follows a  summary  of  the
      correct test when the panel said; "we find that deportation  from  the
      UK amounts to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to
      respect for family life, and that to  proceed  with  that  deportation
      would have unjustifiably harsh consequences for his family  so  as  to
      make the circumstances of this case  exceptional  in  accordance  with
      paragraph 399 (sic) of the Immigration Rules."


  12. We have not been asked to anonymise this determination but we conclude
      that we should do  so  in  order  to  protect  the  interests  of  the
      claimant's daughter.


  13. We make an order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify  the  claimant
      or any member of his family.


  14. We find that  the  panel  did  not  err  in  law  and  we  uphold  the
      determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date    18
      March 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

