

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01373/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 6th November 2014                          |on 14th November 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               MAXINE SATCHELL
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr A Eaton instructed by Virgo Consultancy Services Ltd.

For the Respondent: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal, composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes and Dr T
        Okitikpi, who in a  determination  promulgated  on  9th  July  2014,
        dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  order   for   her
        deportation from the United Kingdom.


     2. The deportation order, dated 28 June 2012, was made as a  result  of
        the Appellant's conviction on a guilty plea on 24th February 2012 at
        Birmingham Crown Court and her subsequent sentence to a period of 30
        months imprisonment in total for a number of offences by  HHJ  Webb,
        who notes in his sentencing remarks that he was dealing  with  seven
        offences in total. The first five counts on the indictment involving
        obtaining and using a  false  identity  document,  in  particular  a
        passport, which entitled the Appellant to enter the  United  Kingdom
        in 1997 and subsequently to obtain a National Insurance  number  and
        another passport.  Using this  false  identity  the  Appellant  also
        registered the births of two of her children  as  British  nationals
        which she knew to be false, in a false identity, which are stated to
        be serious offences.  The Appellant also used her false identity  to
        obtain from the British taxpayer just under �60,000 in  benefits  to
        which she was not entitled over a substantial number of years.


     3. The determination is challenged on  a  number  of  grounds  although
        Ground two, alleging perversity in a specific finding, was withdrawn
        by Mr Eaton at the outset  of  the  hearing  on  the  basis  it  was
        materially incorrect  and  drafted  on  a  misunderstanding  of  the
        findings of the Panel.


     4. Ground 1 asserts the Panel failed to consider the  evidence  of  the
        likelihood  of  the  Appellants  reoffending  or  evidence  of   her
        rehabilitation whist in prison which was combined with a  submission
        the Panel failed to consider the evidence  made  available  to  them
        generally.


     5. In relation to this latter assertion I find the same has no arguable
        merit. At paragraph 10 of the determination the Panel state that the
        Tribunal papers include the  Home  Office  bundle,  the  Appellant's
        bundle, an additional  bundle,  together  with  a  number  of  other
        documents specified in the  determination,  including  the  doctor's
        letter of  20th  March  2014,  a  report  from  Christine  Brown  an
        independent social worker, and others.  The Panel also confirm  they
        have  considered  the  papers  submitted  and   the   evidence   and
        submissions made at the hearing although they  have  not  summarised
        the nature of the evidence but refer to them when relevant in  their
        findings.


     6. It is accepted there are occasions when some judges  of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal have made statements  they  have  considered  all  the
        available evidence which is not supported when their  determinations
        are read. This is not such an application. It is clear from  reading
        the determination that the Panel not only state they considered  the
        evidence but actually did so, as the nature of the analysis of  that
        evidence and the findings of fact that followed thereafter show that
        the key relevant  issues  were  clearly  identified  and  adequately
        considered by the Panel. As the Panel considered the material before
        them, both oral and documentary, with the required degree of anxious
        scrutiny the weight they gave to the evidence is a matter  for  them
        provided that adequate reasons for the findings made were given.   I
        find no arguable merit in the assertion the Panel failed to consider
        the evidence properly or adequately.


     7. In relation to the specific issue raised in Ground  1,  relating  to
        whether the Panel considered the evidence regarding  rehabilitation,
        and the assessment the Appellant presented a low risk of reoffending
        found within the OASYS report, this document appears at page  75  of
        the Appellants additional bundle which is specifically  referred  to
        in paragraph 10 of the determination as having  been  considered  by
        the Panel. Whether the Appellant has made progress  with  regard  to
        the risk of reoffending is one factor but it is  not  determinative.
        This is an appeal against an automatic deportation order in  respect
        of which Parliament has enacted legislation to the effect  that  the
        removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom is conducive to the
        public good. Indeed the relevant provisions of the  UK  Borders  Act
        show that in such circumstances the Appellant must be deported.  The
        Appellant opposes this by reference to  the  exception  in  the  Act
        based upon Article 8 ECHR family or private life although the  Court
        of Appeal have repeated many times that in an automatic  deportation
        case the weight to  be  given  to  the  Respondent's  position  must
        properly  recognise  the  statutory  provisions  and  the  will   of
        Parliament. As of 28 July 2014 the Immigration Act 2014 also  brings
        into force mandatory statutory requirements relating to  the  weight
        to be attached to the public interest under  Article  8,  which  may
        override existing case law, but  which  are  not  applicable  unless
        material legal error is found and the decision is to be re-made.


     8. Risk of offending relates to  the  question  whether  the  Appellant
        poses an ongoing risks to those within the United Kingdom by way  of
        further offending which is only one of the relevant elements  to  be
        considered.    In    Masih    (deportation/public     interest/basic
        principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046(IAC)  the Tribunal said that
        so long as account is taken of the following basic principles, there
        is at present no need for  further  citation  of  authority  on  the
        public interest side of the balancing exercise. The following  basic
        principles can be derived from the present case law  concerning  the
        issue of the public interest  in  relation  to  the  deportation  of
        foreign criminals: (i) In a  case  of  automatic  deportation,  full
        account must be taken of the  strong  public  interest  in  removing
        foreign citizens convicted of serious offences, which lies not only
        in the prevention of further offences on the part of the  individual
        concerned, but in deterring others from committing them in the first
        place. (ii) Deportation of  foreign  criminals  expresses  society's
        condemnation  of  serious  criminal  activity  and  promotes  public
        confidence in the treatment of foreign citizens who  have  committed
        them. (iii)  The starting-point  for  assessing  the  facts  of  the
        offence of which an individual has been committed, and their  effect
        on others, and on the public as a whole, must be the view  taken  by
        the sentencing judge. (iv)  The appeal has to be dealt with  on  the
        basis of the situation at the date of the hearing. (v) Full account
        should also be taken of any developments since sentence was  passed,
        for example the result of any disciplinary adjudications  in  prison
        or detention, or any OASys or licence report.


     9. In Gurung v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ  62  the  Court  of  Appeal,  when
        overturning a Presidential Upper Tier panel, said that  the  absence
        of a risk of reoffending,  though  plainly  important,  is  not  the
        "ultimate aim" of the deportation regime. "We are troubled, too,  by
        the proposition in paragraph 40(iii) (cited above) that  the  nature
        and  seriousness  of  the  offence  do  not  by  themselves  justify
        interference with family and private life without prospective regard
        to the  public  interest.  Although  Mr  Bourne  does  not  seek  to
        characterise this as an error of law, he is right, in our  view,  to
        suggest that it misplaces the emphasis.  The  Borders  Act  by  s.32
        decides that the nature and seriousness of the offence, as  measured
        by the sentence, do by  themselves  justify  deportation  unless  an
        exception recognised by the Act itself applies."


    10. The offences for which the Appellant was  convicted  in  the  United
        Kingdom, ignoring the  earlier  sentence  of  nine  years  for  drug
        trafficking imposed upon her in Germany, of falsely claiming to be a
        British national, using a false identity for personal gain including
        a substantial period of benefit fraud staged over a number of years,
        means there is a very strong deterrent element  in  the  Appellant's
        deportation to set an example to those  otherwise  not  entitled  to
        remain in the United Kingdom that such conduct will not be tolerated
        and will result in serious consequences for offenders.  As  such  no
        material error is proved.


    11. Ground 3 asserts the Panel failed to consider the  evidence  of  the
        Independent Social Worker, Christine Brown,  but  such  a  claim  is
        without arguable merit as a reading of the determination shows. This
        report was considered but the Panel found it not to be as useful  as
        it might have been.   They  clearly  identify  Ms  Brown's  view  in
        paragraphs 33 to 39.  This Ground is, as the first line of paragraph
        6 of the Grounds clearly indicates, a challenge to the weight  given
        by the Panel to Christine Brown's report. Although the Grounds  also
        state she is an expert who has provided cogent  testimony  in  cases
        such as EM and others (returnees) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 98 and  AM  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1634,  as
        if the same should indicate greater weight should have been given to
        her report, it is also noted by the Upper Tribunal that the Court of
        Appeal were more critical of Ms Brown in their recent  judgement  in
        ZZ(Tanzania) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1404,  at  paragraph  30,  where
        Lord Justice Bean in giving the lead judgement stated "For my part I
        agree  with  the  submission  of  Ms  Catherine  Rowlands  for   the
        respondent that the report of Ms Brown, in so  far  as  it  goes  to
        rehabilitation, is strictly speaking not  expert  evidence,  in  the
        sense of evidence of  opinion  on  issues  not  within  the  general
        knowledge of the UT, but more in the nature of a  further  character
        reference."


    12. Whether the weight attached to Christine Brown's report is  rational
        and within the range of findings the Panel were entitled to make  on
        that evidence will depend upon whether their findings are adequately
        reasons - see SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155.


    13. Ground 4 suggests a finding by the  Panel  that  the  Appellant  had
        deliberately become pregnant  in  order  to  frustrate  attempts  to
        deport her is perverse. It is stated she already has three  children
        in the United Kingdom two of whom live with her, one of which was  a
        British citizen with an acute medical condition. The  pregnancy  was
        not considered in the sentencing remarks or the pre-sentence report.
        Such a finding is said to be speculative and have no  basis  on  the
        evidence.


    14. The Panel do make such  a  finding  and  refer  to  this  matter  at
        paragraphs 24 to 26 of the determination. The Panel note  that  both
        the Appellant and her partner's evidence is that she maintained  her
        deception  with  regard  to  a   virtual   identity   during   their
        relationship until she was arrested on 13th January 2012.  The Panel
        concluded that the timing of the pregnancy was of  interest  because
        her last child D was born in September 2012,  41 1/2 weeks after her
        arrest.   The  Panel  concluded  that  delivery  on  this  timescale
        strongly suggested that the Appellant became  pregnant  between  the
        first and second arrest which was stated to  be  significant  as  it
        suggested, consistent with the Appellant's deception with regards to
        her identity and benefit entitlement, that was she  was  seeking  to
        add to her family at a point when she would  have  been  aware  that
        another prison sentence was a possibility, that her British passport
        was likely to be removed with the consequential loss of status,  and
        all that implied.  The Panel specifically  find,  in  paragraph  26,
        that the pregnancy in 2012 was an effort to increase her family life
        with a child who would be a British  citizen  and  to  increase  the
        obstacles to her being  ejected  from  the  United  Kingdom  in  due
        course. It was also found to be possible that  she  hoped  it  would
        render it more difficult to be sent to prison. Such  a  finding  has
        not been shown to be irrational or a finding not  available  to  the
        Panel on evidence they were able to consider. In any  event  such  a
        finding has not been shown to be material to the decision to dismiss
        the appeal.


    15. Ground 5 asserts the Panel failed to properly consider the  evidence
        regarding the Appellant's daughter's ongoing medical treatment.  The
        specific wording is of interest as it is not asserted that the Panel
        did not consider the evidence, but  rather  claims  they  failed  to
        "properly" consider the evidence. The grounds allege  error  in  the
        Panel noting two  of  the  Appellant's  children  suffering  medical
        conditions whereas only her daughter OW is receiving ongoing medical
        treatment.  This child had a congenital heart condition although  it
        is alleged the Panel failed to consider that or that  she  had  also
        been diagnosed with a rare skin condition known as Kawasaki disease.
        This assertion is also without arguable merit.


    16. At paragraph 30 of the determination the Panel note that two of  the
        Appellant's children have  medical  conditions.  There  is  specific
        reference to Kawasaki disease in the evidence provided in  paragraph
        10 of the determination and this was clearly an issue of  which  the
        Panel were fully aware. The Panel note, however, that the  Appellant
        had not enquired whether treatment would be available  to  meet  the
        medical needs of the children in Jamaica to where the Appellant  had
        travelled with the children in  2009.  There  was  no  evidence  the
        children were so seriously ill that they could not  travel  and  the
        letter dated 20th March 2014 suggests  that  OW's  congenital  heart
        defect is minor and not requiring further medical assessment  for  a
        period of 2 1/2 years.


    17. It was accepted before the Upper Tribunal  that  no  enquiries  have
        been made regarding the availability of suitable  medical  treatment
        in Jamaica. As the Respondents  assertion  that  such  treatment  is
        available has not been shown to be false, it has not been shown that
        Article 3 or 8 are breached on the basis of the medical evidence for
        any member of this family unit.


    18. Ground 6 asserts the Panel reached a perverse  conclusion  regarding
        the likely impact upon the Appellant's youngest son M; alleging  the
        Secretary of  State's  own  representative  submitted  it  would  be
        unreasonable for the Appellant to be separated from her son who  was
        at that time not yet two years of  age.   It  is  stated  the  Panel
        concluded perversely that it would  be  reasonable  for  him  to  be
        separated from his mother for the purposes of their consideration of
        paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules.


    19. This ground does not accurately reflect the  submission  made  which
        was not a submission it will be unreasonable for the Appellant to be
        separated from her son. This is of course the child born as a result
        of the pregnancy which led to  the  adverse  finding  regarding  the
        Appellant's motives referred to in the ground above. At paragraph 47
        of the determination the Panel record that  the  Presenting  Officer
        was reluctant to suggest that the youngest child could remain in the
        United Kingdom without the Appellant,  and  no  more.  There  is  no
        concession by the Presenting Officer that such separation  would  be
        unreasonable and even if that was made a submission by  an  advocate
        is not binding upon the Panel  who  are  required  to  evaluate  the
        evidence for themselves.


    20. There are four children born to the Appellant the eldest of whom  is
        now an adult. When the Appellant went  to  Germany,  where  she  was
        arrested and sentenced for importing drugs, that child was placed in
        the care of a named individual and thereafter into the care  of  the
        social services. This  daughter  is  not  part  of  the  Appellant's
        household and was considered and dealt with in an appropriate manner
        within the determination.  The Appellant's eldest son D is stated to
        have seen his father deported and to have been  separated  from  the
        Appellant during her imprisonment in the United Kingdom after  which
        he lived with the Appellant and  her  partner  EW  and  one  of  his
        daughters from his previous marriage. The Panel in fact  noted  that
        of the children of the Appellant and EW only the youngest has  lived
        with the Appellant continuously since birth.


    21. In paragraph 43 of the determination the Panel  make  the  following
        statement:


        43.   The issue for us, whether the best interests of  the  children
            outweigh the public interest in  deportation,  raise  different
            issues for each of the children. It also has to  be  remembered
            that if the Appellant is deported the family will have to  make
            a decision about what they do about where to live  and  how  to
            organise themselves.  These are  decisions  that  all  families
            make and it is not the first time that they would have  had  to
            address  these  issues  arising  out  of  the  removal  of  the
            Appellant from the family.


    22. The Panel thereafter note that the eldest son  D  was  born  in  the
        United Kingdom but is a  Jamaican  national  who  is  approaching  a
        natural break in his education. He has never  lived  in  the  United
        Kingdom lawfully but is here as a result of his mother's  deception.
        Whilst accepting that education and healthcare available in  Jamaica
        would not be to the same standard as that in the United Kingdom  the
        Panel find that the evidence shows that it is  adequate.  The  Panel
        accordingly find that it would be reasonable to expect D  to  travel
        to the country of his nationality with his mother if she were to  be
        deported. This has not been shown to be an irrational conclusion  on
        the basis of the available evidence which did not include sufficient
        evidence of an adverse impact on any  children  of  their  or  their
        mother's removal.  Accordingly there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
        indicate material error in their findings on this point.


    23. Of the three children the Appellant has given birth  to  during  the
        course of her partnership with EW, the Panel accept she  has  family
        life with those children. The situation of the children M and OW  is
        assessed at paragraphs 33 to 43 of the determination.  It was  found
        they are entitled to dual nationality  and  could  live  in  Jamaica
        although if it was decided they should remain in the United  Kingdom
        EW could look after them as he had in the past. This  has  not  been
        shown to be an unreasonable or irrational  finding  based  upon  the
        evidence available to the Panel.


    24. In relation to the youngest child, M, the Panel note the  child  was
        approaching two years of age and was at an age where  the  appellant
        is not required, in a physical sense, to look after him.  The  child
        is a British national entitled to British citizenship as a result of
        the fact his father EW is a British national. The Panel find that if
        the Appellant was deported the child could remain in  the  UK  where
        there are people, including EW, who could undertake his care.


    25. The Panel note in assessing the best interests of the children  that
        the family may be required to make a choice although they have  been
        faced with similar difficulties and decisions in the past  and  made
        arrangements that suited them.


    26. The Panel in paragraph 50 refer to the fact the Appellant's case  is
        covered by paragraphs 398 (b) and 399 of the Immigration  Rules  and
        find that on the evidence it is reasonable to expect the Appellant's
        oldest son to live in Jamaica or that EW  could  be  regarded  as  a
        family member able to care for him. The Panel also note that  whilst
        the Appellant has family life with others in the United  Kingdom  no
        insurmountable obstacles, as this term is  legally  understood,  had
        been shown to prevent that continuing abroad.


    27. In paragraph 52 the Panel summarised their conclusions as follows:


        52.   Obviously it is not a question of punishing the  children,  it
            is not  therefore  that  their  mother  has  acted  in  such  a
            dishonest, persistent, and calculating manner and it is  not  a
            question of rewarding the Appellant for having children who are
            settled in the UK. However, given the extent  and  duration  of
            the Appellant's actions and her convictions  we  are  satisfied
            that the public interest in her deportation is  not  outweighed
            by  the  children's  best  interests.  In   other   words   the
            deportation of the appellant is a proportionate step.  How  the
            family chose to arrange their life is a matter for them, we  do
            not pretend that the decisions or the consequences will be easy
            but they are  a  proportionate  result  of  the  situation  the
            Appellant has created.


    28. As stated above, an important element in this appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal is whether  the  Panel  gave  adequate  reasons  for  their
        findings. Having considered the available material, having read  the
        determination as a whole, and having considered submissions made,  I
        find that the Panel did give adequate reasons for their findings and
        accordingly that the weight they gave to the evidence was  a  matter
        for them.


    29. In relation to the youngest child, the only one of the children  who
        is a British national, the question the  Panel  had  to  answer  was
        "would the child have to leave the United Kingdom in  the  event  of
        the deportation of the mother and perhaps, if so, was  that  outcome
        disproportionate when weighed in the scales against the  seriousness
        of the mother's offending and the public interest  in  deportation?"
        It was not their task to make further enquiries into the welfare  of
        the child either outside the United Kingdom or indeed  the  standard
        of care he would enjoy within the United Kingdom. The Panel answered
        this question and I find they made no legal error  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal which shall therefore stand.








   Decision


    30. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    31. The First-tier Tribunal  made  a  limited  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005 in relation to he identity of EW and the Appellant's  children.
        I continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) in similar terms.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7th November 2014












