
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: DA/01588/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2016                            |On 16 February 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     And


                           MR SAMUEL OGUNMOLASUMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr Blundell, Counsel, instructed by Devonshires
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated on 6 February 2015,  in  which
    he allowed the claimant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to deport him as a foreign criminal.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria.   He  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 18 March 1990 and was granted indefinite leave to  remain
    on 11 August 2000.  He married his current wife in 2003 and  they  have
    two children, born 2006 and 2008.   His  wife  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on 16 September 2010.

 3. On 12 February 2008 the claimant was arrested at Heathrow  Airport  and
    was found to have 3.21 kilograms of cocaine  on  his  body  and  on  28
    August 2008 was convicted for the importation  of  controlled  class  A
    drugs for which he was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment.

 4. The respondent's case as set out in the refusal letter  dated  25  July
    2014 is that as he had been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  in
    excess of four years, it was necessary for him to show that there  were
    exceptional factors such that the public interest  in  deportation  was
    outweighed and that despite the  fact  that  he  has  a  wife  and  two
    children in the United Kingdom this was not so.  The Secretary of State
    was satisfied the claimant, his wife and  children  could  relocate  to
    Nigeria and that any interference with their rights pursuant to Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention was proportionate.

 5. In his decision, the judge directed himself  [7]  as  to  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules stating, [8]  that  if  the  provisions  set  out  in
    paragraph 399 or  399A  did  not  apply  then  it  would  "only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation  will
    be outweighed by other factors".

 6. The judge also directed himself [16] that, pursuant to Section  117C(2)
    the more serious the offence committed  by  the  foreign  criminal  the
    greater the public interest in deportation and that as the claimant was
    sentenced to a term of  imprisonment  of  four  years  Section  117C(6)
    provided that in the case of a foreign criminal sentenced to  a  period
    of imprisonment of at least four years  the  public  interest  requires
    deportation unless there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

 7. The judge found [12] that  the  main  issue  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had satisfied the provisions of Article  8(2)  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention; that  the  claimant  is  remorseful  and  had  taken
    positive steps to turn his life around [13] and accepted  the  negative
    impact his actions would have had; that he had obtained  qualifications
    and skills whilst in custody but that he was not a person who could not
    safely return to Nigeria with his family [13].

 8. The judge also found [14] that the family were still in a family  unit,
    that the children do not have any connection  to  Nigeria  even  though
    both parents have a  strong  Nigerian  identity;  that  the  claimant's
    removal from the United Kingdom would bring  about  grave  consequences
    for him and his family, bearing in mind the children have never gone to
    Nigeria; that the Secretary of  State  had  not  fully  considered  the
    reports in relation  to  the  claimant's  progress  in  prison  or  the
    interests of the children pursuant to Section 55  of  the  Borders  Act
    2009; this case would be distinguished from LC (China) [2014] EWCA  Civ
    1310.

 9. The judge concluded:-

      i) there are compelling circumstances which are over and  above  those
         outlined in Exceptions 1 and 2,  that  the  claimant  had  provided
         credible  evidence  from  an  independent  social  worker  who  had
         prepared a report on the claimant and his family dealing  with  the
         impact of removal  in  which  she  considered  Section  11  of  the
         Children's Act 2004 and Section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2009 [16];

     ii) a number of factors were raised in the social worker's report [17],
         that a member of a voluntary organisation was  positive  about  the
         claimant and believed he is remorseful and  progressing  very  well
         with his rehabilitation, that the claimant's probational caseworker
         considered his progress to be extremely positive and believes  that
         he has turned his life around and will not reoffend;

    iii) the social worker stated in her report that  the  children  do  not
         really know the father due to him being in prison and that this had
         a very negative effect on them; that the family presents itself  as
         loving and supportive and were already facing stress of a  possible
         eviction in 2015 and the claimant's  removal  would  add  to  these
         factors, and the future for the claimant's wife and children  looks
         bleak; that he can provide a male role model for his children which
         will support them;

     iv) on the basis of the  report  the  appellant  has  shown  compelling
         reasons for remaining in the United Kingdom and that as a result it
         would not be proportionate for him to be removed from his family in
         the United Kingdom [20] and, that it  would  not  be  in  the  best
         interests of the children and consistent with the obligations under
         Section 55 of the Borders Act for the  children's  educational  and
         social life to be disrupted by removing them to Nigeria.

10. The judge then allowed the appeal pursuant to Article 8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.

11. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) the judge had made  a  material  misdirection  in  law  in  failing
         properly to consider the Immigration Rules [1];

     ii) the judge had failed to identify the  circumstances  identified  as
         being very compelling over the  exceptions  set  out  in  paragraph
         399(a), 399(b) or 399A [i], and erred also in  basing  findings  at
         [20] on evidence assessed  under  the  previous  Immigration  Rules
         which set out a different criteria; that the Tribunal had erred  in
         allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds  outside  the  Rules,  the
         Immigration Rules being a "complete code";

    iii) the judge had failed to identify why the  claimant's  circumstances
         are very compelling over and above the exceptions provided  for  in
         399(a), 399(b) or 399A [3]; and, that the circumstances  identified
         by the Tribunal are not very compelling [4] there being  no  reason
         why the children could and the claimant's wife could  not  relocate
         there [5];

     iv) the judge had failed to note in their  assessment  that  given  the
         length of the claimant's sentence it would need to be  shown  there
         were very compelling circumstances beyond it being unduly harsh  on
         the wife or children to remain with them [6], the evidence provided
         indicating nothing more than the usual consequences of  deportation
         [6];

      v) there was no evidence that the wife and children had  any  problems
         in the claimant's absence;

     vi) that the judge had failed to recognise that the  scales  were  very
         heavily weighted in view of deportation  [11]  and  that  something
         very compelling was required to outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         deportation; and [12] only if  it  were  clear  that  any  rational
         Tribunal must come to the same conclusion that the error  in  using
         the wrong version of the Immigration Rules  could be said   not  to
         be material;

    vii) that the judge had not given proper  consideration  to  the  public
         interest [13], there being a strong public interest  in  favour  of
         the appellant's deportation [15- 19], [20].

Submissions

12. Mr Duffy submitted that it was evident that the  judge  had  considered
    the wrong version of the Immigration Rules and had not  properly  dealt
    with the issue of "unduly harsh".  The judge's conclusions  that  there
    were "grave consequences" did not satisfy this test and it was  evident
    from what was said at [15] and [16] that the  judge  had  not  properly
    addressed the issue of very  compelling  circumstances.   He  submitted
    that the reasons given by the judge were clearly inadequate.

13. Mr Blundell accepted that there was an error in the judge's description
    of the Immigration Rules at  paragraph  [8]  but  that  this  was  not,
    however, material when analysing the decision as a whole.  He submitted
    that the grounds of appeal, particularly at  paragraphs  [3],  [8]  and
    [11] were simply disagreements.  It was submitted that  the  judge  had
    been clear at paragraphs [8], [13], [15] and [16] of the decision  that
    the judge had applied the correct test.  He submitted  further  it  was
    clear also that the judge had engaged with Section 117C(6) of the  2002
    Act  submitting  that  the  failure  to  refer  to  "very"   compelling
    circumstances later on in that paragraph was simply a slip.

14. Mr  Blundell  submitted  that  in  reality  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge was a perversity challenge but was not properly pleaded.   He
    submitted that adequate reasons had been given with regard  to  Section
    55 and to the impact that there would be on the children  if  moved  to
    Nigeria.   It  was  said  the  judge  had  addressed   the   issue   of
    circumstances over and above those set out in Exceptions 1 and 2.

15. In reply, Mr Duffy submitted that much of what had been  identified  by
    the judge for his reasons to allow the appeal were clearly  not  giving
    proper counter to the public interest.  He submitted that there was  on
    the face of this case no evidence that the effect on the children would
    be different from any other case of deportation.

Did the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Involve the Making of  an  Error
of Law?

16. I am satisfied that, for the reasons set out  below,  it  did.   It  is
    accepted in this case that at [7] and [8] the judge directed himself to
    a now superseded version of the Immigration Rules.   In  light  of  the
    decision in YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1292  this  is  clearly
    incorrect.  Further, the current and previous versions of Rules as  set
    out  in  YM  (Uganda)  identify  the  significant  differences  in  the
    Immigration Rules applicable to this appeal.  Whilst the judge did note
    that given the length of sentence imposed in this case, the  exceptions
    in paragraph 399 and  399A  did  not  apply,  he  nonetheless  directed
    himself, following the previous version  of  paragraph  398,   that  it
    would "only be in exceptional circumstances" that the  public  interest
    in deportation would be outweighed in other factors.  That test is  now
    contained in the  new  version  of  paragraph  398  which  provides  as
    follows:-
         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and
             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or
             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                  view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State
                  in assessing that claim will  consider  whether  paragraph
                  399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
                  interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other
                  factors where there are very compelling circumstances over
                  and above those described  in  paragraphs  399  and  399A.
                  [emphasis added]"

17. There is clearly a significant difference here in the  final  paragraph
    indicating a serious error in self-direction.  The judge also erred  in
    considering the appeal on an Article 8 basis when, as it is established
    law, the Immigration  Rules  insofar  as  they  relate  to  deportation
    constitute a "complete code".

18. Whilst it is correct  the  judge  did  consider  Section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 at in particular [16]  and
    did properly direct himself that as to the effect of Section 117C  [6],
    I consider he misdirected himself  further  on  in  this  paragraph  in
    stating "the  Tribunal  is  of  the  view  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances in this instance which are over and above those  outlined
    in Exceptions 1 and 2".

19. I do not accept the submission  that  the  omission  of  "very"  before
    compelling is simply a slip.  In the context of  the  other  errors  it
    cannot be assumed that  the  judge  the  judge  was  directing  himself
    properly. Further, it is not clear on what basis  the  judge  concluded
    that these circumstances  over  and  above  Exceptions  1  and  2,  the
    contents of which he does not consider in any detail.  It is  important
    in this context to note that Exceptions 1 and 2 provide as follows:-


         "Exception 1 applies where-

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

         Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."


20. It is noticeable also at [20] that the claimant  has  shown  compelling
    reasons to remain the United Kingdom rather than very compelling.

21. Taking these matters together, I consider that having started  from  an
    incorrect premise, that is the wrong version of the Immigration  Rules,
    that there is no indication that the judge did properly direct  himself
    in making findings pursuant to Section 117C such that it could be  said
    that the errors were not material. I  am  satisfied  that  he  did  not
    consider whether the factors are "very compelling" as is shown from his
    approach to exceptions 1 and 2. Accordingly, I am  satisfied  that  the
    decision did involve the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

22. Given that both parties were in agreement that, were I to conclude that
    there was an error of law in  this  case,  the  appropriate  course  of
    action would be to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there
    being a new additional issue regarding the claimant's safety on  return
    to Nigeria which requires detailed consideration.   Accordingly,  I  am
    satisfied that it would be appropriate in this case to remit  the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh determination on all issues.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2) I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh determination
    on all issues.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date:  10 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
