
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01868/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     FH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Nollet
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwaycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellant who claims asylum.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure  and  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by  a  Tribunal  or  court  in
    order to protect the anonymity of the appellant who claims asylum.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 1 April 1993.
     He came to the United Kingdom as an unaccompanied child  on  16  March
    2007.   His  claim  for  asylum  was  refused  but   he   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied  minor.   That  leave
    expired without the appellant seeking to extend it.

 3. On 24 January 2011, the appellant was involved in a fight between  Dari
    and Pashtu men in the UK.  As a result, a Pashtu man was killed and  on
    14 December 2011 the appellant was convicted  at  the  Maidstone  Crown
    Court of manslaughter.  He was sentenced to five years' detention in  a
    Young Offender Institution.

 4. On 24 January 2012, the appellant was notified that he  was  liable  to
    deportation under  the  automatic  deportation  provisions  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 and was invited to make representation why  he  should
    not be deported.  The appellant subsequently made representations on 25
    January 2012 which was treated by the Secretary of  State  as  a  human
    rights claim.

 5. On 26 September 2014, the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, in particular Article 8.  On that date, the
    Secretary of State also made a decision that s.32(5) of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007 applied as the appellant  did  not  fall  within  any  of  the
    exceptions in s.33 of that Act.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed that latter decision to the First-tier Tribunal.
     In a determination promulgated on 12 June 2015, Judge Powell dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds  and  also
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. First, having concluded that the respondent's certification under  s.72
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 could not stand  as
    the presumption that the appellant had been convicted of a particularly
    serious crime and was a risk to the community had been rebutted,  Judge
    Powell went on to dismiss the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.
    Judge Powell was not satisfied that the appellant had established  that
    he would be at risk on return to Afghanistan as a result  of  a  'blood
    feud' stemming from the killing of the Pashtu man of whose manslaughter
    he had been convicted.  Secondly, Judge Powell was satisfied  that  the
    appellant's removal would not breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against
    the judge's decision to dismiss his appeal on asylum grounds.  Further,
    it was argued that the judge had erred in law by  failing  to  consider
    the appellant's humanitarian protection claim under para  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules (and Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive).
    No challenge was made to the judge's decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    under Article 8.

 9. On 7 July 2015, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Astle)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

10. On 16 July 2015, the Secretary of State filed a response under Rule  24
    seeking to uphold the judge's adverse decision on  asylum  grounds  and
    arguing that the judge had not materially erred in law  in  failing  to
    consider the appellant's claim under Article 15(c) of the Qualification
    Directive.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

12. Ms Nollet, who represented the appellant relied upon the  four  grounds
    of appeal which she developed in her written skeleton argument and  her
    oral submissions.

13. First, she submitted that the judge had failed to make any  finding  on
    whether the appellant's action had triggered a blood feud.

14. Secondly, she submitted that in assessing the risk to the appellant the
    judge had failed to  follow  the  structured  approach  to  determining
    whether there was a risk from a blood  feud  set  out  in  the  UNHCR's
    documents:  Position  On  Claims  For  Refugee  Status  And  The   1951
    Convention Relating To The Status  Of  Refugees  Based  On  A  Fear  Of
    Persecution Due To An Individual's Membership Of A Family Or Clan In  A
    Blood Feud (17 March 2006) especially at para 6 (set out at para  7  of
    the grounds of appeal).  Further, the judge had failed to consider  the
    risk to the appellant as a result of a blood feud  without  considering
    the  Landinfo  report,  Afghanistan:  Blood  Feuds,   Traditional   Law
    (Pashtunwali) And Traditional Conflict Resolution (2012) at pages 23-44
    of the appellant's bundle.  In particular, she relied upon passages set
    out at para 12  of  the  grounds  dealing  with  blood  feuds  and  the
    possibility of "collective responsibility" among the Pashtu group.  She
    submitted that the judge had been wrong to characterise the appellant's
    fear to be limited to that of the "cousin of the man he stabbed in  the
    United Kingdom" (see para 37 of the determination)  and  even  to  that
    individual's family.  The appellant's claim was, she submitted, that he
    feared a broader risk from Pashtuns and she referred me to para  21  of
    the appellant's witness  statement  dated  13  February  2015  to  that
    effect.

15. Thirdly, Ms Nollet submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  inconsistent
    findings in paras 43 and 48 of the determination.  In para 43 the judge
    had accepted that the appellant had been  warned,  "that  he  will  'be
    sorted out' wherever and whenever he is released".  However in para 48,
    the judge, in finding that  it  was  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant would face any risk of harm in Afghanistan, stated that:

         "There is insufficient evidence to show that the victim has  family
         in Afghanistan or would be in a position  to  carry  out  a  threat
         which has not in fact been made against the appellant or that  that
         family will be willing to take the risks ... to  prosecute  such  a
         threat." (emphasis added)

16. Ms Nollet submitted that that the emphasised  words  were  inconsistent
    with the judge's acceptance of the threat to "sort out" the  appellant,
    "wherever and whenever he is released".

17. Fourthly, Ms Nollet submitted that the judge had failed to  explain  at
    paras 43 and 44 of his determination why as a result of the warning  he
    identified in para 43 that risk was more realisable in the UK  than  in
    Afghanistan particularly given that in para 44 he had stated  that  the
    risk was more "obviously realisable in the United  Kingdom  ...  if  he
    comes into direct contact with  members  of  the  other  Pashtu  group"
    (emphasis adeded).  Ms Nollet submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
    give adequate reason as to why that risk would not  arise  if  he  came
    into direct contact with members of that group in Afghanistan also.

18. Fifthly, Ms Nollet submitted that the judge had failed to give adequate
    reasons at para 50 of his determination for concluding that the  Afghan
    police would provide a "sufficiency of protection" given that the judge
    accepted that the Afghan police were prone to corruption and  may  have
    greater priorities than  protecting  the  appellant  from  the  adverse
    interests of the victim's family.  Ms Nollet submitted that  the  judge
    could not  simply  state  that  she  accepted  what  was  said  in  the
    respondent's refusal letter that there was a "functioning police force"
    in Afghanistan.

19. Finally, Ms Nollet submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  make  any
    finding under Article 15(c) of  the  risk  to  the  appellant  of  harm
    arising from indiscriminate violence as a result of the armed  conflict
    in Afghanistan.  She submitted that the judge had  been  provided  with
    background evidence referred to in the  appellant's  skeleton  argument
    before the First-tier Tribunal at para 43 et seq  which  postdated  the
    country guidance case of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT
    00163 (IAC).

20. Mr Diwaycz on  behalf  of  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response.

21. First, he submitted that the judge had considered whether the appellant
    was subject to a "blood  feud"  by  considering  whether  he  would  be
    subject to a "revenge killing".

22. Secondly, he submitted that  the  judge  had  considered  the  relevant
    background evidence, including the report of  Dr  Giustozzi  which  the
    judge was entitled to reject.

23. Thirdly, he submitted that the judge had given sustainable reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant would not be at risk in Afghanistan.

24. Fourthly he submitted that the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  a
    sufficiency of protection would be provided to the  appellant  for  the
    reasons given in the refusal letter.

25. Finally, he submitted that in relation to Article 15(c),  although  the
    judge had failed to consider it, on the basis of the  country  guidance
    case of AT the appeal would have been dismissed.



Discussion

26. In his determination, Judge Powell accepted a number of aspects of  the
    appellant's claim.   He  accepted  that  the  appellant's  offence  was
    committed against a background of inter-ethnic dispute in  the  UK  and
    that the appellant had a fear of reprisals from a rival  ethnic  group,
    namely the Pashtu in the UK (see para 42 of  the  determination).   The
    judge  also  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  warned,  albeit
    indirectly, that he would "be sorted out" and that the threat was  that
    would happen "wherever and whenever he is released".   The  judge  also
    accepted that blood feuds occurred in Afghanistan.

27. However, the judge did not accept that there was a  "specific  risk  to
    this appellant" in Afghanistan (see paras 47 and 48).

28. In reaching his adverse finding, I accept the substance of a number  of
    Ms Nollet's submissions that the judge erred in  law  and  his  finding
    cannot stand.

29. First, although he rejected the expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi, and no
    challenge is made to that, the judge made no reference to the  Landinfo
    report, in particular s.4 at pages  30-33  of  the  appellant's  bundle
    dealing with "blood revenge/feuds."   That  report  identifies  that  a
    blood feud  may  exist  within  a  "victim's  kin  group"  and  that  a
    "collective responsibility to take revenge and contribute to  restoring
    honour" can arise.  In addition, that is said  within  the  context  of
    blood feuds or "blood revenge" being part of  the  "Pashtu  tradition".
    There is, in my judgment, at  least  an  argument  that  this  material
    provided support to the appellant's broader claim to  fear  not  simply
    the victim's family but also other Pashtu.  The judge  failed  to  take
    this into account and, I accept Ms  Nollet's  submission,  he  did  not
    consider the wider threat which was part of the appellant's evidence.

30. Secondly, having found that the threat to the  appellant  was,  as  the
    judge put it in para 43 of his determination, that he would  be  sorted
    out "wherever and whenever he is released", it is not clear to  me  the
    basis upon which the judge found that that risk  could  not  extend  to
    Afghanistan.  His conclusion in paragraph 44 that the  risk  was  "more
    obviously realisable in the United Kingdom" whilst  self-evidently  the
    case  whilst  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK,  did  not  exclude  the
    possibility of the threat being carried out in  Afghanistan.   That  is
    particularly  supported,  as  Ms  Nollet  submitted,  by  the   judge's
    observation, albeit in the context of the UK, that the risk  was  "more
    obviously realisable" in a situation where the  appellant  "comes  into
    direct contact with members of the other Pashtu group."  The basis  for
    the judge's conclusion in para 47 is  not  clear  that:  "The  indirect
    threats made against the appellant ... I find  to  be  focused  on  his
    prospective return to the town in England, where he committed the index
    offence."

31. The judge's conclusion in para 48 that it was: "Not  reasonably  likely
    that the appellant will face a real risk of harm  in  Afghanistan  from
    the victim's family" is based upon an absence of sufficient evidence to
    show that the victim has family in Afghanistan or that they would be in
    a position to carry out the threat.   To  reach  that  conclusion,  the
    judge should have considered all the background evidence, in particular
    the Landinfo report concerning  the  prevalence  and  nature  of  blood
    feuds.  Whilst I do not accept Ms Nollet's submission that in order  to
    determine the risk the judge is required to apply in rote  fashion  the
    guidance in the UNHCR  document  at  paragraph  6,  those  factors  are
    relevant and I am not satisfied that the judge, taking into account the
    background evidence, fully grappled with the  evidence  concerning  the
    nature and intensity of blood  feuds  that  can  arise  between  ethnic
    groups from Afghanistan.

32. I agree with Ms Nollet's submission that in finding that the  appellant
    had not established a risk to him in Afghanistan the judge in  para  48
    appears not to have considered his finding in para 43 that  the  threat
    was not, on its face, limited to the United Kingdom.

33. Finally, the judge's reasons for finding that there is a sufficiency of
    protection in Afghanistan in para 50 required more than  him  to  state
    that he accepted the respondent's view in the refusal letter that there
    was a "functioning police force" in Afghanistan.  In my  judgment,  the
    judge was required to grapple with the background evidence (which is by
    no means unsupportive of the appellant's position)  particularly  given
    that the judge stated that he  saw  "some  merit"  in  the  appellant's
    submission that the Afghan police were prone to  corruption  and  might
    have greater priorities than protecting the appellant.

34. Whilst I do not accept Mr Nollet's submission that the Judge failed  to
    find whether there was a 'blood feud' - he clearly did, on the basis of
    an accumulation of these reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    adverse findings of the appellant being at risk in Afghanistan and that
    there would, in any event, be a sufficiency of protection, are  legally
    flawed and cannot stand.

35. As regards Article 15(c), the judge did not deal  with  this  issue  at
    all.  Although the respondent had the country guidance case  of  AT  in
    her favour, the appellant did rely upon more recent material to support
    the submission that the position had changed.  As the  appeal  must  be
    reheard, and given that the  judge  failed  to  make  any  findings  in
    relation to Article 15(c), in my judgment on  remittal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must also consider the appellant's claim under  Article  15(c)
    if it is maintained.   It  will  be  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider whether there is cogent evidence  and  reasons  for  departing
    from the country guidance case in AT.

Decision

36. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

37. The decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Article 8 stands.

38. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding, and having regard to  para
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements it is appropriate  to
    remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

39. The First-tier Tribunal's decision in respect of s.72  stands  as  does
    its decision to dismiss the appeal under Article 8.

40. On remittal, the First-tier Tribunal should  consider  the  appellant's
    claim that his removal would breach the Refugee Convention and that  he
    is entitled to humanitarian protection.

41. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis set  out
    above to be heard by a judge other than Judge Powell.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

