


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01999/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Birmingham Magistrates Court       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 12 March 2014                            |On : 24 March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              johnson omitiran
                            (NO aNONYMITY oRDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Scott of Pickup Scott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before us following a grant of permission to appeal on  15
January 2014.

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 24 March 1992. He arrived  in
the United Kingdom in 2002 with his three brothers and  his  mother.  On  21
July 2006 his mother submitted a SET(O) application for  settlement  outside
the immigration rules, including him, his father and his three  brothers  as
her dependants.  She  did  not  have  leave  to  remain  at  the  time.  The
application is still outstanding but his application as a dependant  of  his
mother was refused in the decision to deport him.

On 22 December 2010 the appellant was convicted at Croydon  Crown  Court  of
possession of a prohibited  forearm  and  possessing  ammunition  without  a
firearm certificate and was sentenced  to  six  years  imprisonment.  On  14
April 2011 he was served with a notice of liability to deportation to  which
he responded. A decision was made on 19 August 2013 that  section  32(5)  of
the UK Borders Act 2007 applied and a deportation order was  signed  against
him on 20 August 2013. He appealed against the decision of 19 August 2013.

Deportation Proceedings

The respondent, in making the  deportation  decision,  considered  that  the
appellant and his mother and brothers had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as
visitors in 2002 and had overstayed. The appellant was 14 years of age  when
his mother applied for settlement  but  was  now  an  adult  and  no  longer
dependent upon her. In the circumstances, and in light  of  his  conviction,
his application for settlement as her dependent was refused under  paragraph
322(1c) of the immigration rules. With regard to Article 8 of the ECHR,  the
respondent considered that paragraphs 399 and 399A of the immigration  rules
did not apply due to the length of  sentence  handed  down  and  that,  with
respect to paragraph 398,  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  that
would outweigh the  public  interest  in  his  deportation.  Whilst  it  was
accepted that he had a girlfriend there was  no  evidence  of  a  subsisting
relationship and it was not accepted that family life had  been  established
on that basis or with respect  to  his  relationship  with  his  mother  and
brothers. As regards  private  life,  the  respondent  considered  that  the
appellant could reasonably be expected to readjust to life  in  Nigeria.  It
was not accepted that his deportation would breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant's appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal, by a  panel
consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas  and  Mr  G  F  Sandall.  The
appellant claimed before the Tribunal to have experienced a lot of  violence
from his father towards his mother in Nigeria and to  have  had  no  contact
with his father since coming to the UK at the age of ten years.  His  mother
had a partner and he had a step-sister. He claimed to have  attended  Sunday
Chapel and to have been an enhanced prisoner for  six  months,  although  he
also had some adjudications in prison. He was living with  his  mother  when
he committed the offences but  would  live  with  his  brother  Joseph  upon
release from prison. The Tribunal also  heard  oral  evidence  from  several
witnesses, including the appellant's mother, his brother  and  his  nephew's
mother, another brother, a paternal uncle, a prison chaplain  and  a  social
worker. According to the appellant's mother, his father had paid  for  their
travel to the United Kingdom and had brought her sons here  in  2002  before
returning to Nigeria. Her own mother remained in Nigeria, in a village,  and
was cared for by relatives in the family home. The  appellant's  uncle  gave
details of his own brother and sister who remained in Nigeria.

The Tribunal accepted that the appellant had an established family  life  in
the United Kingdom with his mother, siblings and relatives, and that he  had
also established a private life here.  However  it  found  there  to  be  no
exceptional circumstances outweighing the  public  interest  in  deportation
and concluded that his deportation would not breach Article  8.  The  appeal
was accordingly dismissed on human rights grounds and under the  immigration
rules.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  the  grounds  that
the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  two  errors  of  fact  which  led   it
erroneously to conclude that there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  or
compelling reasons to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
deportation. Firstly it was pure speculation on the  part  of  the  Tribunal
that, if contacted, the appellant's maternal grandmother and paternal  uncle
would be able to support him in  Nigeria.  He  did  not  have  contact  with
anyone in Nigeria. Secondly the Tribunal  wrongly  replied  on  a  probation
report from March 2013 in concluding that the appellant would not return  to
the family home on release from prison but wanted  to  lead  an  independent
life, whereas the oral evidence at the hearing was that he would  live  with
his brother Joseph. The appellant's family life was therefore stronger  than
found by the Tribunal.

Permission to appeal was granted on 15 January 2014.

The appeal came before us on 12 March 2014. We heard submissions  from  both
parties on the error of law. Mr Scott expanded upon the  grounds  of  appeal
and Mr Jarvis responded accordingly.

Consideration and findings.

In our view the Tribunal did not make  any  errors  of  law  such  that  its
decision needs to be set aside.   Our  reasons  for  so  concluding  are  as
follows.

It is asserted that the Tribunal made two factual errors  in  its  findings.
The first was said to be in  its  finding  that  the  appellant  would  have
support in Nigeria from his  grandmother  and  uncle,  whereas  it  was  the
appellant's evidence that he had no contact  with  any  family  in  Nigeria.
However when we enquired further, Mr Scott  agreed  that  the  Tribunal  had
made no error in its recording of the evidence at  paragraph  12,  that  the
appellant had an uncle, two cousins and an aunt in  Nigeria.  Further,  with
regard to paragraph 25 relating to the appellant's grandmother and  paternal
uncle in Nigeria, Mr Scott accepted that whilst there was no  evidence  that
they would support him, there was likewise no evidence that they would  not.


Clearly, therefore, there was no error in the Tribunal's  recording  of  the
evidence as to the appellant's relatives remaining in  Nigeria.  The  ground
of appeal in that respect amounts to no more than a  disagreement  with  the
Tribunal's finding that the evidence did  not  suggest  that  the  appellant
would have no access to family support in Nigeria. The evidence  before  the
Tribunal was that there were several family members living  in  Nigeria  and
it was entitled to conclude that the appellant would be able to access  some
support from those family members.

In any event the question of family support was not materially  relevant  to
the issue of "exceptional circumstances" for the purposes of  paragraph  398
of the rules, particularly since the appellant was an adult with  no  issues
of particular dependency  or  vulnerability  such  as  would  necessitate  a
support system  in  Nigeria.  Family  and  other  ties  to  the  country  of
nationality was a relevant factor only under  paragraph  399A  which,  given
the length  of  the  appellant's  sentence,  did  not  apply  in  his  case.
Accordingly there was no error of fact or of law in the Tribunal's  findings
in that regard.

The second error fact raised in the grounds of appeal is in  regard  to  the
Tribunal's findings at  paragraph  26  of  its  determination  where  it  is
asserted that the Tribunal wrongly found that the intended  contact  between
the appellant and his mother and siblings  would  be  limited.  The  grounds
assert that the Tribunal wrongly relied upon a  probation  report  of  March
2013, in which reference was made to the appellant's desire  not  to  return
to his family home upon release but to lead an independent life,  and  ought
instead to have accepted the evidence given at the hearing that he would  be
going to live with his brother. However, again, that  ground  of  appeal  is
simply a disagreement with the Tribunals' findings. There was  no  error  in
the recording of the evidence and the Tribunal was fully  entitled  to  rely
upon the information in the probation report and upon the evidence given  by
the appellant at that time as to his desire to live an independent life.  In
any event, the point raised is  not  a  material  one  since  there  was  no
suggestion that the appellant's relationship with  his  brother,  or  indeed
any other family member in  the  United  Kingdom,  involved  any  particular
emotional or other dependency. The Tribunal was entitled to find that  there
was nothing in the family ties to indicate  the  existence  of  particularly
compelling circumstances.

Having regard to the Tribunal's findings at paragraph 24 to 33 it  is  clear
that full and  careful  consideration  was  given  to  all  factors  in  the
appellant's favour, including the  age  at  which  he  came  to  the  United
Kingdom and his length of residence here, his family ties in  this  country,
his conduct and progress in prison, his educational qualifications  and  his
involvement with the church. The Tribunal considered  the  evidence  of  the
various witnesses and took into account the favourable comments  they  made.
However, the Tribunal properly had regard to the weight to  be  attached  to
the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals and to the  fact
that paragraph  398  required  the  appellant  to  demonstrate  "exceptional
circumstances" if his own interests were to outweigh that of the public.  It
was fully entitled to find that the factors relied  upon  by  the  appellant
were insufficient to amount to "exceptional  circumstances",  in  particular
when considered in the light of the adverse factors  arising  in  his  case.
The conclusion that the Tribunal reached was entirely  consistent  with  the
principles set out in Nagre, R (on the application of) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC
720, MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA
Civ 1192 and Kabia (MF:  para  398  -  exceptional  circumstances)  (Gambia)
[2013] UKUT 569. There was no error of law in its decision  and  the  appeal
was properly  dismissed  under  the  immigration  rules  and  on  Article  8
grounds.


DECISION

The appellant's appeal before us is dismissed. The making  of  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. We do not  set  aside  the  decision.
The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  deportation  appeal  therefore
stands.


























                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
