

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
DA/01183/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision and Reasons        |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 10 November 2015                    |        On 04 March 2016            |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                               Appellant
                                     and

                           MR GRISH KANTILAL PATEL

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:             Mr E Tufan Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr N Ohanugo of Grand and Machyle Solicitors

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. The respondent, (who we shall refer  to  hereafter  as  the  appellant
   because that was his position  before  the  First  tier  Tribunal)  is  a
   citizen of India now aged 64. He has been in the UK for  some  39  years.
   Following the death of his first wife he married a Mrs Patel in  1999  in
   India. She subsequently came to the UK in May 2000 and was granted ILR in
   September 2001. On  29  May  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  (hereafter)
   respondent made a deportation order against him  under  s.32  of  the  UK
   Borders Act 2007 (UKBA 2007) following his conviction and sentence of  14
   months imprisonment on 19 November 2013. He was convicted on 2 counts for
   dishonestly making false representations to make gain for self/another or
   cause loss to other and expose other to risk. He did not  appeal  against
   conviction or sentence.


   2. In a determination sent on 2 January 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Burnett allowed his appeal against this decision. He did so on the  basis
   that the appellant fell within one of the exceptions set out in  s.33  of
   the UKBA 2007 by virtue of meeting the requirements of paragraph 399A  of
   the Immigration Rules and also the "exceptions in  section  117  [of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended]").  He  also
   considered that the decision breached the appellant's Article 8 rights.


   3. It is unnecessary for us to set out the respondent's grounds of appeal
   or the submissions of the parties at the hearing because  we  are  in  no
   doubt that the judge's determination was vitiated by legal error.


   4. In his determination the judge found that the appellant did  not  meet
   the requirements of paragraph 399 ([78]).


   5. The judge concluded however that the  appellant  succeeded  under  the
   Immigration Rules because he met the requirements of paragraph 399A. Para
   399A provides that:


         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if-
         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and
         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported"


   The requirements of this paragraph are cumulative. The conjunctive  "and"
   leaves no doubt that the requreiemtns are cumulative.


   6. Having considered that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph
   399A(a)-(b), the judge turned to consider whether the appellant was  able
   to  show  that  pursuant  to  paragraph  399A(c)  there  would  be  "very
   significant obstacles" to  his integration into the country to  which  it
   is proposed he is deported.


   7. In our judgment it was at this juncture that the judge fell into error
   because in assessing the requirements of paragraph 399A(c) he conducted a
   one-sided weighing up of the relevant factors, stating that  the  factors
   that led him to this conclusion were: (i) the appellant's age;  (ii)  the
   fact he had spent the majority of his life in the UK; (iii) the  fact  he
   had no family in India; and (iv)  the  fact  that  he  had  children  and
   grandchildren in the UK. In respect of the last-mentioned factor, he also
   found at [63], without any reasoning, that  "their  best  interests  mean
   that the appellant should remain in the UK" ([62]). This  was  one  sided
   and amounted to a failure to  take  into  account  all  relevant  factors
   because the judge nowhere weighed in the balance factors pointing against
   there being very significant obstacles, in particular: (a) the fact  that
   the appellant had lived in India for the first 20 years of his  life  and
   was thus culturally and linguistically familiar with  that  country;  (b)
   the fact that he still had some family members there; (c) the  fact  that
   he had paid several visits back to that  country  during  which  he  made
   contact with family members there; (d) the fact that his wife   was  also
   from India and had spent a significant period of her life there; and  (e)
   on his own account  there was little provided in terms of the details and
   how often the appellant saw and spent time with  the  grandchildren.  For
   the judge the test he applied  in  practice  appears  not  to  have  been
   whether there were very significant obstacles to integration  but  rather
   whether the appellant had shown he lacked any real connection with  India
   (see [77]). In the penultimate sentence of [79]  the  judge  appeared  to
   have  reasoned  illogically  that  because  the  appellant  had  not  re-
   integrated into Indian society when he visited  there  he  could  not  be
   expected to re-integrate if deported there.  That  is  illogical  because
   reintegration for the purposes of a short visit and  reintegration  on  a
   permanent basis are not necessarily the same thing  and  may  involve  in
   certain cases very different considerations. There was certainly  nothing
   in the judge's reasoning that explained why the considerations  would  be
   the same in both contexts.


   8. As regards the judge's allowance of the appeal under ss.117C(4),  that
   provision contains three requirements  identical  to  those  set  out  in
   paragraph 399A. As regards assessment of  s.117C(4)(c),  this  too  (like
   paragraph 399A(c))  requires it to be shown that  "there  would  be  very
   significant obstacles to C's integration into the country to which  C  is
   proposed to be deported". Whilst the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  the
   appellant met the requirements of s.117C(4) (a) and (b),  his  basis  for
   considering that the requirement set out  in  s.117C(4)(c)  was  met  was
   flawed for the same reasons as his assessment of  the  paragraph  399A(c)
   requirement.


   9. As for the judge's allowance of the appeal under Article 8  at  large,
   it was not open to him to go beyond the Immigration  Rules  dealing  with
   Article 8 claims by foreign criminals as  those  rules  are  a  "complete
   code": see MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  Further and in any  event,
   his reasoning under  this  limb  was  parasitic  on  his  earlier  flawed
   reasoning on the Immigration Rules and s.117C.


   10. For the above reasons we conclude that the judge materially erred  in
   law and we set aside his decision.


   Re-making of the decision


   11. The appellant had not submitted any further evidence in  response  to
   Tribunal directions and both representatives said they were content  that
   if we decided to set aside the decision of the First tier Tribunal (as we
   have) we could proceed to re-make  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
   evidence and submissions before us. We would emphasise, however, that  we
   have taken careful account afresh of all the evidence in this case.


   12. There is no challenge to the First tier  Tribunal  rejection  of  the
   appellant's  case  under  paragraph  399  and  his  acceptance  that  the
   appellant met the requirements of 399A(a) and (b) and s.117C(4)(a)-(b).


   13. It is not in dispute that the appellant is not  entitled  to  succeed
   either under paragraph 399A or  s.117CD  unless  he  can  also  meet  the
   requirements of paragraph 399A(c) and s.117C(4)(c), both of which require
   him to show that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
   integration into the country to which he is to be deported.  We  are  not
   persuaded the appellant meets either requirement. We take account, in his
   favour, inter alia, that: he is now nearing 65 and he is someone who  has
   spent the majority of his life in the UK (he came in November  1978);  he
   has resided in the UK continuously with  valid  leave  for  at  least  15
   years; his (second) wife resides in the UK and has settled  status  since
   September 2001; he has a mortgage and business in the UK; and he has  not
   re-offended since he was convicted in November 2013  on  two  counts  for
   dishonestly  making  false  representations;  and  he   no   longer   has
   significant family ties in India.


   14. However, we consider that such   factors  are  outweighed  by  others
   indicating that the obstacles to his integration in India  would  not  be
   very significant. These include, inter alia, that he is in generally good
   health and is still able to work in a business;  his   children  are  now
   adults and his ties with them have not  been  shown  to  over  and  above
   normal emotional ties; although he has grandchildren  there is  a  dearth
   of evidence to show that his ties with them are particularly  close;  his
   wife was, like him, born in India and lived there until she was 37  years
   old and both of them can be considered to have sufficient experiences  of
   the language, cultures and traditions they shared in India to be able  to
   re-establish their lives in India; he has travelled  to  India  with  his
   mother in 2011 and stayed in his brother's flat; although  the  appellant
   may not any more enjoy close family ties in India, it is incontrovertible
   that he still has some family members there; and he can  be  expected  to
   renew those ties upon return; in any event, his wife be able to accompany
   him if she chooses without this giving rise to significant hardship,  and
   hence he will not be without family life of  his  own;  although  he  has
   strong ties in the UK, his conduct shows a disregard for  UK  society  to
   the extent that he has accumulated a criminal record (commencing in 1991)
   and most notably receiving 14 months sentence on 19 November 2013; whilst
   he still has a mortgage and business in the UK, he cannot be said  to  be
   contributing economically in any significant way because he continues  on
   his own account to experience financial difficulties.


   15.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt  we  have  not  when  assessing   the
   requirements  of   paragraph   399A(c)   or   s.117C(4)(c)   taken   into
   consideration any specific public interest considerations  based  on  the
   appellant's criminal offending (we regard the observations regarding  the
   extent of his integration in the UK in the previous paragraph in light of
   his criminal conduct to be a matter solely related to the quality of  his
   integration).


   16. Given our earlier conclusion that in  a  foreign  criminal  case  the
   Rules are to be regarded as a complete code, it is  not  open  to  us  to
   address the appellant's human rights claim under Article 8 at large.  But
   even if de bene esse we translated  the  appellant's  grounds  so  as  to
   amount to a claim that he should benefit from paragraph 398 on the  basis
   that the public interest in  his  deportation  was  outweighed  by  other
   factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
   those described in  paragraph  399  and  399A,  we  would  unhesitatingly
   conclude that there were no  such  factors  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
   public interest in his deportation. In this context we would  note  first
   that we have again taken into account all the evidence in this  case  and
   have had regard  to  the  factors  in  his  favour  including  all  those
   identified by the First  tier  Tribunal  when  assessing  his  Article  8
   circumstances.


   17. When it comes to paragraph 398, we are obliged to have regard to  the
   fact that the judge found the appellant to have shown a  post-trial  lack
   of remorse which "perhaps increases to a degree, the likelihood of  [his]
   re-offending". We agree with this observation. This was  a  man  who  had
   pleaded guilty and was now saying he was  not  even  though  he  had  not
   appealed against conviction or sentence. Even though he has  children  in
   the UK they are adults and the evidence does not establish that his  ties
   with them go beyond normal emotional ties. Nor  (as  already  noted  when
   considering  paragraph  399A(c)  and  s.117C(4)(c)),  does  the  evidence
   establish that he had close ties, let alone even significant  ties,  with
   his grandchildren [see [62]).


   18. In deciding the appellant's appeal we must apply the guidance set out
   by the Court of Appeal in MF(Nigeria) and subsequent cases, including  AM
   v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636,  and  SSHD
   v SS (Congo & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387. In AJ (Angola) Sales LJ emphasised
   that the requirements of assessment through the lens  of  the  new  rules
   "also seeks to ensure that decisions are made in a way that  is  properly
   informed by the considerable weight to be given to the public interest in
   deportation of foreign criminals...".


   19. We are in no doubt that when given considerable weight in this  case,
   the public interest in the appellant's deportation is not  outweighed  by
   factors of a compelling nature. In essence the appellant's claim is based
   on his age (64), his lengthy period of residence in the  UK  (some  39-40
   years), his relationship with his wife who has indefinite leave to remain
   in the UK, the fact that he has adult children as well  as  grandchildren
   here;  and the fact  that  he  still  runs  a  business  (albeit  he  has
   financial difficulties). Such considerations,  taken  cumulatively,  fall
   well short of crossing the necessary threshold.


   20. For the above reasons:


   the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law and its decision  is  set
   aside;


    the decision we re-make is to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
   grounds.


                               Signed


                               Date:




                                Dr H H Storey


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
