

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01512/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8th September 2014                         |On 9th September 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RMB
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kingham - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Ms Soltani agent for Freemans Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. On 14  July  2014,  following  a  hearing  at  North  Shields,  the
        determination of a panel of the First-tier Tribunal (the Panel) was
        set aside and directions given for the rehearing  of  RMB's  appeal
        against the order for his  deportation  from  the  United  Kingdom.
        There are a number of  preserved  findings  including  the  factual
        findings regarding RMB's immigration history, offending  behaviour,
        family and private life, and the best interests  of  the  children.
        The scope  of  this  hearing  is  limited  to  considering  whether
        unjustifiably harsh consequences will arise if RMB is removed  from
        the United Kingdom in accordance with the deportation order on  the
        basis of an alleged breach of human rights.


     2. The Panel found that RMB is unable to satisfy any of the 'Article 8
        exceptions to deportation' outlined in paragraphs 399 and  399A  of
        the Immigration Rules. They also note there is no evidence to  show
        that RMB has ever had leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


     3. In relation to assessing  the  best  interests  of  the  two  minor
        children S, born in September 2007, and J, born in April 2011,  the
        Panel noted that the Secretary of State accepted that it is  likely
        to be in the best interests of the children to remain in  the  care
        of their respective mothers  and  that  the  children  are  British
        citizens.  The Panel find  that  the  evidence  relating  to  RMB's
        relationship with the two children he has with SL is much  stronger
        than his relationship to the other children he has fathered in  the
        United Kingdom.  It was noted  that  while  RMB  may  have  regular
        contact with his older children  and  has  established  a  parental
        relationship with them before he went to prison; he has never lived
        together with those children in a family unit.  It was  also  noted
        that the two younger children are unlikely  to  have  much  contact
        with their father because  they  were  both  born  in  2011  either
        shortly before or after he had been imprisoned.


     4. The Panel note, however, evidence of SL (the mother  of  S  and  J)
        living with RMB's mother since he went to prison and the  existence
        of ongoing family ties despite the fact  the  relationship  between
        RMB and SL was found to be 'on and off'. There is evidence that RMB
        has maintained indirect contact with the family whilst  he  was  in
        prison. The Panel concluded that it was in the  best  interests  of
        the children to have an ongoing relationship with their father  and
        in view of the fact the children are still very young, that distant
        communication from Dominica would be an inadequate for the parental
        relationship to continue as a result of which they conclude it will
        be in the children's best interests for RMB to remain in the UK.


     5. RMB is the subject of a  deportation  order  as  a  result  of  his
        criminal offending details of which are set out in the PNC printout
        in the Secretary of States bundle. The reference in  that  document
        to a charge of conspiracy to commit GBH in April 2012 is  said  not
        to relate to RMB as he was in prison at that time.  This  postdates
        the index offence upon which the deportation decision is based  and
        in light of the lack of adequate information  in  relation  to  the
        same it shall not be factored into the considerations any further.



The law


     6. Since the error of law hearing the provisions  of  the  Immigration
        Act 2014 relating to Article 8 ECHR assessments  has  been  brought
        into force by the relevant commencement order and it is accepted by
        both advocates that these provisions must now be taken into account
        by this Tribunal. Section 19 of the 2014 Act inserts a new Part  5A
        into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  setting  out
        the manner in  which  public  interest  considerations  are  to  be
        assessed when undertaking an Article 8 ECHR assessment, as follows:


     7. Section 117 provides:


         19   Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

         This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Notes has no associated
After Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 insert-

         "PART 5AArticle 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

         117A Application of this Part
         (1)This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
determine whether a             decision made under the Immigration Acts-

         (a)breaches a person's right to  respect  for  private  and  family
life under Article 8, and

         (b)as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
Rights Act 1998.

         (2)In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
tribunal must (in particular)       have regard-

         (a)in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,  and


         (b)in cases concerning the deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  to
the considerations listed       in section 117C.

         (3)In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
question of whether  an           interference  with  a  person's  right  to
respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under          Article
8(2).

         117BArticle 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
cases
         (1)The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
public interest.

         (2)It  is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
interests of the economic  well-      being  of  the  United  Kingdom,  that
persons who seek to enter or remain in the United         Kingdom  are  able
to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)It  is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
interests of the economic  well-      being  of  the  United  Kingdom,  that
persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the  United          Kingdom  are
financially independent, because such persons-

         (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)Little weight should be given to-

         (a)a private life, or

         (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when  the  person  is  in
the United Kingdom         unlawfully.

         (5)Little weight should be given to a private life  established  by
a  person  at  a  time  when          the  person's  immigration  status  is
precarious.

         (6)In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
public interest does not        require the person's removal where-

         (a)the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
with a qualifying          child, and

         (b)it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
United Kingdom.

          117CArticle  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases   involving
foreign criminals
         (1)The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public  interest.


         (2)The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign  criminal,
the greater is the         public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)In the case of  a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
sentenced to a period of        imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the
public  interest  requires  C's  deportation  unless        Exception  1  or
Exception 2 applies.

         (4)Exception 1 applies where-

         (a)C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of
C's life,

         (b)C is socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom,
and

         (c)there would be very significant  obstacles  to  C's  integration
into the country to which       C is proposed to be deported.

         (5)Exception 2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship  with  a              qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying         child,  and  the
effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced  to  a
period of                  imprisonment of at least four years,  the  public
interest requires  deportation  unless          there  are  very  compelling
circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions        1 and  2.


         (7)The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be  taken
into account where a       court or tribunal is considering  a  decision  to
deport a foreign criminal only to the            extent that the reason  for
the decision was the offence or offences for which the              criminal
has been convicted.

         117DInterpretation of this Part
         (1)In this Part-

            . "Article 8" means Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
              Human Rights;

            . "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of  18
              and who-

              (a)
              is a British citizen, or

              (b)
              has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of
              seven years or more;

            . "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

              (a)
              is a British citizen, or

              (b)
              who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning  of
              the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

         (2)In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a)who is not a British citizen,

         (b)who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,  and


         (c)who-

         (i)has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  12
months,

         (ii)has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious  harm,
or

         (iii)is a persistent offender.

         (3)For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person  subject  to  an
order under-

          (a)section  5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
(insanity etc),

         (b)section  57  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
(insanity etc), or

         (c)Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland)  Order  1986
(insanity etc),

         has not been convicted of an offence.

         (4)In this Part, references to a person who has been  sentenced  to
a period of            imprisonment of a certain length of time-

         (a)do not include a person who has received  a  suspended  sentence
(unless a court        subsequently orders that the sentence or any part  of
it (of whatever length) is to take      effect);

         (b)do not include a person who has been sentenced to  a  period  of
imprisonment of that       length of time only by virtue of being  sentenced
to consecutive sentences amounting in        aggregate  to  that  length  of
time;

         (c)include a person who is sentenced to detention,  or  ordered  or
directed to be             detained, in an institution other than  a  prison
(including, in particular, a  hospital  or  an       institution  for  young
offenders) for that length of time; and

         (d)include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or  detention,
or ordered  or           directed  to  be  detained,  for  an  indeterminate
period, provided that it may last for at         least that length of  time.


         (5)If any question arises for the  purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
whether a person is a British       citizen, it is for the person  asserting
that fact to prove it."




Discussion



     8. Directions made at the error of law stage provide for  the  parties
        to file all additional evidence upon which they intend to  rely.  A
        bundle has been  received  from  RMB's  representatives  containing
        further copies of  historical  witness  statements  and  additional
        statements prepared by RMB, his mother, sister,  and  a  supporter,
        all dated since the date of the error of law  hearing.   There  is,
        however, no up-to-date evidence from SL,  the  mother  of  the  two
        younger children. The  material  provided  fails  to  identify  any
        unduly harsh consequence of RMB's removal.


     9. The statements from RMB contain his  apologies  and  statements  of
        regret for previous offending but this does  not  engage  with  the
        specific direction relating to the issue this Tribunal is tasked to
        consider. It is accepted that if RMB is deported  from  the  United
        Kingdom his contact with his mother and siblings will  change  from
        direct to indirect contact, although at the moment this is all that
        occurs as a result of the family living in London and RMB living in
        Sunderland as per his bail conditions.


    10. It is accepted the family will miss each other but it is not  shown
        that the consequences of such separation will  result  in  anything
        other than the normal emotional impact of  this  family  not  being
        able to live together or having the relationship they may have  had
        in the past and will be denied in the future. No  other  member  of
        the family attended the Upper Tribunal hearing to  support  RMB  in
        person although I accept there may be funding issues in relation to
        the costs of transport. No application has been made by RMB to vary
        his bail to allow him to live with or near family in London either.


    11. It is accepted the Panel found  that  the  best  interests  of  the
        children were for RMB to remain in the United Kingdom, and that  is
        a preserved finding, but it is also settled law that  this  is  not
        the determinative factor but one (albeit of great importance)  that
        has to be considered as part of any assessment.


    12. The evidence fails to establish that if RMB  is  removed  from  the
        United Kingdom there will be  any  unduly  harsh  or  unjustifiably
        harsh consequences for the children or anybody involved  with  this
        individual. It is clear that the mothers' of the children  RMB  has
        fathered have been responsible  for  meeting  the  needs  of  those
        children by way of provision of basic  necessities  such  as  food,
        clothing, heating, love, and any other physical or emotional needs.
        It is not established that  if  RMB  is  removed  from  the  United
        Kingdom that will change or that there will be  a  negative  impact
        upon the children such that it is a necessary requirement for their
        overall  welfare  that  he  remains.  Contact  can  be   maintained
        indirectly and although the Panel made comment regarding  the  ages
        of the children, who are at the date of this hearing  nearly  seven
        and three respectively in relation to SL's children and so able  to
        understand cards or other forms  of  indirect  contact  with  their
        father, they will be  able  to  do  so  more  if  such  contact  is
        maintained post removal and as they grow older.


    13. The statutory provisions state that little weight should  be  given
        to private life or a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
        as SL is, established by a person at a time when the person  is  in
        the United Kingdom unlawfully [s114  (4)  Nationality,  Immigration
        and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended  by  the  2014  Act)].  Whilst  the
        weight to be given to the evidence is a matter for  the  court  the
        fact this provision is now enshrined in statute cannot be  ignored;
        although there is no definition of how  the  draughtsmen  interpret
        the phrase 'little weight'. In any  event  this  reflects  European
        case law which has been applied by  the  Tribunal  for  some  time,
        namely that the weight given to family and private life established
        at the time when an individual has no lawful right to  remain  here
        is reduced, although it is also clear  from  the  authorities  that
        children should not  be  punished  for  the  wrongdoings  of  their
        parents.


    14. Of more importance to this case are the provisions of section  117C
        NIAA 2002 (as amended) as RMB  is  the  subject  of  a  deportation
        order.  Section 117C (3) applies as RMB has not been sentenced to a
        period of imprisonment of four years or more.  The public  interest
        requires his deportation unless Exceptions 1 or 2 apply.  Exception
        1 clearly does not as RMB has not been  lawfully  resident  in  the
        United Kingdom for most of his life and  it  has  not  been  proved
        there will be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  into
        Dominica.


    15. In relation to Exception 2 - the question  of  whether  RMB  has  a
        genuine subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  partner  or  a
        genuine subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child
        can be answered in his favour in relation to  the  latter  element,
        but it is also necessary for him to establish that  the  effect  of
        his deportation on the partner or child would be unduly  harsh.  In
        this respect the directions given for this hearing seeking evidence
        of unjustifiably harsh consequences  as  opposed  to  unduly  harsh
        appears to be indicative of a request for evidence dealing  with  a
        similar issue and so no further delay for additional evidence to be
        filed dealing with the stricter test in section 117 C is required.


    16. Even if the introduction of  the  term  unduly  harsh  indicates  a
        higher test the difficulty for RMB is  that  the  evidence  he  has
        provided is wholly inadequate  in  establishing  the  existence  of
        either element. The children may miss him, they will not be able to
        have their father there as they grow up, but they will remain  with
        their mother who will meet their day-to-day needs. The relationship
        with his own family is part of  his  private  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom but only little weight can be given to that as a result  of
        the statutory provisions and the fact he has never had lawful leave
        to remain in the United Kingdom and has  always  had  a  precarious
        immigration situation.


    17. RMB is subject to an automatic deportation order  as  a  result  of
        what was stated to be a sophisticated conspiracy to supply cannabis
        which is referred to in paragraph 2 of the error  of  law  finding.
        UK Borders Act 2007 requires the deportation of a person  in  RMB's
        situation unless one of the exceptions in section 33 is  made  out,
        which  has  not  in  this  case.   It  is  not  unduly   harsh   or
        unjustifiably harsh if this family is to be separated as  a  result
        of the deportation decision.   It  has  not  been  shown  that  the
        consequences of such separation satisfy the required test.


    18. I find having considered  all  the  evidence  with  the  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny required in an appeal of this nature that RMB  has
        failed to discharge the burden of proof upon him  to  the  required
        standard to show he is able to benefit from any exception contained
        in any statutory provision to allow him  to  avoid  being  deported
        from the United Kingdom as a direct  consequence  of  his  acts  of
        criminality. In SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550  the
        appellant had been sentenced to  3  years  for  dealing  drugs.  He
        appealed relying on the best interests of his children.  The  Court
        of Appeal said that in previous cases in which potential  deportees
        raise claims under Article 8 relying on  the  children's  interests
        insufficient attention had been paid to the weight attached to  the
        policy of deporting  foreign  criminals  which  came  from  primary
        legislation. The deportation was upheld. In AD Lee  v  SSHD  [2011]
        EWCA Civ 348 Sedley LJ said "the tragic consequence  is  that  this
        family... Would be broken up forever, because  of  the  appellant's
        bad behaviour. That is what deportation does."





Decision

    19. The First-tier Tribunal Panel materially erred  in  law  and  their
        decision set aside.  I remake the decision as follows. This  appeal
        is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    20. I continue the order for anonymity  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
        Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th September 2014












