

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA 01001-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |            Decision signed: |
|                                              |07.05.2014                   |
|on    26.03.2014 & 02.05.2014                 |                   sent out: |
|                                              |12.05.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                             Jacques Mbila mbaki
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Isaac Maka  (counsel instructed by Traymans)
For the respondent: Mr Tom Wilding (on 26 March); Mr Glyn Saunders (on 2
May)


                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Philip Conrath and a lay member), sitting  at  Kingston
    Crown Court on 24 October 2013, to  a deportation appeal by  a  citizen
    of the DRC, born 2 August 1962. The appellant arrived in  this  country
    in 1991 and claimed asylum: no decision was made on this till 1998, but
    meanwhile he had met and married a Zambian citizen with  limited  leave
    to remain in this country, who gave birth to their son in 1996;  so  in
    1998 he was refused asylum, but they were all given exceptional  leave,
    and eventually indefinite leave to remain on 25 February 2003.





CASE HISTORY

 2.  That  decision  might  have  caused  surprise  nowadays,  because  the
    appellant had already served a number of sentences of imprisonment  for
    motoring  offences,  and  was  to  serve  more:  leaving  aside   those
    convictions which did not result in imprisonment,  his  record  was  as
    follows (total sentences only shown):

    28 January      1997   driving a  motor  vehicle  with  excess  alcohol
        2 months
    21 June   2000  driving whilst disqualified/failing to provide specimen
        5 months
    12  July    2004   driving  whilst  disqualified/failing  to  surrender
        6 months


    There followed occasions in 2006, 2008 and 2010 when he appeared before
    courts for offences of dishonesty,  for  which  he  received  community
    orders and  a  conditional  discharge.  Then  on  16  August  2011  the
    appellant received a 3 months' suspended sentence for fraud.

 3. Presumably unknown to the court  which  suspended  that  sentence,  the
    appellant had already been involved in a  conspiracy  to  defraud:  the
    dates for that offence were charged as between 11 August  2009  and  11
    August 2011. On 31 July 2012 he pled guilty to that charge,  and  on  7
    August he was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment, with  part  of  the
    suspended sentence put  into  effect  concurrently.  This  led  to  the
    automatic deportation order of 8 May 2013, now under appeal.

 4. At the date of the first-tier hearing, MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192 had been out for over a fortnight; but neither Mr  Maka,  nor  the
    presenting officer (not Mr Wilding)  were  sufficiently  au  fait  with
    developments in their field to bring it to the notice of the panel,  as
    was both their  professional  duty.  The  result  was  that  the  panel
    embarked on an open-ended assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    appellant's removal, under article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    which they should never have done without first expressly finding  that
    there were circumstances in the case so 'exceptional'  or  'compelling'
    as to justify that. A valiant attempt by Mr  Maka  to  argue  that  the
    facts set out at paragraph 32 of the first-tier decision could only  be
    seen in that light  was  doomed  to  failure:  whatever  sympathy  they
    excited for the appellant or his children would have to be set  against
    his increasingly poor criminal record.

 5. That is a judgment which in my view needed to be reached by way of  re-
    making the decision on a fresh hearing, which took place on 2 May.  The
    first-tier panel should never have been  expected  to  hear  an  appeal
    against  a  deportation  decision  without  being  provided  with   the
    sentencing judge's remarks, and in accordance with  my  directions  one
    was put before me.

DECISION RE-MADE

 6. Sentencing judge's remarks          This is the gist of what the  judge
    said to the appellant, who had pled guilty to  conspiracy  to  defraud,
    involving benefits. He pointed out the ease of access  to  the  benefit
    system, designed as it was for people who might not have much  English.
    In this case, people had got  hold  of  genuine  cheques,  altered  the
    values on them, and cashed them in with false ID. One of  those  caught
    cashing cheques was  the  appellant;  but  a  search  of  his  property
    revealed the typewriter that had been used to alter them, and a set  of
    false  identity  documents:  "In  other  words,  it  was   a   complete
    fraudster's kit". The judge however accepted that the appellant was not
    at the top of the  enterprise,  and  had  allowed  others  to  use  his
    premises, using him to "take the rap" for them. However,  he  described
    it as "... a very serious planned offence and ...  one  that  you  have
    committed before in extremely similar and parallel circumstances".

 7. This can only have referred to the suspended sentence the appellant had
    received the previous year. The judge noted his very early guilty  plea
    on this occasion, and, inaccurately in view of his driving record, that
    this was his "first committed sentence" [meaning, to prison  there  and
    then]. Since he had done all  the  unpaid  work  and  kept  the  curfew
    ordered with his suspended sentence, the judge  put  that  into  effect
    with a reduced term of one month, concurrent with the sentence for  the
    conspiracy, for which he took a starting-point of two years, reduced to
    16 months for the appellant's plea.

 8. Risk for criminals returned to the DRC?     Mr  Maka  referred  in  his
    updated skeleton argument to a first instance decision by  Phillips  J,
    for which he did not give the full citation, but it is P  (DRC)  [2013]
    EWHC 3879 (Admin). However, both sides agreed that this point had never
    been taken by the appellant before the present hearing, and would  have
    to form the subject of separate representations  by  him  to  the  Home
    Office, if the need arose later. It was clearly in the public  interest
    that I should deal with the issues already before me, for which purpose
    there had already been over a month's adjournment, following the  March
    hearing, especially as the Home Office were challenging the decision in
    P (DRC) before the Court of Appeal.

 9. National Offender Management Service [NOMS]/  OASys  reports      There
    was a very recent NOMS report before me, dated  23  April.  The  writer
    (Sandra Maragh) notes  that  she  supervised  the  appellant  from  his
    release on licence on 28 April 2013 till that expired last 6  December.
    She goes on to say that the appellant

       ... complied fully with his Licence conditions by attending all  pre-
       arranged appointments, addressing his  offending  behaviour  and  not
       committing any further offences.

       He was also successful in  getting  and  sustaining  employment  with
       [named firm] and I was informed by  an  employment  partnership  that
       [he] was a valued employer [sic].

       To my  knowledge  since  his  licence  expiry  date  [the  appellant]
       continues to live a life free from crime.

    While that last remark can only mean that the writer has no  reason  to
    believe otherwise, the endorsement is  not  without  value.  The  OASys
    report of 27 December 2012 had given no indication of  any  significant
    continuing risk of the appellant's committing any further offences.  He
    is now working for a different firm.

FAMILY HISTORY

10. The appellant was born in the Congo in 1962, and in 1983  begat  a  son
    called Corence, who is with him in this country,  and  who  has  mental
    health problems. In 1991 the appellant came here as  an  asylum-seeker,
    and the same year Everine Chansa arrived from Zambia, she says as an au
    pair. They got married on 26 January 1996, and must have met some  time
    before, as on 16 August that year they had their son, whom I shall call
    J1; but I shall call all the grown-ups involved  in  this  case,  apart
    from the appellant, by their Christian names.

11. Around 2002 the appellant and Everine  split  up,  perhaps  unknown  to
    those who gave them all exceptional leave to remain in  2003;  but  the
    appellant has always kept in touch with J1. In about 2004  Everine  was
    diagnosed as HIV+, and sadly J1 has since had the  same  diagnosis.  So
    far his condition is symptom-free; but hers has led to TB. Meanwhile in
    2005 the appellant met Clarisse:  they  had  their  daughter  J2  on  4
    December 2006, and married in 2008, but are now living apart.  Clarisse
    too has indefinite leave to remain, and so both J1 and J2  are  British
    citizens, who whatever happens are likely  to  stay  in  this  country.
    Though J2's school confirms  that  the  appellant  has  picked  up  and
    dropped off J2 since she started in nursery in 2010, he cannot do  that
    now that he is working again, so in term-time sees her when  she  comes
    to stay at week-ends. However the potentially  exceptional  feature  of
    this case lies in the responsibility the appellant has for J1, now  and
    in the future, in view of Everine's state of health and prospects;  and
    also for Corence.

12. Corence  Since Mr Saunders did not challenge any of the evidence  given
    by or for the appellant on any point, I can  deal  with  it  relatively
    shortly. Corence had lived with him from 2001  when  he  came  to  this
    country with his mother, who died soon after, till 2008 - 09,  when  he
    moved out on his own, eventually to Birmingham.  He  never  showed  any
    signs of mental health problems till June 2011, when he was taken  into
    hospital after an  incident  at  a  bus-stop,  and  stayed  there  till
    December that year, when the appellant took him back to live with him.

13. Corence stayed with the appellant till he went to prison  on  7  August
    2012. Though the appellant was working full-time then, Corence took his
    medication at night, and so the appellant was able to  supervise  that.
    During  the  day  the  appellant's  lodger  Geoff  (clearly  a  fellow-
    countryman, as his other name is Ndongala) kept an eye on Corence,  and
    when the appellant went to prison, Geoff went  on  looking  after  him.
    However, when Geoff moved out, Corence couldn't cope on his own, as was
    clear to the appellant when he rang him from prison in April 2013.

14. The appellant told Corence to ring Jackie Clark, his care  co-ordinator
    at Barnet, Enfield and Haringey  Mental  Health  NHS  trust.  Ms  Clark
    arranged for Corence's re-admission to hospital in April last year; but
    confirms in a letter of 11 June 2013 that he was back living  with  the
    appellant again. She says that, owing to his] mental  health  condition
    [she does not specify this, but it is paranoid schizophrenia] he  needs
    looking after at home and would struggle to live alone, partly to  keep
    him on his medication, and partly because he simply  can't  look  after
    himself.

15. The appellant is able to provide this care, and Ms Clark supports  that
    being allowed to happen. I  heard  and  saw  Corence  give  brief  oral
    evidence, in which he said there was no-one else to support him if  his
    father wasn't there, and he couldn't see a future for himself,  or  how
    he could carry on, if he were returned to the DRC.  Corence  was  lucid
    enough to answer simple questions, but clearly somewhat withdrawn.

16. J1 and Everine  also gave oral evidence before me. J1 (born  16  August
    1996, so now nearly 18) had been a very promising boy  footballer,  and
    had had a trial for Arsenal. However, in 2011 he had been attacked  and
    stabbed in his lower buttock, near the sciatic nerve: though this was a
    bad shock for him, he might have recovered from  the  physical  injury,
    but in 2012 he had broken his ankle badly while playing  football.  The
    result was that any thought of a professional career was over for  him;
    but he is still very keen on the game, which he plays  at  the  college
    where he started a course in sport and exercise science last September.

17. J1 said things were always hard for him at  home,  as  his  mother  was
    always ill: there are some medical details for her,  which  show  that,
    besides being  treated  for  her  HIV+  and  TB,  she  has  been  under
    investigation for gastric problems. His own HIV+ diagnosis had come  as
    a complete shock to him: he said he was lost for words, and didn't know
    what to say, or how to react.

18. Everine described her own condition: she said her doctors were  worried
    about her, as her weight had gone down from 55 kg to 45 - she certainly
    looked distinctly ethereal when she gave evidence - and she in turn was
    worried about who would be there for J1 if she were  to  die,  and  the
    appellant to go back to the DRC. So  far  as  her  HIV+  condition  was
    concerned, she was on anti-retrovirals, with antibiotics  for  her  TB,
    which made her dizzy and sleepy during the day. Three weeks ago she had
    been in hospital for  three  days  with  her  gastric  problems;  every
    fortnight she had to have a blood test. She no longer had the  strength
    to stand up and cook, so  was  reduced  to  using  the  microwave.  Not
    surprisingly, she was also on anti-depressants.

19. Everine confirmed that the appellant  had  acquired  his  bad  motoring
    record while they were together, but she regarded him as a changed man.
    She had pointed out his  duty  to  be  there  for  J1:  he  had  always
    supported her with money, and she was here to support him,  though  she
    was supposed to be on bed-rest. As for J2, it was more a  question  now
    of his looking  after  her,  rather  than  the  other  way  round:  the
    appellant came round once a week to  see  him,  but  clearly  her  main
    concern was the future, uncertain at best for her.

20. Dr Hannah Caller DCH gave oral evidence too. She had  been  responsible
    for J1 as part of the p�diatric team  at  the  hospital  where  he  was
    looked after from 2010, when he was diagnosed  as  HIV+,  till  he  was
    transferred to the care of the adult sexual health team more  recently.
    Dr Caller had seen him every two or three months till then, though more
    often following the stabbing and his ankle injury. J1 was  coping  with
    doing more of the shopping and housework at home; but there was serious
    anxiety about his future, since his mother's condition was  not  stable
    in the long term; but she would be less worried if the  appellant  were
    to stay in this country.

21. Submissions     Mr  Saunders  referred  to  the  need  for  exceptional
    circumstances, already dealt with, and to SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ
    550, with which I shall deal in my conclusions: he did not  address  me
    further.  Mr Maka accepted the need for deterrence,  but  stressed  the
    potential effect of the appellant's removal on J2 and Everine.



CONCLUSIONS

22. Some of the judgment in SS (Nigeria) has now to be read in the light of
    what has since been said in MF (Nigeria). In SS (Nigeria), the Court of
    Appeal had already referred specifically to deportation  cases  at  46;
    what was said there is repeated, with added emphasis, at 55:

        ... while the authorities demonstrate that  there  is  no  rule  of
        exceptionality for Article 8, they also clearly show that the  more
        pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or  deportation,  the
        stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is to prevail. The
        pressing nature of the public interest here is vividly informed  by
        the fact  that  by  Parliament's  express  declaration  the  public
        interest is injured if the criminal's deportation is not  effected.
        Such a result could in my judgment only  be  justified  by  a  very
        strong claim indeed.

23. That is reinforced by the requirement of exceptional circumstances,  or
    'compelling reasons' (I see no  relevant  difference  between  the  two
    expressions) made clear in MF (Nigeria). In this case the appellant was
    sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment in 2012 for his part in  a  series
    of benefit frauds which had  been  going  on  between  2009  and  2011,
    spanning the date on which he had been given a suspended sentence for a
    similar offence. Not surprisingly, the sentencing judge described  that
    as a very serious planned offence, and gave reasons for that view;  but
    clearly he had some sympathy for the appellant, in  view  of  his  very
    early guilty plea, and full compliance with the other conditions of his
    suspended sentence, and reduced the sentence passed, so far as  he  was
    able to do so.

24. It is quite clear from the recent NOMS report that  the  appellant  has
    given just as full co-operation to those supervising him this time:  he
    is no fool, and must see that his ability to stay here and  look  after
    Corence, and, rather less closely, J1, demands nothing less.  There  is
    still a strong public interest in removing him, if only as  an  example
    to others who might be tempted by the easy money  to  be  made  through
    this kind of offence; and that is why  only  exceptional  circumstances
    should be allowed to prevent that. The  appellant  may  not  have  been
    guilty of violence, or any other offence against the  person;  but  the
    public interest is clear.

25. Though the appellant sees J2 when he can, and  her  best  interests  no
    doubt are against, not for his removal, there is clearly nothing in her
    case which could be called exceptional.  However,  in  my  view  it  is
    otherwise with Corence, and with J1 and Everine.  Corence  needs  daily
    care, in making sure he takes his medication, and generally looks after
    himself. Although Geoff was able to look after Corence for a while when
    the appellant first went  to  prison,  it  is  quite  clear  from  what
    happened when Geoff left that, if the appellant were not there for him,
    the only long-term future would be in some institution. There he  would
    no doubt get all the medication and physical care he needed, but  would
    have  no  familiar  face  to  keep   him   from   becoming   thoroughly
    institutionalized, probably for the rest of his life.

26. So far as J1 is concerned, the situation is rather  different.  He  can
    look after himself, and increasingly must look after his mother too, so
    far as day-to-day things are concerned. However, he  is  clearly  still
    'shell-shocked' from his HIV+ diagnosis,  though  that  dates  back  to
    2010, when he was only 14. There is no medical prognosis for his mother
    before me; but from what she said, without challenge from Mr  Saunders,
    about her loss of weight and problems resulting from  her  HIV+-related
    TB, she must be justified in regarding her  own  future  as  uncertain.
    Both she and the appellant were clearly genuinely  worried  about  J1's
    prospects, if he were left alone in  this  country  without  either  of
    them; and, with the shock he has had already with  his  own  diagnosis,
    not to mention the injuries which have  prevented  his  going  on  with
    football as a career, he is by no means an average  near-18  year  old;
    nor can Corence be treated as a normal grown-up person.

27. In this very unusual case, I regard J1's continuing need  to  have  the
    moral support of at least one parent, and Corence's for the appellant's
    practical and  moral  support,  taken  together,  as  amounting  to  an
    exceptional reason for not letting  the  appellant's  future  take  the
    normal course of deportation, following  the  serious  offence  he  has
    committed. I reach this conclusion with some  reservations,  given  the
    fact that he had a previous conviction for the same kind of thing;  but
    in the end that is my view, and it must follow that deportation in this
    case  would  not  be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  purposes   of
    prevention of crime, or of

Home Office appeal against first-tier decision allowed: decision re-made
Appellant's appeal against deportation allowed
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal


