
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01223/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th December 2013                          |on 16th December, 2013       |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 LIAQAT ALI
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Miss Mears on the telephone due to travel disruption
caused by adverse weather conditions.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher and Dr C
        J Winstanley (hereinafter referred to as  'the  Panel')  who  in  a
        determination promulgated on 10th September 2013 allowed  Mr  Ali's
        appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  to
        revoke a deportation order made by virtue of section 5 (2)  of  the
        Immigration Act 1971.


     2. In paragraph 21 of their determination the Panel conclude  that  Mr
        Ali's fear of an individual named Jabal is  sufficient  to  justify
        the revocation of the deportation order on Article 3  ECHR  grounds
        and, in paragraph 24, they state:


     24.  The Appellant has no family life in  the  UK,  and  there  was  no
   evidence before us           of any significant private life, friendships
   or ties to the community. Realistically,            Mr  Ficklin  conceded
   that  if  we  had  been  considering  the  appeal   solely   on   Article
   8 grounds because of the Appellant's private life, deportation would have
   been           proportionate. However, given the Appellant's well founded
   fears of  Jabal  which              engage  Article  3,  the  absence  of
   reoffending, and his mental health issues, we               came  to  the
   clear conclusion that this appeal should be allowed.


     3. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  alleging  that
        whilst it may be that Mr Ali has not  reoffended  and  has  engaged
        with supervision, the  First-tier  Tribunal  have  failed  to  show
        consideration for the historic nature of  the  criminality.  It  is
        alleged the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard  to  (1)  the
        need to deter foreign nationals from committing  serious  crime  by
        leading them to understand that, whatever the other  circumstances,
        one consequence of them  may  well  be  deportation  and  (2)  that
        deportation expresses societies revulsion  of  serious  crimes  and
        builds public confidence in the treatment of foreign  citizens  who
        have committed serious crimes.  The grounds also allege the  First-
        tier Tribunal should have proper regard to  the  fact  Mr  Ali  was
        placed on the sex offenders register as a result of his offence.


     4. There is, in addition, appearing in brackets  at  the  end  of  the
        grounds on which permission to appeal  was  sought  the  following:
        "The SSHD does not challenge the findings in relation to Article  3
        ECHR".  Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal
        but granted on a renewed  application  by  a  judge  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal although one does wonder why this challenge  was  made  in
        the first place if the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  seeking  to
        challenge the finding that Mr Ali's removal will breach his  rights
        under Article 3.  Those matters set out in  the  grounds  on  which
        permission to appeal was sought may  be  relevant  to  the  correct
        balance to be struck when undertaking  a  proportionality  exercise
        under Article 8 but they have no place in an assessment of  Article
        3 which is absolute. As there is no challenge to the  finding  that
        Article 3 is engaged and  that  the  deportation  order  should  be
        revoked as a result, it cannot be said that the Panel committed any
        legal error material to their decision to allow the appeal.


Decision

     5. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     6. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order (pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 5th December 2013
