
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01092/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2016                   |On 26 February 2016                  |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                   JOSE F
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg Pierce
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal, in this case a panel comprised  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A R Williams and First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach, promulgated  on
    15 June 2015 by which it dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision to deport him.

 2. Given that the Secretary of State does not oppose the grounds of appeal-
     in summary that the appeal was procedurally  unfair,  and  it  follows
    that the appeal will be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  is
    unnecessary to go into the facts of the case.

 3. It is important to set out the history of this appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal, and to bear in mind  that  at  all  material  times  the
    appellant was unrepresented and in detention. He would, thus, appear to
    be a vulnerable adult as defined.

 4. There were two Case Management Reviews in this  appeal,  at  which  the
    appellant was not produced through no fault of his  own  and  when  the
    matter did came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  substantive
    hearing on 4 March 2015,  he  was  without  legal  representation.  The
    appeal which did take place on 4 March 2015 had been brought forward at
    the request of the respondent.  When he did come before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant asked to adjourn the matter  as  he  wished  to
    seek legal representation.  That request was refused  for  the  reasons
    set out in paragraph 11 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 5. The primary reason given by the First-tier  Tribunal  for  refusing  to
    adjourn the matter was that the appellant had been told that he was not
    entitled to legal aid and did not have the funds available to pay for a
    legal representative.  That  was  the  only  reason  recorded  for  the
    refusal, it being said  that  there  was  no  real  likelihood  of  the
    appellant securing legal representation without excessive delay.

 6. There are lengthy and detailed grounds  submitted  in  this  case,  the
    thrust of which is that the appellant was through a number  of  factors
    denied a fair hearing.  It is also important to note that although  the
    appellant was not at the time of the hearing in receipt  of  legal  aid
    funding, that was subsequently granted because it was decided that  the
    appellant was entitled to Exceptional Case Funding ("ECF").

 7. The grounds submit firstly, that the Tribunal failed properly  to  have
    regard to  the  factors  identified  in  the  decision  of  Farquharson
    (removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT 146 (IAC) and also  failed  to
    have regard to  the  possibility  of  obtaining  ECF  as  explained  in
    Gudanaviciene & Ors v Director of Legal Aid & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 1622
    (in particular at [81]-[91]).

 8. It is also averred that further unfairness  arose  from  the  appellant
    that not being produced to Case Management Review hearings  through  no
    fault of his own and that, as he was not being legally  represented  at
    the hearing, he was not able to bring to the attention of the  Tribunal
    a NOMS report, a witness statement which he had prepared, and  to  have
    witnesses who had attended the  previous  CMR  attend  the  substantive
    hearing to give evidence on his behalf.

 9. There are a number of factors relating to this  appeal  which  made  it
    complex.  First, it  to  a  significant  extent  on  material  produced
    pursuant to Operation Nexus.  That included two  Lever  Arch  files  of
    material relating to the appellant.  There was also in this  case  live
    evidence adduced from a serving police officer.  Evidence from  another
    police officer was relied upon but he was not present in court.

10. The guidance given in Farquharson is as follows:-

         (1)  Where the respondent  relies  on  allegations  of  conduct  in
         proceedings for removal, the same principles apply as to  proof  of
         conduct and the assessment of risk to the public, as in deportation
         cases: Bah [2012] UKUT 196 (IAC) etc applicable.

         (2)  A criminal charge that has not resulted in a conviction is not
         a criminal record; but the acts that  led  to  the  charge  may  be
         established as conduct.

         (3)  If the respondent seeks to establish the conduct by  reference
         to the contents of police  CRIS  reports,  the  relevant  documents
         should be produced, rather than a bare witness statement  referring
         to them.

         (4)  The material relied on must be supplied to  the  appellant  in
         good time to prepare for the appeal.

         (5)  The judge has a duty to ensure a fair hearing is  obtained  by
         affording the appellant sufficient time to study the documents  and
         respond.

         (6)  Where the appellant  is  in  detention  and  faces  a  serious
         allegation of conduct, it is in the interests of justice that legal
         aid is made available.

11. This guidance must also be seen through the prism of what was  said  by
    the Court of Appeal in Gudanaviciene, in respect of that appellant  who
    was in a similar position to this appellant.

12. There is no indication that the First-tier Tribunal  that  they  turned
    their minds properly to the factors identified in Farquharson. While it
    may be that this, and  the  other  matters  eloquently  raised  in  the
    grounds before me, were not put to the Tribunal, it  does  not  absolve
    them from a need to have regard to the principles  established  in  the
    cases, or from the need to appreciate that an  unrepresented,  detained
    appellant may not even be aware of what he can say on his behalf.

13. A particular concern raised by the appellant, and  which  goes  to  the
    core of being unable to prepare properly, is that  his  appeal  hearing
    which had previously been listed for 13 April 2015 was in fact  brought
    forward to 4 March 2015 and that he was not notified of that  until  27
    February 2015.  While the judges' notes show  that  the  appellant  did
    raise this with them, the decision is silent on this issue.

14. Although it was not clear to the appellant's  representatives  nor  for
    that matter to Mr Wilding, the reason  for  the  appeal  being  brought
    forward was the request made by the Secretary of State to that  effect.
    That the request sets out the Secretary of State's case in some detail,
    setting out the difficulties that the Secretary of  State  saw  in  the
    appellant's case succeeding and concludes "In order to save the  public
    purse with regard to detention costs it is respectfully requested  that
    the appeal hearing be brought forward".

15. There is, however, no indication on file as to who took the decision to
    bring the case forward nor for that is matter there any indication that
    the appellant's views on this were taken into account.  That in my view
    was a serious omission on both counts.

16. It is difficult to understand how an appellant in detention, who is  by
    that reason a vulnerable individual, should be subject to a case  being
    brought forward at little or no notice when he is expected to deal with
    in a case such as this with two Lever Arch files of  detailed  evidence
    provided by the respondent.  It is also unfair  for  an  appeal  to  be
    brought forward at the request of one party to the potential  detriment
    of the other, particularly in this case at the  request  of  the  party
    with considerably  greater  resources  than  an  appellant  who  is  in
    detention let alone to do so without notice.

17.  I  am  satisfied  that  for  these  reasons  that  the  appellant  was
    disadvantaged to a considerable extent by the bringing forward  of  his
    hearing and it appears that the  Tribunal  were  not  directed  to  the
    existence of a NOMS report and a detailed  statement  produced  by  the
    appellant, albeit that it is handwritten.  I am satisfied that, for all
    ob the above reasons, that it could not be said that in this  case  the
    appellant had a fair hearing.  This is clearly not a case in  which  it
    could be said that had  there  would  inevitably  have  been  the  same
    result.

18. Accordingly I am satisfied that the hearing  was  procedurally  unfair,
    and that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set  aside  as
    it involved the making of an error of law. I  direct  that  the  appeal
    must be remitted to the First-tier for a fresh hearing on  all  issues.
    None of the findings of fact are preserved.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.

      2. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         decision on all issues.

      3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 23 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

