




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
DA/01343/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 April 2016                     |         On 20 May 2016              |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:        Mr L Garrett, Counsel instructed by Leonard & Co
                      Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1) Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  respondent
    (the applicant in the First-tier Tribunal). Breach of this order can be
    punished as a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order  because  the
    respondent is a citizen of Iran who  has  been  convicted  of  offences
    involving the misuse of drugs.  I am satisfied that it is arguable that
    publicity about his crimes and identity could create a  real  risk  for
    him in the event of his return to Iran.  I have decided to dismiss  the
    Secretary of  State's  appeal  but  my  decision  might  be  challenged
    successfully and even if it is not the respondent's circumstances might
    change and he  might  become  eligible  for  deportation  on  a  future
    occasion.  It would be  a  regrettable  irony  if  publication  of  his
    identity strengthened his case against removal.

 2) I have tried to bring particular care  to  this  decision  because  the
    respondent has lived in the United Kingdom since 1992 (i.e.  for  about
    24 years) and his former wife and two sons continue to reside there. He
    has the protection against deportation that is due to an  EEA  national
    but he has been sent to  prison  for  eleven  years  for  his  part  in
    offences involving the misuse of drugs. He has therefore been convicted
    of serious offences of a kind that attract particular  public  concern.
    Further the appeal  has  previously  been  allowed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that decision overturned by the Upper Tribunal who ordered
    that it be heard again in the First-tier.

 3) I have before me  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who allowed the appeal of  the  respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant" against a decision of the Secretary of State on 26  June
    2014 to make him the subject of a deportation order. It is not my  task
    to decide if the claimant should be deported but if  the  Secretary  of
    State has shown that the decision to allow the appeal was wrong in law.

 4)      Before considering the First-tier Tribunal's decision and reasons,
    I look at the reasons for deportation  set  out  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's letter of 26 June 2014 because the Judge's determination of the
    appeal should be considered in the light of the  Secretary  of  State's
    case.

 5)  The  letter  began  by  identifying  the  claimant's  conviction   for
    conspiracy to import class A controlled drugs which  the  Secretary  of
    State  described,  uncontroversially,  as   a   "particularly   serious
    offence".

 6)      The Secretary of State also confirmed that  the  case  had  to  be
    considered under EEA Regulations.

 7) Paragraphs 7 to 13 appear to be relevant but on  close  reading  do  no
    more than set out basic principles  of  law  without  indicating  their
    application to this case. It looks as though they  have  been  inserted
    from a word processor without much thought.

 8) The claimant's immigration history is then reviewed.

 9) There is a section  headed  "Assessment  of  Threat".   This  sets  out
    Regulation 21(5) and,  at  paragraph  28,  recognises  that  the  NOMS1
    assessment of the claimant found that he posed "a low  risk  of  harm".
    Paragraph 28 continues, possibly significantly:

    "However, the Secretary of State considers that your involvement in the
    organised importation of large amounts of  Cocaine  into  the  UK,  for
    financial gain, does indeed mean you pose a significant risk of harm".

10) At paragraph 29 there is a reminder about the  harm  that  the  use  of
    illegal drugs does to society.

11) The Secretary of State's decision continues to deal with the claimant's
    criminal activities and the sentencing remarks of the court.

12) Paragraph 36 states:

    "In completing your NOMS1 assessment the offender  manager  found  that
    you posed a low risk of re-offending.  However, the  offence  of  which
    you have been convicted is a serious one  and  the  sentence  that  you
    received reflects this.  Whilst you do not have an  extensive  criminal
    record and your offender manager has calculated that your risk  of  re-
    conviction is low, the Home Office takes the view that the serious harm
    which would be caused as a result of any similar instances of offending
    is such that it is  not  considered  reasonable  to  leave  the  public
    vulnerable to the potential for you to re-offend".

13) At paragraph 39 the Secretary of State says:

    "The Home Office takes the view that  there  is  insufficient  evidence
    that you have adequately addressed all the reasons for  your  offending
    behaviour.  Although it is acknowledged that  you  have  been  engaging
    with the prison regarding your  rehabilitation  (sic),  However,  (sic)
    prison is a controlled environment, and  it  is  considered  that  your
    behaviour in the community has not been tested.  The fact that you have
    not addressed the issues that led to your offending, increases the risk
    of you re-offending and continuing to  pose  a  risk  of  harm  to  the
    public, or a section of the public".

14) The letter then continues with findings about proportionality and  then
    deals with rehabilitation.  The decision refers to the case of  Essa  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1718.  That case deals  with  proportionality  and
    the need to decide if rehabilitation would be more readily achieved  in
    the host country or country of nationality.   The  Secretary  of  State
    makes the point that the claimant's community ties were  stronger  when
    he committed the offences than is presently the case and  they  clearly
    did not prevent him  from  offending.  Further  he  could  rehabilitate
    himself in Iran.

15) At paragraph 48 the Secretary of State purports  to  reach  conclusions
    under the EEA Regulations and says:

    "You have committed a serious criminal offence in  the  United  Kingdom
    and, as explained above, the professional assessment is that there is a
    real risk that you may re-offend in the future.  Account has been taken
    of the considerations outlined in EEA Regulation 21(6).   Nevertheless,
    given the threat of serious harm that you pose  to  the  public  it  is
    considered that  your  personal  circumstances  do  not  preclude  your
    deportation being pursued.  It  is  considered  that  the  decision  to
    deport you is proportionate and in accordance with  the  principles  of
    Regulation 21(5)".

16) The rest of the letter deals with Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human  Rights  and  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act  2009  which  are  not  particularly  relevant  to  the
    decision. This is not a "human rights" appeal.  It  is  about  the  EEA
    Regulations.

17) Regulation 21(5)(c)  requires  that  before  an  EEA  national  can  be
    deported:

    "the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society".

18) The purported conclusion under EEA Regulations  is  misleading.  It  is
    unfair and, in my judgment, discreditable, to say without qualification
    that there is professional assessment that "there is a real  risk  that
    you may re-offend" when the professional assessment actually says  that
    there is a low risk of re-offending.  There is almost always  going  to
    be a risk of somebody re-offending.  I  find  it  concerning  that  the
    concluding  paragraph  did  not  acknowledge  that   the   professional
    assessment is that in this case the risk was low.

19) I also note that at paragraph 26 the Secretary of State recognised that
    the Rules require that the personal conduct of the  personal  concerned
    "must represent a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".   Paragraph  36
    (set out above) identifies a different test from the  one  required  by
    the Rules.  Instead of applying the test required  by  the  Rules,  the
    Secretary of State asked herself if it was  "reasonable  to  leave  the
    public vulnerable to the potential for you to re-offend". A theoretical
    low risk of reoffending is not  the  same  as  a  sufficiently  serious
    threat. There is always some potential to reoffend. There is not always
    "a present and sufficiently serious" threat.

20) At paragraph 28 it is clear that the Secretary  of  State  has  assumed
    that because the claimant has been involved in smuggling large  amounts
    of cocaine into the United Kingdom he now poses a significant  risk  of
    harm.  The need for there to be a present  risk,  as  required  by  the
    Rules, has disappeared from the  analysis.   I  am  not  aware  of  any
    presumption at law that says a person who has  been  convicted  of  one
    serious offence is necessarily likely to commit another.  As the letter
    acknowledges, the Rules specifically prohibit a decision  based  purely
    on the fact of the conviction.  It is not at all clear from the refusal
    letter why the Secretary of State thought that the claimant presented a
    present risk.

21) I consider now the decision made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  this
    second occasion that the appeal was allowed.

22) The Judge acknowledged that the claimant is a citizen of Iran  who  was
    born in 1970 and that he had appealed the decision of the Secretary  of
    State on 26 June 2014.  The claimant was subject to a deportation order
    because he was convicted after  a  trial  before  the  Crown  Court  at
    Bournemouth  of  offences  involving  conspiracy  to  import  class   A
    controlled drugs.  It was clearly a very large scale operation  because
    he was sentenced to eleven years'  imprisonment.   He  was  ordered  to
    serve a  further  eighteen  months'  imprisonment  consecutive  to  the
    punishment for the conspiracy because  he  had  not  made  payments  as
    required under the Proceeds of Crime Confiscation Proceedings.

23) The First-tier Tribunal Judge then considered the circumstances of  the
    offence.   The  claimant  was  described  as   a   "go-between   or   a
    facilitator".  The conspiracy had lasted for more than  two  years  and
    had involved the illegal import of at least 25 kilograms of cocaine  on
    each of six occasions.  The claimant was held to  have  played  a  "key
    role" in assisting the ringleader and there was evidence  that  further
    smuggling runs would have been organised if the conspiracy had not been
    discovered.

24) The Judge then  looked  at  the  claimant's  immigration  history.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom with permission in January 1992.  He made
    various applications to extend  his  leave  including  an  unsuccessful
    claim for asylum but it seems that he  has  always  had  some  kind  of
    permission to be in the United Kingdom.  His appeal against an  earlier
    deportation decision (made to ensure his removal - as is  explained  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, at that time a deportation order was the means
    of removing a person from the United Kingdom; it  did  not  necessarily
    suggest serious criminal misbehaviour) but the day  before  the  appeal
    was dismissed he advised the Secretary of State that he had  married  a
    Portuguese national in March 1995.  He was given a  residence  document
    on the basis of that marriage  and  an  appeal  against  the  grant  of
    permanent residence was allowed in September 2008.

25) Save for the very grave matters that led to the present proceedings  he
    is known to have only one previous conviction.   He  was  conditionally
    discharged for driving whilst disqualified and using a vehicle  without
    insurance.  Although the respondent rightly made the point that driving
    whilst disqualified and without insurance should not be regarded  as  a
    trivial offences, I am not confident that the papers before me show the
    full circumstances.   If  the  claimant  was  in  fact  driving  whilst
    disqualified, then I would have expected there  to  be  details  of  an
    earlier conviction  that  led  to  his  being  disqualified.   Further,
    driving whilst disqualified is an offence that  frequently  attracts  a
    prison sentence.  Here the punishment was a  conditional  discharge.  I
    have to conclude that there is a chapter missing  somewhere  from  this
    part of the story. Whatever the truth about  this  might  be  there  is
    nothing presented in his antecedents that adds much  to  the  11  years
    sentence for drug related offences.

26) The Judge then looked at the  Secretary  of  State's  approach  to  the
    decision to deport the claimant.  The Secretary of State  accepted,  as
    is plainly the case, that the claimant is  the  ex-husband  of  an  EEA
    national and therefore, in all the circumstances, can only  be  removed
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  These
    bring into United Kingdom  law  Directive  2004/38/EC  (Citizens'  Free
    Movement) dealing with the rights of citizens of the  Union  and  their
    family members to move and reside freely within the  territory  of  the
    member states.

27) The respondent expressly (and correctly) accepted that the claimant has
    a right of permanent residence in the  United  Kingdom  notwithstanding
    the break-up of his marriage.  I emphasise at this point that  although
    it might seem strange to a person  unfamiliar  with  the  operation  of
    European Union law that the Iranian  former  husband  of  a  Portuguese
    national is not subject to the  ordinary  law  on  deportation  but  to
    special Rules intended to promote the security of EEA  nationals;  such
    is the plain effect of Directive  2004/38/EC  which  the  Secretary  of
    State must follow.

28) The Secretary of State noted that the claimant's offender  manager  had
    found that he posed a low risk of re-offending  but  the  Secretary  of
    State said that there was "insufficient evidence that he had  addressed
    his offending behaviour".

29) In fairness to the claimant the evidence shows  that  he  does  have  a
    healthy relationship with his sons now aged about 17 and about  22  who
    live in the United Kingdom.

30) The First-tier Tribunal Judge then set out the relevant part of the EEA
    Regulations.  Of particular relevance is  paragraph  21(5)(c).   As  is
    explained above, this requires that when a relevant decision  is  taken
    on the grounds of public policy and it  shall,  in  addition  to  other
    requirements, be taken in  accordance  with  the  principle  that  "the
    personal conduct of the person  concerned  must  represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society".  The  Rules  make  it  clear  beyond
    argument that the person's previous convictions do  not  in  themselves
    justify the decision.

31) The First-tier Tribunal Judge then directed himself correctly  that  he
    must assess the extent and nature of any such threat at the date of the
    hearing.  He said at paragraph 15:

    "... obviously the [claimant] posed such a threat when he was  involved
    in the conspiracy to supply class A drugs.   The  question  is  whether
    that threat is still present".

32) At paragraph 17 the Judge referred to the case of  VB  (Deportation  of
    EEA national: human rights?) Lithuania  [2008]  UKAIT  00087  and  then
    directed himself in the following terms:

    "Only if satisfied that deportation is required on  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security should the Tribunal go on to consider whether
    deportation would contravene the  Human  Rights  Convention.   For  the
    [claimant] to be deported as an EEA national his personal conduct  must
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat that  must
    affect one of the fundamental interests of society; and exclusion  must
    be proportionate in all  the  circumstances.   Public  policy  measures
    should only be taken if there is a likelihood that  the  offender  will
    commit further offences or in some other way infringe  public  security
    or policy.  In every case the personal conduct of the  person  involved
    and in particular the implication of future risk or threats  to  public
    policy must  be  assessed.   Measures  taken  by  the  UK  against  EEA
    nationals  in  the  United  Kingdom  must   be   reasonable   and   not
    disproportionate to the gravity of the conduct concerned".

33)      At paragraph 20 the Judge said:

    "It is clear from the  above  that  in  respect  of  those  faced  with
    deportation under the 2006 Regulations I must  consider  not  only  the
    crime itself but must also look to the propensity of re-offending as  a
    necessary element for the deportation decision.  It is the present risk
    arising  from  the  conviction  that  must  be  established.   Previous
    convictions in themselves do not justify the decision.  Under the terms
    of Regulation 21 above I am not permitted  to  take  into  account  the
    element of deterrents.  I must also when  deciding  on  proportionality
    have regard to the principle of rehabilitation and make a finding as to
    whether the appellant's prospects of rehabilitation would be greater in
    the UK than in the home country: Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration)
    [2013] UKUT 316 (IAC).  Under Regulation 21(6) I must consider the age,
    state of health, family and economic circumstances of  the  [claimant],
    his length of residence in the UK, his social and cultural  integration
    into the UK and the extent of his links with his country  of  origin  -
    Iran".

34)      He then reminded himself that it is for the claimant to  establish
    the facts that he relies on in his appeal.

35) The Judge then reviewed the evidence relied on by the claimant.

36) The claimant had been released from  immigration  detention  in  August
    2014 and had gone to live with his brother. He resumed his career as  a
    chef. His marriage ended in 2013.

37)      He insisted that he was not guilty of the offences  for  which  he
    had been sent to prison.  It was his case that the  prison  authorities
    had told him he could not be "downgraded to a category D prison because
    he was in denial" but he had  insisted  that  he  would  not  admit  to
    something he had not done.

38) The Judge, uncontroversially, pointed out that the  claimant  had  been
    convicted of the offence and it was not his role to  look  behind  that
    conviction.

39) The claimant's case was that  he  did  not  have  to  be  rehabilitated
    because he had done no wrong.

40) Nevertheless he had taken advantage of the opportunities  available  to
    him in prison, such as they were, and this included attending a  victim
    awareness course where he made a good impression.  He said that as well
    as having regular  contact  with  his  two  sons  he  had  an  amicable
    relationship with his ex-wife and he even hoped he  might  be  able  to
    rekindle their marriage.

41) The claimant gave evidence about his relationship with his sons and his
    fear of return to Iran.

42) Paragraph 34 of the Decision is important and, with  respect,  not  the
    best written part of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   However,
    after reading it carefully, I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  directed
    himself, correctly,  that  this  is  a  case  where  there  can  be  no
    deportation except on "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security" and in deciding if this is such a case, the Tribunal  has  to
    have regard to Regulation 21(5) and that 21(5) at paragraphs (a) to (e)
    set out the five principles which the judge identifies at paragraph  35
    of the decision.

43)      At paragraph 37 the Judge noted that the  OASys  Reports  assessed
    the claimant's risk of re-offending as "low". It was expressed to be at
    5% in the first year and 10% in the second year.  The risk of  harm  to
    others is expressed as  low  and  there  is  a  memorandum  from  Serco
    confirming that in September 2010 he posed a low risk of re-offending.

44) At paragraph 38 the Judge reminded himself that he has to reach his own
    view on the evidence  and  although  weight  should  be  given  to  any
    statistical assessment of re-offending, such as that provided by  NOMS,
    it does not bind him.

45) The Judge reminded himself of the claimant's achievements in prison and
    in particular his attendance at a victims' awareness course.  He  noted
    that the claimant's behaviour in prison gave no reason for concern.  In
    particular there had been no adjudications recorded against him and  he
    had given negative samples whenever he was tested for drugs.

46)      He reminded himself that the claimant denied his  guilt.  He  was,
    nevertheless, recorded as showing insight into the effects of crime  on
    others.

47) The Judge accepted that the claimant lived with his  brother,  that  he
    had resumed his work as a chef, that he had a close  relationship  with
    both of his sons and that his wife supported him in  the  interests  of
    their children.

48) He also reminded himself that  the  claimant  was  subject  to  licence
    conditions until 2019 which meant he was subject to the supervision  of
    a probation officer and could be recalled to prison if  there  was  any
    cause for concern.

49) The judge further reminded himself that the claimant had been convicted
    after a long trial and had been punished with  a  substantial  sentence
    even though he was of previous  good  character.   While  the  claimant
    insisted that he was not guilty, the Court of Appeal, presided over  by
    the Lord Chief Justice, had upheld the  conviction  and  sentence.   He
    noted that the claimant  had  contacted  the  Criminal  Cases  Revision
    Committee but said that that does not "prove anything except  that  the
    [claimant] still does not accept that  he  committed  any  crime".   He
    found that the claimant was not only guilty of the offences but he  was
    "heavily involved in this conspiracy".  Nevertheless he  accepted  that
    the claimant was of good character apart from the driving  offence  for
    which he  was  conditionally  discharged  before  taking  part  in  the
    conspiracy to import class A drugs.  He was involved in  the  lives  of
    his children and his former wife wanted that involvement to continue.

50) The Judge then dealt with the claimant's  contacts  with  Iran  in  the
    context of how he might settle there. This part of the Decision is  not
    relevant for present purposes.

51) At paragraph 49 of his Decision the Judge dealt with the fact that  the
    claimant insisted that he was not guilty of the offences concerned  and
    said:

    "I have to make the finding that his rehabilitation must be regarded as
    incomplete until such time as he is prepared to  admit  his  guilt  and
    face up to what he has done: abandoning fanciful explanations as to how
    he was at the centre of this conspiracy and made �50,150".

52) The Judge then further reminded himself that although there was a  "low
    risk" assessment, there was therefore an assessment that there was some
    risk of the claimant reoffending.

53) He found that the claimant was now separated from  his  co-conspirators
    by reason of his prison sentence and the conditions of his  licence  to
    be absent from prison.

54) At paragraph 51 the Judge deduced that the claimant had been  motivated
    by greed.

55) At paragraph 53 the Judge decided that the claimant's six  years  spent
    in a closed prison, during which time he had  lost  his  marriage,  had
    been a "devastating" experience and that  the  prospect  of  return  to
    prison would deter him from committing further serious crime.

56) He then concluded that the claimant was not a  present  threat  and  he
    allowed the appeal.

57) I consider now how the decision is criticised in the grounds.

58) Ground 1 asserts that there is misdirection of law.  It says  that  the
    Tribunal relied on Essa and then says:

    "It appears from the determination [35-37] that the FTJ has  considered
    proportionality and rehabilitation prior to making a finding  that  A's
    personal conduct represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of   society
    (Regulation 21(5)(c)) and in doing so has failed to follow  established
    law as determined by the UT at [29(b)] of MC (Essa  principles  recast)
    [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC)".

59) The grounds then set out all of that paragraph although  the  important
    part is (b) which states unequivocally that:

    "It is only if the personal conduct of the person concerned is found to
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society  ...  that  it  becomes
    relevant to consider whether the decision is proportionate ..."

60) The Judge has invited this criticism because paragraph 34 is less  than
    ideal and paragraph 35 begins by saying "The first  principle  is  that
    the decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of  proportionality".
    However the reference to the "first principle" is clearly  a  reference
    to Regulation 21(5)(a) where the principle of  proportionality  is  the
    first one to be listed.   I  do  not  accept  that  the  Judge  decided
    proportionality first (which would have been wrong). The Decision  does
    not lend itself to any other construction except  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decided separately if the claimant's  conduct  amounted  to  a
    "present threat" and the judge decided that it did not.   There  really
    is nothing of substance in ground 1.

61) The second ground is in various forms and alleges that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to take account of the evidence or resolve conflict  in
    the evidence.  Paragraph 3 of the grounds  asserts  that  although  the
    risk of offending has been assessed as low  "a  propensity  to  offend,
    even at the lower end of the scale, still  represents  a  risk  to  the
    public".  It says  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have
    considered  the  harm  further  offending  could  cause.   This  is   a
    potentially interesting point but not one that  was  not  made  in  the
    refusal letter. It was not the case that was presented before the First-
    tier Tribunal and the Judge did not err by failing to consider it.  The
    relevant question is not whether there is a  risk  to  the  public  but
    whether "the personal conduct of the person concerned  must  present  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests  of  society".   The  Judge  concluded  that  the
    claimant was not likely to re-offend and that there was not "a genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat".

62) Point 4 contends that it is a "critical part of the assessment  of  the
    likelihood of [the claimant] committing offences again is whether  they
    accept culpability for their actions".  I do  not  understand  why  the
    claimant has been identified in the plural form.  There is only one  of
    him.   Why  this  is  described  as  a  critical   part   is   unclear.
    Nevertheless the fact that the claimant had not accepted responsibility
    for his actions was uppermost in  the  Judge's  mind.   This  point  is
    considered  particularly  at  paragraph  49  where  the  Judge  clearly
    regarded it as a negative factor  that  the  claimant  did  not  accept
    responsibility for what he had done.  It did not effect his  conclusion
    that he did not expect the claimant to get  into  trouble  again.   The
    Secretary of State's point is just wrong.

63) Point 5 complains that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  resolve
    a conflict between the completion of a victims'  awareness  course  and
    his refusal to accept responsibility for his criminal conduct and  that
    rehabilitation is unnecessary because he has done nothing wrong.  I  do
    not agree with this ground.  There is no conflict between  being  aware
    of the harm that criminals  can  do  and  denying  any  involvement  in
    criminal acts.  A person does not have  to  be  criminal  in  order  to
    appreciate the bad consequences of crime.  The fact that  the  claimant
    does not admit that he has done anything wrong might make it  difficult
    for him to  be  rehabilitated  but  it  does  not  mean  that  he  will
    necessarily commit further offences.  The judge was  clearly  concerned
    that the claimant had not faced up to what he had done and said  so  in
    rather emphatic terms but also took the view that he had  been  sobered
    by his time in custody and would behave in the future. There is nothing
    irrational in such a finding.

64) Neither do I see any merit in ground 6 which complains that  the  Judge
    gave weight to the claimant having settled  habits  after  his  release
    from custody when these things had not stopped him getting into trouble
    before.  The only point the Judge made is that a  person  with  settled
    habits and community support is less likely to offend than a person who
    has none of these things.

65) Neither is there merit in the contention that the Judge  was  wrong  to
    accept that the claimant would be kept away from his former  associates
    by his probation officer.   The  point  being  made  was  that  if  the
    claimant does not behave himself, which includes  his  maintaining  his
    probation  officer's  goodwill,  he  can  be  readmitted  to   custody.
    Presently his primary co-offenders are presumed to be still in  custody
    because their sentences are longer.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision was not perverse. He was just taking a view of the evidence.

66) Point 8 contends that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  by
    failing to take into consideration the full content of the  "JSR's"  (I
    assume that this is a reference to the Judge's Sentencing Remarks)  and
    whether the claimant had addressed any gambling problems.   This  might
    have been a very good point to have made in the refusal letter.  It  is
    a bit late to make it now.  Although it was the claimant's case that he
    has gambled, and gambled successfully, I have found nothing to  suggest
    that there is a proper reason to think that this  man  has  a  gambling
    habit that controls him.  The OASys assessment excludes  concern  about
    drug misuse or alcohol misuse.  It recognises finance as  being  linked
    to a risk of re-offending but concludes there is  no  risk  of  serious
    harm.

67) There really is no basis in the evidence to  raise  concerns  that  the
    claimant is a compulsive gambler. This is not a point that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should have addressed.

68) Point 9 refers to the decision in Regina v Bouchereau Case 30/77  which
    informs us that:

    "Although in general a finding that such a threat  exists  implies  the
    existence in the individual concerned of a propensity  to  act  in  the
    same way in the future, it is possible  that  past  conduct  alone  may
    constitute such a threat to the requirements of public policy".

69) I do not find this the clearest of phrases to  understand.   I  totally
    fail to see how any previous offence, not linked  to  a  propensity  to
    offend, can give rise to a finding that a  person  presents  a  present
    threat. It does not mean that a Judge errs by reason of finding that  a
    person with a conviction for a  serious  offence  does  not  present  a
    present threat.

70) As a final and possibly disjunctive part of point 9  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds assert:

    "Although the FTJ acknowledges the role A [the claimant] played in  the
    conspiracy at [46] the FTJ fails to consider the significant length  of
    time over which the offence took place or the  continued  participation
    of A following the arrest of one  of  his  co-defendants  [5].   It  is
    relevant to the assessment of  the  present  risk  as  to  whether  the
    circumstances of the offence continue to have an implication".

71) This is an unjustified criticism.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made
    plain that he had considered all the material and there is no reason to
    assume he has not considered these points.

72) His reasons for allowing the appeal are that he is  not  persuaded  the
    claimant is now a present risk.  That is based largely  on  the  prison
    and OASys Reports, on the view that the  judge  took  of  the  salutary
    affect of a prison sentence on the claimant and to some extent the time
    that has lapsed since he came out of custody.

73) These grounds cause me considerable concern because they read to me not
    as a considered attack on the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    but as an attempt to raise points that ought to  have  been  considered
    before the decision was made to deport the  claimant.  If  they  formed
    part of that decision then they should have been put in the letter.

74) Although I have not said much about the submissions, or indeed the Rule
    24 reply, I have considered them. I took careful notes at  the  hearing
    and drafted this Decision when the matters were very much in the  front
    of my mind.  I have considered all of the material relied upon.

75) I cannot agree with Mr Norton's contention that  the  Judge  failed  to
    follow Essa because he erroneously failed to  consider  proportionality
    before other points.  It is quite clear to me that when the Decision is
    read as a whole the Judge considered Regulation 21(5)(c) as a  separate
    issue, which it is, it does not matter when he considered it.

76) This is a troubling case for many reasons.  Although the claimant was a
    man of effectively good  character  his  first  proven  adventure  into
    serious crime was for something very serious.  His offence  was  not  a
    one-off act in an impetuous moment which might be  regretted  for  ever
    more, such as happens when a person loses his temper and kills someone,
    but it was planned and persisted over a prolonged period.  The claimant
    is clearly, according  to  the  evidence,  a  man  capable  of  serious
    criminal activity.

77) I say as an aside that the arguments that have prevailed so far in this
    case would have been of little or any assistance to the claimant if his
    case did not fall to be decided under the EEA  Regulations.   Arguments
    about rehabilitation or the likelihood of re-offending are  of  limited
    value  in  other  cases   because   deportation   expresses   society's
    repugnance.

78) However for the reasons explained above this claimant  is  entitled  to
    the protection of the EEA Regulations.  He is in a different  position.
    He cannot be deported unless he represents a present threat.

79) The First-tier Tribunal Judge has conspicuously  analysed  all  of  the
    evidence.  He has not been assisted by the rather limp way the case was
    presented in the refusal letter (that of course is nothing to  do  with
    the Presenting Officers) and it is not his job to  work  out  arguments
    that might assist the Secretary of State  or  any  other  party  to  an
    appeal.

80) The Judge's key finding is at paragraph 53 of  the  decision  where  he
    says:

    "I find the prospect of return to prison would likely  deter  him  from
    the commission of further serious crime".

81) The claimant is a man  of  settled  habits  who,  before  he  committed
    offences, was in regular work and living with his family.  As it is  no
    doubt intended to be, prison was a harsh experience for him.  The Judge
    was entirely justified in concluding on the facts of this case that the
    prospect of return would deter him from bad behaviour.

82) In short, the First-tier Tribunal has reached a decision that was  open
    to it and has given legally permissible reasons.

83) I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 May 2016                    |




