
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01705/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 12th May 2014                              |On 24th July 2014            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   O'B E D
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr M Bradshaw instructed by Wilsons Solicitors LLP.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes promulgated on 12th March  2014
        following a hearing at Stoke.


     2. The Respondent, O'BED, was born in 1983 and is a Jamaican  citizen.
        He entered the United Kingdom in December 1997 aged 14 and received
        six months leave as a visitor although made no further  attempt  to
        regularise his status. He was arrested in May 2000 and subsequently
        left the country in June of that year although returned on  1  July
        2001 aged 18 and was  granted  six  months  leave  to  enter  as  a
        visitor, which was subsequently extended  as  both  a  visitor  and
        student until 31 October 2006.


     3. The Respondent is subject to a deportation  order  made  under  the
        automatic deportation provisions of UK Borders Act 2007 as a result
        of his conviction after trial of an offence of violent disorder. On
        29th April 2009 he was sentenced to 30 months imprisonment.  Appeal
        against conviction and  sentence  was  dismissed.  The  deportation
        order was signed on 24th March 2010  and  his  appeal  against  the
        order dismissed.


     4. On 18th May 2011 an injunction was granted preventing  his  removal
        following a judicial review application, which was  treated  as  an
        application to revoke the deportation order.  On 4th  October  2011
        the decision was made to refuse to revoke the order and  an  appeal
        against  the  decision  dismissed  on  22nd  December   2011.   The
        respondent became appeal rights exhausted on 15th November 2012.


     5. On 16th October 2012 the Respondent obtained  a  contact  order  in
        respect his child M allowing monthly  contact  at  the  Immigration
        Removal Centre and such other contact as the  parties  agreed.   On
        1st February 2013 contact orders  in  respect  of  the  Respondents
        other two children, S and A, were made.


     6.  On  31st  January  2013  the  Respondent  applied  to  revoke  the
        deportation order which was refused on 6th August 2013  and  it  is
        the appeal against this decision which came before Judge Landes.


     7. Having reviewed the evidence, including the  findings  of  the  two
        previous First-tier Tribunals the Judge sets out her  reasons  from
        paragraph 30  of  the  determination.  The  Judge  notes  that  the
        Respondent does not fall within  paragraphs  399  or  399A  of  the
        Immigration Rules and so it was necessary to consider whether there
        are any exceptional circumstances such as to make the  Respondent's
        removal disproportionate.


     8.  The  Judge  considers  the  matter  by  reference  to  the  Razgar
        guidelines and specifically notes in paragraph 30 that the  adverse
        credibility findings of  the  two  previous  panels  could  not  be
        explained away by the Respondent's learning disability.  The  Judge
        accepted that the Respondent does have a genuine relationship  with
        S, A, and with M [42 and 44].


     9.  The  Judge  was  satisfied  there  was  family  life  between  the
        Respondent and all three children [45] and thereafter moved  on  to
        consider the proportionality of the decision.


    10. The Judge notes the trial and seriousness of the offence  [50]  and
        the fact that until he completed his  witness  statement  for  that
        appeal  the  Respondent  had  maintained  his  innocence,   despite
        conviction by a jury,  although  it  was  noted  he  was  not  very
        forthcoming in evidence about the reasons  for  what  had  happened
        [52].  The Respondent was noted to have been in the United  Kingdom
        for over 12 1/2 years  prior  to  the  commitment  of  the  offence
        although it was also noted that together with almost 4 years  spent
        in prison and immigration detention,  the  Respondent  has  had  no
        leave to remain since May 2007 [53].


    11. The Judge notes the offence was committed 8 1/2 years ago and  that
        the only offending since was a driving offence the  following  year
        [54].


    12. The Judge found  the  Respondent's  relationship  with  B  has  the
        potential to amount to  family  life  but  did  not  yet  meet  the
        required 'test' as the couple are not living together and  she  has
        not met the Respondent's children [63].  The  Judge  also  notes  a
        history  of  consistency  in  relationships  together  with  issues
        relating to the ability of the Respondent to  adapt  to  living  in
        Jamaica.  It is noted the Respondent suffers from epilepsy and that
        medical evidence was available and considered.


    13. The conclusions are set out from paragraph 75 of the determination.
        The Judge reminds herself that the best interests of  the  children
        are the starting point and thereafter  finds  that  the  Respondent
        should be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  result  of
        the relationship he and the children now have and the potential for
        it to continue. The Judge found a low risk of  the  Respondent  re-
        offending, comments upon the difficulties the Respondent will  face
        re-establishing  himself  in  Jamaica,  and  the  likely  need  for
        continued support.  The Judge also noted the medical evidence which
        asserts that the Respondent's disability means he has a social  age
        of someone in their mid teens. He has become close to and dependent
        on his mother since he has been released from detention.


    14. The Judge refers to the need to consider changes  in  circumstances
        before stating in paragraphs 81 and 82 of the determination:




      81.   The  two  significant  changes  in   circumstance/material   not
   previously              available are I find the  developed  relationship
   between the appellant            and his children and the fact that there
   is now up-to-date evidence            which was not previously  available
   that the appellant is not simply              dyslexic, he has a learning
   disability which will give him a difficulty            I have  described,
   a difficulty far  beyond  the  usual  in  re-establishing             his
   private  life  in  Jamaica  without  support.   I   do   not   find   the
   relationship between the appellant and [B]  to  be  significant  in  this
     sense other than if it  continues  she  is  likely  to  be  a  positive
   influence           on his behaviour; I found  the  relationship  not  to
   amount to family             life and in any event to  have  begun  at  a
   time when both parties knew            it  might  well  not  be  able  to
   continue.


     82.  Not without some hesitation when all the factors I  have  referred
   to             are taken together I am not satisfied that the decision is
                       proportionate bearing in  mind  the  two  significant
   changes I have               outlined at paragraph 81 above.  It  is  the
   combination of effect on              family and private life  that  make
   the decision  disproportionate  and              therefore  a  breach  of
   Article 8 ECHR; the effect on the children's           family  life  with
   the      appellant      now      he      has       re-established       a
   relationship with them and the effect on the  appellant  himself  in  re-
     establishing a private life in Jamaica without the support of  a  close
     relative, which  I  find  to  be  disproportionately  harsh  given  his
     disability and which itself will make maintaining any sort  of  contact
     with his children difficult if as I consider likely, he is not able  to
              achieve a  settled  lifestyle  and  routine  in  Jamaica.  The
   combination of               effects I have  referred  to  must  be  seen
   against the background of an              offence which although  serious
   was committed a long time ago and             the long  time  before  the
   original deportation order was made, is an             isolated  incident
   and although there  still  remains  some  potential  for              the
   appellant to  cause  harm  this  is  unlikely  unless  his  circumstances
   change  and  he  is  no  longer  supported  by  his  mother   or   in   a
   supportive relationship such as the one with  [B].   There  is  a  strong
     public interest in  the  appellant's  deportation  given  the  fact  he
     committed a serious  offence  of  course  regardless  of  the  risk  of
     reoffending but I find a combination of factors I have described to  be
          such as to amount  to  compelling  reasons  which  outweighed  the
   public interest in the appellant's deportation. I take  full  account  of
     the respondent's view of the states obligation  under  Article  8  ECHR
     as expressed in immigration rules but I still consider for the  reasons
   I              have described bearing in mind the particular  combination
   of factors,             that the decision breaches Article 8 ECHR.


    15. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  alleging  a
        material misdirection in law. It is said the  Judge's  findings  on
        the subject of exceptional circumstances in paragraph 76 and 78  of
        the determination leading to the conclusion that  the  relationship
        with the children and learning difficulties are  the  factors  that
        engage Article 8, such as to allow  the  Respondent  to  remain  is
        infected by material legal error.  The grounds of challenge  assert
        that such factors in isolation or taken holistically do not  amount
        to a claim that is 'very strong' as per Article 8.


    16. A number of other  issues  have  been  raised  and  permission  was
        granted on 28th March 2014 with particular reference  to  Ground  G
        which  submits  the  Judge  failed  to   engage   adequately   with
        deportation  as  a  multi  dimensional  step,  failed  to  consider
        deportation as a deterrent, an expression of  societal  abhorrence,
        and the means of maintaining public confidence  in  the  system  of
        immigration control, which do not appear to have been considered by
        the Judge, whose focus was on the future risk of reoffending  which
        is said to be too limited in scope.



Error of law


    17. This is an appeal against a refusal to revoke the deportation order
        made on 24th March 2010. Paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules  in
        force at the date of decision  provides  that  an  application  for
        revocation of a deportation order will be considered in  the  light
        of all the circumstances including the following:
          (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
          (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
          (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance of
   an effective        immigration control;
          (iv) the interests of the applicant, including  any  compassionate
   circumstances.


    18. 390A provided that where paragraph 398  applies  the  Secretary  of
        State will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if
        it does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that  the
        public interest  in  maintaining  the  deportation  order  will  be
        outweighed by other factors.


    19. The Judge notes in the determination that the deportation order was
        made as a result of the Respondent being  convicted  of  a  serious
        offence which was considered to be one of the reasons why  the  two
        previous appeals against the order and refusal  to  revoke  failed.
        The facts of the offence are that on 22nd October  2005  there  was
        large-scale disorder within the Handsworth  and  Lozells  areas  of
        Birmingham  involving  members  of  both  the   Black   and   Asian
        communities targeting each other and undertaking  acts  of  serious
        violence.  Whilst this was occurring the Respondent approached  the
        Newtown Fish Bar together with approximately fourteen  other  males
        who it is said were armed with  sticks  or  wood,  and  who  caused
        damage to the property, and threatened the two  brothers  who  were
        within  their  business  premises.   The  Respondent   denied   his
        involvement claiming he was elsewhere but was convicted by a  jury.
        In  the  pre-sentencing  report  it  is  noted  that  the  evidence
        contained  within  the  Crown  Prosecution  Service   documentation
        suggests that the Respondent, together with a group of  associates,
        took advantage of the breakdown in law and order on  the  night  in
        question in order to advance a grudge held by  the  Respondent  and
        one named individual against the victims.


    20. The Judge accepted that the respondent was  unable  to  succeed  by
        reference to the Immigration Rules, 399 or 399A, which set out  the
        Secretary of State's and Parliament's view  of  the  way  in  which
        Article 8 should be interpreted, and reminded herself that  it  was
        therefore only in exceptional circumstances that the  appeal  could
        succeed on Article 8 grounds.


    21. There are a number  of  relevant  cases,  not  all  of  which  were
        considered by the Judge, including MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
        1192 in which the Master of the Rolls indicated that where the "new
        rules" in force from 9 July 2012 apply in a deportation  case,  the
        "first step  that  has  to  be  undertaken  is  to  decide  whether
        deportation would be contrary to an individual's article  8  rights
        on the grounds that (i) the case falls within para 398 (b)  or  (c)
        and (ii) one or more of the conditions set out in para 399  (a)  or
        (b) or para 399A (a) or (b) applies.  If the case falls within para
        398 (b) or (c) and one or more of those  conditions  applies,  then
        the new rules implicitly provide that deportation would be contrary
        to article 8" (paragraph 35).   Paragraphs  399  and  399A  can  be
        thought of as setting out the exceptions to deportation  (paragraph
        14).


    22. In Kabia (MF: para 298 - "exceptional circumstances")  [2013]  UKUT
        00569 (IAC) it was held that (i) The new rules relating to  article
        8  claims  advanced  by  foreign  criminals   seeking   to   resist
        deportation are a complete code and the  exceptional  circumstances
        to be considered in the balancing exercise involve the  application
        of  a  proportionality  test  as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
        jurisprudence: MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at para 43; (ii) The question being
        addressed by a decision maker applying the new  rules  set  out  at
        paragraph 398 of HC 395 in considering a claim founded upon article
        8 of the ECHR and that being addressed by the judge who carries out
        what was referred to in MF (Article 8 - New Rules)  Nigeria  [2012]
        UKUT 393 (IAC) as the second step in a  two-stage  process  is  the
        same one that, properly executed,  will  return  the  same  answer;
        (iii) The new rules speak of "exceptional  circumstances"  but,  as
        has been made clear  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria),
        exceptionality is a likely characteristic of a claim that  properly
        succeeds rather than a legal test to  be  met.   In  this  context,
        "exceptional" means circumstances in which deportation would result
        in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  individual  or  their
        family such that a deportation would not be proportionate".


    23. In the recent case of McLarty (Deportation-  balance)  [2014]  UKUT
        00315 it was held that there can be little doubt that  in  enacting
        the UK Borders Act 2007 Parliament views the  object  of  deporting
        those with a criminal record as a  very  strong  policy,  which  is
        constant in all cases (SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550).
        The weight to be attached to that object will, however,  include  a
        variable  component,  which  reflects  the  criminality  in  issue.
        Nevertheless, Parliament has tilted the scales strongly  in  favour
        of deportation and for them to return to the level and  then  swing
        in  favour  of  a  criminal  opposing  deportation  there  must  be
        compelling reasons, which must be exceptional; (ii) What amounts to
        compelling reasons or exceptional circumstances is very  much  fact
        dependent but must necessarily  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the
        articulated will of Parliament  in  favour  of  deportation;  (iii)
        Where the facts surrounding an individual who has committed a crime
        are said to be "exceptional" or "compelling", these are factors  to
        be placed in the weighing scale, in order to be weighed against the
        public  interest;  (iv)  In  some  other  instances,   the   phrase
        "exceptional" or "compelling" has been used  to  describe  the  end
        result:  namely,  that  the   position   of   the   individual   is
        "exceptional" or "compelling" because, having weighed  the  unusual
        facts against the (powerful) public interest, the former  outweighs
        the latter.  In this sense "exceptional" or "compelling" is the end
        result of the proportionality weighing process.


    24. Following discussion it was accepted the Judge had  probably  erred
        in  law.  I  find  this  to  be  the  case  as  a  reading  of  the
        determination  does  not  indicate  that  the  above  approach  was
        followed when  the  conclusions  regarding  exceptional  compelling
        circumstances were  being  weighed  against  the  public  interest,
        although Mr Bradshaw thereafter submitted that the  issue  in  this
        appeal was whether any error was material to the decision to  allow
        the appeal.


    25. It was submitted  on  the  Respondent's  behalf  that  the  Judge's
        finding  that  his  circumstances  met  the   required   test   for
        exceptional circumstances as set out in the  Immigration  Rules  is
        sustainable. The Judge considered the fact that the three  children
        with whom the Respondent has a relationship will be affected by the
        decision. There was evidence of ongoing contact which was  not  the
        situation previously  and  an  independent  social  workers  report
        prepared by Christine  Brown.  It  was  also  submitted  the  Judge
        considered  the  issue  of  the  willingness  and  ability  of  the
        Respondent to be involved in his children's upbringing as evidenced
        by the private law children's proceedings.  It  is  accepted  there
        were difficulties in relation to the Respondent's lifestyle and his
        personal problems, but it was  relevant  that  if  he  is  deported
        contact will lessen and he will face a ten year prohibition from re-
        entering the United Kingdom.


    26. Mr Bradshaw submitted that the impact upon the  children  is  based
        upon the conclusions to be found in paragraph 4.5 of the report  of
        Christian Brown in which  it  is  alleges  that  if  S  and  A  are
        separated from their father there would be "untold emotional damage
        in both the short  and  longer  term  creating  and  introducing  a
        mistrust in the  children's  relationship  with  their  mother  and
        possibly other close relatives as they respond  with  the  distress
        that will follow their father's removal and will akin to  the  loss
        of their father through death...". It is also  submitted  that  the
        two elements identified by the Judge in paragraph 81  are  relevant
        and the best interests of the children all persuasive.


    27. On behalf of the Secretary of State it was submitted by Mr  McVeety
        that this is  the  third  appeal  against  the  obligation  of  the
        Secretary of  State  to  remove  the  Respondent  from  the  United
        Kingdom.  Mr McVeety also referred to the findings in the  previous
        determinations and reference in the reasons for refusal letter that
        the Respondent would do anything in his  power  to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom.


    28. I accept that two issues that do not appear to have been adequately
        considered by the Judge when looking at the best interests  of  the
        children are that the Respondent is not their primary carer and the
        impact of his history, which indicates that he  has  been  'in  and
        out' of any potential family life. The previous tribunals found the
        Respondent has a cavalier attitude to women and children  and  what
        was considered to be a lack of commitment for family  members,  his
        obligations, or personal responsibility.


    29. I find there is history indicating a  lack  of  commitment  in  the
        Respondent towards his children and partners previously.  I  accept
        he is not the primary carer of the children  that  there  was  only
        evidence of sporadic contact recorded in the 2011 determination.


    30. I find it is a relevant factor that the Respondent has no leave  to
        remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  he  has  not  made  any  valid
        application for leave and that the private and family life he seeks
        to rely upon as a means  of  avoiding  deportation  is  based  upon
        relationships formed at a time when no leave existed, as  noted  by
        the Judge.


    31. There is merit in the Secretary of State's argument  that  allowing
        the Respondent to remain when  he  has  no  leave,  has  undertaken
        serious criminal acts, and is the subject of a  deportation  order,
        would mean such issues being overridden purely  to  permit  ongoing
        contact, although I also accept that in certain circumstances  this
        is proportionate.


    32. The comments regarding  difficulties  re-settling  in  Jamaica  are
        noted but it has not been established that any  economic  or  other
        impact of relocating to Jamaica upon the Respondent  is  sufficient
        to satisfy the test of exceptionality.


    33. It was accepted by both advocates that this is a challenging  case,
        as recorded by  the  Judge,  who  only  allowed  the  appeal  "with
        hesitation".


    34. The Court of Appeal have made it  clear  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
        should not interfere with  decisions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        unless there is clear evidence  of  legal  error  material  to  the
        decision under challenge. The Judge was right to record  that  this
        case has factors which made it less clear than others  although  it
        is important to  note  that  when  considering  whether  there  are
        exceptional circumstances the correct test is whether the  decision
        will result in unjustifiably harsh consequences to  the  Respondent
        or family members.


    35.  The  fact  the  Respondent's  true  presentation  may  have   been
        identified in the medical evidence considered by  the  Judge  is  a
        factor that she took into account and although it is accepted  that
        he may face difficulty settling in Jamaica which  may  lead  to  an
        unsettled  lifestyle,  the  evidence  does  not  show  that   harsh
        consequences will arise for him as an individual  per  se.  He  has
        received support from his mother in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
        evidence does not substantiate a claim  he  will  not  be  able  to
        receive some support in Jamaica, if required, or that  the  absence
        of such support makes the decision disproportionate.


    36. The key to this appeal, as in many cases of  this  nature,  is  the
        needs of the children. There are three children and the  Respondent
        splits his time between two family units. The report  of  Christian
        Brown was noted by the Judge but  Ms  Brown  has  been  subject  of
        adverse comment previously regarding the lack of objectivity in her
        reports.  The wording of paragraph 4.5 is in fact very  similar  to
        those in previous reports seen by this tribunal in other  cases  in
        which she has been instructed.


    37. It is accepted that a child in a  settled  relationship  with  both
        parents, even if the relationship is limited to contact, is  likely
        to suffer an adverse reaction if such contact is lost as  a  result
        of a parent being deported.  To suggest this will result in "untold
        emotional damage" with no suggestion that  this  could  be  managed
        with appropriate  care/assistance  appears  somewhat  extreme.  The
        evidence provided related to the Respondent's medical condition and
        there is insufficient medical/psychological evidence  available  to
        support the assertion that such harm will be caused to the children
        if the Respondent was to be deported. This is an  appeal  in  which
        the primary needs of the children are  met  by  their  mothers,  in
        relation  to  which  there  is  insufficient  evidence   of   harsh
        consequences when their father  was  in  prison,  and  insufficient
        evidence of harsh consequences of the nature of those  outlined  by
        Christian Brown if he was to be removed.


    38. It is accepted that the ideal  situation  for  children  is  to  be
        brought up within an environment including supportive  parents  but
        this is not the reality of modern life within the  United  Kingdom.
        If the Respondent was to be removed the children will remain living
        with their primary carers as they do now. Contact will change  from
        direct to indirect contact and so it is not a case of  all  contact
        being automatically lost with their father. In families where  such
        contact is lost the  important  thing  in  a  child's  life  is  to
        maintain the day-to-day routine as a child can then continue his or
        her lifestyle and  on  the  whole  is  able  to  adapt  to  even  a
        fundamental change in their family situation, as may occur  with  a
        deportation order. As said by the Court of Appeal in Lee,  that  is
        the effect of deportation.


    39. The term "unjustifiably" indicates that the consequences, harsh  or
        otherwise, need to be weighed against the reason why the individual
        concerned is to be removed.  I accept the submission on  behalf  of
        the Secretary of State that there is a finding that the  Respondent
        has done all in his power to avoid removal from the United  Kingdom
        which must be relevant in relation to the weight to be placed  upon
        his claims.  The fact he has no  leave  to  remain  is  a  relevant
        factor as it reduces the weight to be placed  upon  any  family  or
        private life he seeks to rely upon, although I accept the needs  of
        the children are of primary importance and that children should not
        be punished for the actions of their parents.


    40. The deportation order is an automatic deportation made as a  result
        of a serious offence. I find that the Judge has materially erred in
        law in  her  assessment  of  the  material  and  that  the  grounds
        asserting misdirection or in relation to the correct application of
        the applicable legal test have merit.


    41. I set the determination aside. There is no challenge to the Judge's
        factual findings. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal as
        notwithstanding the fact that it is in the best  interests  of  the
        children for their father to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  when
        weighing this as one of the factors to be  taken  into  account  as
        part of  any  balancing  exercise,  I  do  not  find  it  has  been
        established that any unjustifiable harsh  consequences  will  arise
        such  as  to  make  the  decision  disproportionate.   This  is  an
        automatic deportation order made following the commission of a very
        serious offence. Involvement in public disorder of the sort seen in
        Birmingham and London in recent years  or  using  such  large-scale
        public disorder as a cover to undertake an attack for the  purposes
        of seeking revenge upon two  named  individuals,  especially  as  a
        member of a group of fourteen assailants, more than  justifies  the
        Respondent's removal.  As submitted  in  the  grounds  there  is  a
        strong deterrent element in this appeal to discourage  others  from
        thinking that such crimes  of  violence  will  not  be  dealt  with
        appropriately in a way that reflects the public's revulsion of such
        activities.


    42. I find the Secretary of State has discharged the  burden  of  proof
        upon her to the required standard to  show  that  the  decision  is
        proportionate, especially in light of the failure of the Respondent
        to satisfy me that is able to succeed under any  provision  of  the
        Immigration Rules.


Decision

    43. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    44. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make that  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to protect  the  identity  of
        the children.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21st July 2014





