
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01024/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 August 2019                            |On 11 September 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Q B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  on  2
    June 2014 to make a deportation order against the appellant (as I  will
    refer to him).

2.   There is a history of which I will not go into all the  detail.   There
    have been two previous occasions on which appeals  have  been  allowed.
    In relation to the most recent one that formed the subject of a further
    appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal in which  I  was
    sitting with Lord Beckett and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was set aside and the matter then was listed for rehearing.

3.   There is a preliminary point of significance in this case and  that  is
    a consequence of the conclusions of the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria)
    [2018] UKSC 53 in relation to the issue of how  undue  harshness  to  a
    child is to be evaluated.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal in this case had concluded that there would  be
    undue harshness for the children, in  particular  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's stepson who suffers severely from autism, and this was  the
    key point upon which the  panel  focused  in  its  examination  of  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal in  this  case,  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 52 to 54 where referring to the First-tier decision  it  was
    said:-

         "52. There is a reference to 'criminal immigration history' but  we
             see no  reference,  in  this  section  of  reasoning,  to  the
             appellant having entered the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  and
             having apparently been here on no lawful basis between January
             2004 and January 2010 which, on  the  face  of  it,  would  be
             relevant to a consideration of immigration history.   At  para
             21 there was a reference to illegal entry and a failed  asylum
             claim, but not the gap of six years.  Those references were to
             the Secretary of State's submissions.  There is no  indication
             of the weight, if any, given to those circumstances in  making
             the ultimate decisions.

         53.  Whilst references to 'previous convictions' are  to  be  found
             within the determination (at paras  21  and  25)  the  context
             persuades us that they are references to the five  convictions
             which led to a total sentence of imprisonment for  30  months.
             We see no reference to the claimant's previous conviction  for
             cannabis cultivation which,  on  the  face  of  it,  would  be
             relevant to a consideration of criminal  history  being  taken
             into account in making the 'unduly harsh' judgement.

         54.   The  sentencing  judge's  remarks  refer  to   that   earlier
             conviction, as did at least one of the appellant's statements.
              Had there been reference to the circumstances of the offences
             as explained in the sentencing remarks, as opposed to the bare
             fact of the sentence length, it would have been easier  to  be
             satisfied that there was an informed and careful assessment of
             the relative strength of the public interest"

    and then the Tribunal went on to refer to Ali and factors  relevant  to
    very  compelling  circumstances,  failure  to  refer  to  exception  1,
    circumstances which might have significant weight,  but  not  satisfied
    that due consideration  was  given  to  the  public  interest  and  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal fully within  the  scope  of  Section
    117C(3) and therefore the decision was set aside.

5.   The argument made on the appellant's  behalf  now  as  set  out  in  Ms
    Loughran's skeleton is that this now has to be seen in  light  of  what
    was said by the Supreme Court as I say in KO  (Nigeria)  where  it  was
    confirmed that the consideration of unduly harsh  does  not  require  a
    balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence  other
    than it is inherent in the distinction  drawn  by  the  section  itself
    regarding length of sentence does not require very compelling  reasons.
    As a consequence it is  argued  following  from  the  decision  of  the
    Presidential Panel in AZ [2018] UKUT 245 (IAC) that it is open  to  the
    Tribunal in very exceptional circumstances to remake the error  of  law
    decision.  That was a matter I think that  had  been  subject  to  some
    uncertainty prior to AZ, but it is clearly decided in that case that if
    the case is a very exceptional one then it is open to the  Tribunal  to
    revisit the error of law decision.

6.   The Tribunal did not  set  out  what  is  meant  by  "very  exceptional
    circumstances", no doubt wisely because it is a matter that really  has
    to evolve through the case law rather than it being sought to lay  down
    guidelines, and it was in a sense an example of a case where there were
    not very exceptional circumstances and perhaps  therefore  also  not  a
    very good opportunity to provide guidance.

7.   Ms Loughran refers to "very exceptional circumstances"  in  that  there
    is the long history of the proceeding including two appeals before  the
    First-tier, both of which were set aside by the  Upper  Tribunal  given
    the changes in the law which at least now since the change in  the  law
    comes from the Supreme Court we may say the decision is settled, and  I
    think one might add to that that if the position is sufficiently  clear
    that there is an error of law, then  that  could  not  be  said  to  be
    irrelevant, putting it perhaps not at its highest, to the  question  of
    very exceptional circumstances.  If it is sufficiently clear  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not err as a matter of law and that  there  had
    been subsequent changes in the law that make that clear, then that must
    be relevant I think to the issue of very exceptional circumstances.  It
    makes little sense in the abstract for the Upper Tribunal  to  continue
    to maintain that there was an error of law in the  decision  if  it  is
    clear that as a result of the change in the law that decision  was  not
    flawed by error of law, and it is to my mind  sufficiently  clear  from
    the paragraphs in the earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal to which I
    have referred that the error of law that it  found  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was in relation to matters which, as we now know in
    light of KO (Nigeria), do not amount to errors of law.   That  was  the
    basis upon which the decision was overturned and the circumstances  are
    in my view such as to make it necessary to conclude that the  error  of
    law finding by the panel earlier on  is  to  be  set  aside  and  as  a
    consequence the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  this
    appeal must therefore stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed   Date 3 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
