
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01270/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A S
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. J. Walsh of counsel, instructed by Morgan Has
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The Appellant, who was born on 16 February 1992, is a citizen of  Iran.
    His father was granted asylum in the United  Kingdom  in  1998  and  in
    2000, the Appellant was granted indefinite leave to enter to join  him.
    The Appellant applied to naturalise as a British citizen on 22 May 2008
    but his application was refused on the basis of character.

 2. On 23 January 2014 he was convicted of one count of common assault  and
    one count of assault occasioning bodily harm in relation to assaults on
    his then girlfriend and sentenced to  two  years  imprisonment  and  an
    indefinite restraining order. On 26 June 2014  the  Respondent  made  a
    deportation order against him and on 3 July 2014 the Appellant appealed
    against this decision.

 3. He completed his term of imprisonment  on  18  December  2014  and  was
    detained under immigration powers. On 26 January 2015  he  was  granted
    bail and on 7 March 2015 he applied for asylum.   His  application  was
    refused and his appeal against this decision was  dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davey on 17 August 2015.

 4. The Appellant appealed on 22 August 2015 and on 9 September 2015 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foudy refused him permission  to  appeal  and  also
    refused to extend time to appeal. The Appellant renewed his application
    to the Upper Tribunal on 30 September  2015  and  on  16  October  2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor  granted  him  permission  to
    appeal on two of his three grounds.

 5. The Respondent filed her Rule 24 response on 5 November 2015.

 6. On 1 January 2016 the Appellant completed  his  licence  and  his  risk
    level was reduced to medium in relation to risk  of  harm  to  a  named
    person.

Error of Law Hearing

 7. At the error of law hearing, Mr. Walsh submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in law by adopting the test contained  in  the
    old pre-28  July  2014  version  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  also
    submitted that, even when he considered the old rules,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to apply all aspects of the old rule.

 8. He also submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to
    address the risk of persecution which may arise  if  his  tattoos  were
    seen during the military service he would have to serve if he  returned
    to Iran.

 9. Mr. Tarlow relied on his Rule 24 response and said that read as a whole
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision had addressed the  contents  of  the
    amended paragraph 399A. Therefore, he  submitted  that  there  were  no
    material errors of law.

10. Paragraph 398(b) of the Immigration Rules applied to the Respondent  as
    he had been convicted of an offence for which he had been sentenced  to
    less than four years but at least 12 months. When the decision was made
    to deport him from the United Kingdom  and  he  appealed  against  this
    decision, the previous version of the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    deportation were in force.  Therefore, in paragraph 22 of  her  refusal
    letter the Respondent referred to the Appellant  needing  to  establish
    that he had been here for a continuous period of at least twenty  years
    and that he had no ties in Iran. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  adopted
    this test in paragraph 5 of his decision.

11. However, the Immigration Rules were amended and from 28 July  2014  the
    version of paragraph 399A which the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  to
    apply read:

         "This paragraph applies ... if

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
             his life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported".

12. The Rules also made it clear that where Article 8  was  raised  in  the
    context of deportation under Part 13 of  the  Rules,  the  claim  under
    Article 8 will only succeed where the requirements of the rules  as  at
    28 July 2014 are met, regardless of when the  notice  of  intention  to
    deport or the deportation order, as appropriate was served.

13. Mr. Tarlow did not dispute that this was the case  but  submitted  that
    the new rule was very similar to the previous one.

14. I find that this is not the case. The previous rule required  at  least
    twenty years continuous residence but the new rule  only  requires  the
    Appellant to establish that he has been here for most of his  life.  He
    may well be able to show this as he entered the United Kingdom when  he
    was nine and he is now 22 years old.

15. The second limb of the previous rule was that an appellant had to  show
    that he had lost all ties with his country of origin. To succeed  under
    the amended Rules an appellant has to show  that  he  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom and  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to integration there. I find that these are  very
    different tests.

16. Furthermore, the fact  that  his  father  was  granted  refugee  status
    because of his fear of persecution in Iran and that the  Appellant  has
    tattoos which the authorities are likely to disapprove of are  elements
    which he can rely on under the new Rules but which he would not be able
    to rely upon under the old rules.

17.  Mr.  Tarlow  also  relied  on  the   case   of   Bossade   (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015]  UKUT  00415  (IAC).  However,  in
    paragraph 5 of its head note the Upper Tribunal found paragraph 399A no
    longer looks at 'ties' per se but  at  the  more  inclusive  notion  of
    integration and obstacles thereto. By requiring  focus  on  integration
    both in relation to a person's circumstances in the UK as  well  as  in
    the country of origin, the new  Rules  achieve  a  much  more  holistic
    assessment of an appellant's circumstances.

18. He also relied on paragraph 25 of Bossade and  noted  that  deportation
    was always in the public interest. However, at the end of the paragraph
    the Upper Tribunal found that the new rule does not  as  such  preclude
    time in prison from being considered as to whether social and  cultural
    integration is shown but its terms may leave very little scope for such
    argument.

19. In relation to the second grounds of appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    noted in paragraph 15 of his decision that the Appellant did  not  wish
    to do military service but he did  not  go  on  to  give  any  detailed
    consideration of the consequence of his tattoos being discovered during
    military service.  Therefore, I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    did not apply the necessary anxious scrutiny  to  all  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's asylum appeal.

20. Taking all of this into account, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Davey made material errors of law in his decision.

Decision

1.   I allow the Appellant's appeal on grounds two and three of his
    application to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey.

3.   I remit the Appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
    novo hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davey.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                      Date:  8 February 2016
Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

