
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01203/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th April 2014 and 11th June 2014           |On 25th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE bean
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Liban Deria Khaure

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Toal of Counsel instructed by Brent Community Law
Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Callow and Mrs Schmitt JP made following a  hearing
    at Kingston Crown Court on 9th January 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a national of Somalia born on 1st  February  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK on a family reunion visa in July 2007 as  the  spouse
    of a refugee, and was subsequently convicted of a sexual assault  under
    Section 3 of the Sexual Offences  Act  2003  and  sentenced  to  twelve
    months' imprisonment  at  Bristol  Crown  Court  on  12th  March  2008.
    Thereafter he was served with a notice of liability to deportation  and
    he made a claim for asylum.

 3. On 3rd June 2008 the Secretary of State made  a  deportation  order  by
    virtue of Section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971  on  conducive
    grounds. The claimant appealed against that decision and his appeal was
    dismissed by what we shall refer to as "the  first  Tribunal"  on  21st
    October 2008.

 4. At that hearing Mr Khaure said that he would be at risk of  persecution
    if returned to Somalia as a member of the  Reer-Maanyo  clan.   He  had
    lived in the Hamarweyne district in Mogadishu and his family  were  all
    killed during the civil war when he was  about  10  years  old.   As  a
    consequence he fled the area  and  went  to  live  in  Jilib  with  his
    neighbours, before moving to Ethiopia when he was 19 or 20.

 5. The first Tribunal disbelieved the claimant's  case  in  its  entirety.
    They noted that he knew little about his clan's leadership, history and
    origins and found it not credible that, if he had continued to live  in
    Somalia until he was 19 or 20, he would not have basic knowledge  about
    his clan or Mogadishu.   They  found  his  evidence  to  be  internally
    discrepant and discrepant  with  that  of  his  wife.   They  were  not
    satisfied that he was from any minority clan,  and  indeed,  given  the
    doubts which they had about his credibility, were not satisfied that he
    was from Southern or Central Somalia and noted that  the  Secretary  of
    State believed that he was from Somaliland or Puntland.

 6. Before the second Tribunal, in 2014, Mr Khaure  accepted  that  he  had
    lied about when he left Somalia because his wife, Fouzia, who had  been
    accepted as a refugee as a member of the minority clan Reer Hamar,  had
    told the Home Office that she had met him in Somalia and she  had  only
    been in Ethiopia for a short time.  He now claimed that in 1994 or 1995
    his family were killed in a bomb attack and he was taken into the  care
    of neighbours who fled for Jilib in Southern Somalia where they  stayed
    for about a year before moving to Ethiopia.  It was there that  he  met
    his future wife.  He had only said that he had stayed in Somalia  until
    he was in his late teens because he did not want to contradict Fouzia's
    earlier evidence.  He did however continue to maintain that  he  was  a
    member of the Reer-Maanyo clan.

 7. The second Tribunal reminded themselves that it was necessary  to  make
    credibility findings on the  evidence.   They  cited  the  decision  of
    Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 000702 and summarised the guidelines set
    out  in  that  case.   They  said  that  in  assessing  the  claimant's
    credibility they took account of his background and the  assessment  of
    Dr Green, a clinical psychologist, who in a report dated 24th July 2011
    concluded that he was a vulnerable person.

 8. They then wrote as follows:-

         "For his part the Appellant has openly  confessed  to  having  lied
         when making his claim for asylum and proceeding with his appeal  in
         2008 and it is from this standpoint that he resolved  to  tell  the
         truth about his  background  and  circumstances  that  led  to  him
         fleeing Somalia in the manner that he did in  proceeding  with  the
         present appeal.  Mindful of the  low  standard  of  proof  and  the
         situation that prevailed in Somalia after the outbreak  of  war  in
         1991 we accept that the facts summarised at paragraph 16 above have
         been established, save that  the  Appellant  is  the  member  of  a
         minority clan.  It is accepted that he has given an explanation  as
         to why he has limited knowledge of his clan on the premise that  he
         left Somalia earlier than he had previously said.  The weight to be
         attached to the Sprakab linguistic report has not  been  placed  in
         issue.  This report summarised at paragraph  17(f)  above,  refutes
         the Appellant's claim to be a member of Reer-Maanyo, a sub-clan  to
         the Reer-Hamar.  As it has not been established that the  Appellant
         is the member of a minority clan it has not been  established  that
         he would be at risk of persecution or a real risk of serious  harm.
         To this extent the Appellant is not entitled  to  protection  under
         the Convention.  Whilst it might be said to  be  a  fact  sensitive
         decision we are guided by the decision in KAB in which it was  held
         that the situation in Mogadishu, by contrast to that when  deciding
         the case of Sufi and Elmi, no longer gave rise to a  real  risk  of
         treatment contrary to Article 3 arising from mere presence.  It  is
         noted that the European Court was not considering Article 15(c)  in
         KAB."

 9. The second Tribunal applied the country guidance case of AMM and others
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    00445 and said that the background evidence showed that there continued
    to be indiscriminate  and  targeted  attacks  within  Mogadishu.   They
    dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds and under Articles 3  and  8  of
    the ECHR, but allowed the appeal under Article 15(c).

The Grounds of Application

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in law in failing to consider that the findings  in
    KAB v Sweden (application  number  886/11)  were  persuasive,  and  had
    misdirected themselves in failing to state  why  the  factual  findings
    made by the European Court were not of relevance when it  was  arguable
    that they provided a material development in the country  situation  in
    Somalia, particularly in relation to Al-Shabab's  lack  of  control  in
    Mogadishu.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  Judge  Zucker  on  21st
    March 2014 who observed that whilst as a general proposition judges are
    encouraged to follow country guidance cases it was arguable, given  the
    findings in KAB, that the panel was required to look at the  extent  to
    which, if at all, the available background material pointed to the need
    to depart from the country guidance case of AMM rather than simply make
    the distinction appearing in the last sentence of paragraph 33  of  the
    determination.





The Hearing on 16th April 2014

12. Both parties made extensive submissions in relation  to  the  potential
    error of law as identified in the grounds and the grant of  submission.



13. By an application filed just  before  the  hearing,  Mr  Jarvis  sought
    permission  from  us  to  amend  his  grounds  and  to  challenge   the
    determination on the basis that there had been a material  misdirection
    in law in the application of Devaseelan.

14. We agreed to allow the amendment, but since Mr Toal had not had time to
    prepare his case on that basis,  it  was  agreed  that  the  matter  be
    adjourned to be resumed on 11th June 2014.

The Secretary of State's Case

15. Mr Jarvis submitted that the  FTT  did  not  accurately  summarise  the
    principles of Devaseelan applicable to the appeal, and failed  to  make
    lawful findings when purporting to apply it.

16. He relied in particular on Guideline 4 which states that:-

         "Facts personal to the Appellant  that  were  not  brought  to  the
         attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were relevant  to
         the issues before him should be treated by the  second  Adjudicator
         with the greatest circumspection."

17. Firstly, he argued, the panel did not refer to the  need  for  greatest
    circumspection and did not properly summarise the longstanding guidance
    of the IAT.  The claimant now states that he was not in Somalia between
    the ages of 10 and 20 but in Ethiopia; his present case,  that  he  had
    lied before the first Tribunal but was telling the  truth  now,  should
    have been approached with caution.

18. Second, the FTT did not properly apply  Devaseelan  when  making  their
    findings.  Simply to state that "the low standard of proof applies"  is
    not a finding and not a lawful approach to the care required in a  case
    of this type where the factual issues have already been decided by  the
    AIT in 2008.  It was imperative, for example, that  the  Tribunal  make
    clear findings about whether the claimant's house had  been  destroyed.
    No reasons at all were  given  for  rejecting  the  myriad  of  adverse
    credibility points raised against him.

19. Third, the judge failed to make  lawful  findings  in  respect  of  the
    absence of the wife at the 2014 hearing.  The FTT was obliged to engage
    with her absence as part of their consideration of the claim.

20. Fourth, the FTT had failed to make lawful  findings  in  respect  of  a
    number  of  matters,  including  the   expert   evidence,   which   was
    inconsistent with the claimant's evidence before the initial  Tribunal,
    and, whilst the evidence from Sprakab was that his dialect matched that
    of Mogadishu, the judge made no reference to it.



The Claimant's response

21. Mr Toal submitted that there was no misapplication  of  the  Devaseelan
    principles.  The core facts relied upon by the claimant were  the  same
    as those which he brought to the attention of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    In any event, the failure to summarise an authority did  not  establish
    that the judge had misunderstood the applicable principles.

22. It should be assumed that, absent any demonstration otherwise, that the
    judge knew what he was required to do.  He relied on Piglowsaka  [1999]
    WLR 1360 at 1372G where Lord Hoffman stated that a judge's decision  is
    to be read:-

         "on the assumption that, unless he has demonstrated  the  contrary,
         the judge knew how  he  should  perform  his  functions  and  which
         matters he should take into account ... An appellate  court  should
         resist the temptation to subvert the principle that they should not
         substitute their own discretion for that of the judge by  a  narrow
         textual analysis which enables them to claim  that  he  misdirected
         himself."

23. He also relied on the leading decisions in Eagle Trust  Company  Ltd  v
    Pigott-Brown [1985] 3 All ER 199, English v Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd
     1 WLR 2409; [2002] EWCA Civ 605,  and RH (Ghana) v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 640 which held that:-

         "... it is not required of a tribunal  of  fact,  particularly  one
         that has heard witnesses, to say more than that  it  fully  accepts
         the evidence of the one witness."

24. He accepted the first proposition of the Devaseelan guidelines that the
    first Adjudicator's determination should always be the  starting  point
    and submitted that this was exactly what the judge  in  this  case  had
    done.  The Tribunal had in mind the adverse factual  findings  made  by
    the first  Tribunal  hearing  the  previous  appeal,  but  subsequently
    identified a number of matters, upon which it was entitled to rely,  to
    reach different findings of fact to them.

25. Those matters include the claimant's confession that he had  lied  when
    he made his asylum claim at the  behest  of  his  wife.  Dr  Green  had
    produced a compelling report which was capable of placing  a  different
    complexion  on  his  evidence,  stating   that   he   had   significant
    difficulties in his intellectual functioning and sought  to  cope  with
    them by having others develop coping strategies for him.  It provided a
    psychological basis for his conduct at the time of  his  first  appeal,
    i.e his lying on the advice of his wife, and an alternative explanation
    for the deficiencies in his testimony. The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    rely on this as a basis for departing from the conclusions of the first
    Tribunal.  The adverse credibility findings made by the first  Tribunal
    lose their force if it was accepted that the  claimant  left  Mogadishu
    when he was 10 years old.

26. With regard to the Sprakab Report, he submitted that  this  was  cogent
    evidence that the claimant was  from  Mogadishu  as  claimed  and  cast
    significant doubt on the conclusions of the first  Tribunal  which  was
    not satisfied that the claimant was from Southern or  Central  Somalia.
    It was compelling evidence that the deficiencies in  his  evidence  did
    not in fact provide a reliable basis for drawing adverse inferences  as
    to his truthfulness.

Our Conclusions

27. We find that the Secretary of State's submissions are made out, and the
    second Tribunal erred both  in  their  application  of  Devaseelan  and
    because the determination is not adequately reasoned.

28. First, paragraph  33  of  the  determination,  cited  above,  does  not
    demonstrate that the second Tribunal had in his mind that the  previous
    findings of the first Tribunal were their starting point. Simply citing
    Devaseelan is not a demonstration that its principles have  been  taken
    into account.  The panel did  not  begin  their  consideration  of  the
    evidence on the basis that the claimant was a person who had been found
    almost entirely incredible by  a  previous  Tribunal.   The  facts  had
    already been adjudicated upon.   It  should  be  noted  that  the  main
    finding of the first Tribunal was that the claimant had lied about this
    clan membership, and he continued to maintain the lie before the second
    Tribunal.

29. What the panel should have done  was  to  take  each  of  the  previous
    findings and to state whether there was any basis  for  departing  from
    them and if so, to give reasons.

30. It is true that the claimant's case before the second Tribunal, that he
    told lies at the behest of his wife and that he left  Somalia  when  he
    was a child, is an explanation for his inability  to  give  any  detail
    about his clan membership and  is  capable  of  producing  a  different
    conclusion.   However,  there  is   no   analysis   of   the   original
    determination,  and  the  fresh  evidence  now  before  them,  and   no
    consideration of how it might produce another result.

31. Moreover, it is difficult to understand why the  report  of  Dr  Green,
    which deals  with  the  claimant's  propensity  to  reoffend,  his  low
    intellectual capacity and his ability to cope  on  return  to  Somalia,
    could be a proper basis for departing from the findings  of  the  first
    Tribunal.  Whilst Dr Green's report is potentially  supportive  of  the
    claimant's case that he lied about timing at the behest of his wife, it
    is not an adequate basis for a finding that he was  telling  the  truth
    about the remainder of his claim.

32. The Sprakab Report is evidence that he comes from the  Mogadishu  area,
    but says nothing about the circumstances of his life there, and was not
    in fact relied upon by the panel as evidence that his account of having
    lost his family in a bomb explosion in Mogadishu when he  was  a  child
    was true, but to  show  that  he  was  not  being  truthful  about  his
    membership of a minority clan.

33. Second, it is not possible from this determination  to  understand  why
    the Tribunal found in the claimant's favour in respect of  his  account
    of  what  happened  to  him  there.   There  was  no  analysis  of  the
    constituent parts of the claim.

34. The Tribunal in AMM did not find that every resident of  Mogadishu  was
    subject to Article 15(c) risk, although at that time, for  most  people
    in Mogadishu there was such a risk.  However, it is only on  the  basis
    of proper findings of fact that an assessment of risk on return can  be
    made, including Article 15(c) risk.

35. For the above reasons, the decision is set aside. It is  therefore  not
    necessary to deal with the arguments in relation to whether  there  was
    an error of law as originally pleaded by the Secretary of State.

36. We indicated our decision at the conclusion of the oral  hearing.  Both
    parties were in agreement that the proper  course  would  be  for  this
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, which in  making  its
    findings of fact will take as its starting point the  determination  of
    2008. The Tribunal will then consider whether any subsequent  evidence,
    including the evidence of Dr Green  and  the  Sprakab  Report  and  any
    further oral evidence from the claimant, should  lead  them  to  depart
    from the 2008 findings.

37. We are aware that a country guidance  case  dealing  with  the  present
    situation in Somalia is to be promulgated very shortly and this  appeal
    should therefore be listed after the promulgation of that case. Listing
    directions are attached. We take the view that the Tribunal  should  be
    freshly constituted.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


