
[pic]
IAC-FH-ar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01386/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2015                 |On 18 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        decio david pereira da silva
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Portugal born on 10 June 1993, as  the
    appellant herein.

2.   He claims to have arrived in this country in 2002 and 2003.  He  has  a
    lengthy criminal history including convictions for arson,  assault  and
    robbery.  The Secretary of State decided to make  a  deportation  order
    against him on 10 July 2014 following a further  conviction  for  arson
    for which he was sentenced to 32 months' detention in a Young Offenders
    Institution.

3.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 9 February 2015.  The appellant was unrepresented before  the  judge
    as he is before me.

4.   Having referred to the appellant's lengthy criminal  record  the  judge
    concluded that there remained a risk of reoffending and that if he  did
    reoffend there was a high  risk  to  the  public  in  respect  of  such
    reoffending.  Those at risk included his mother, his girlfriend and his
    daughter.  The judge concluded there was a  real  likelihood  that  the
    appellant might offend again and he did not accept that  the  appellant
    was fully  sincere  in  his  expressions  of  remorse  and  contrition.
    Furthermore, the index offence was a very serious offence.

5.   The judge found that the appellant had established  a  permanent  right
    of residence although he acknowledged in paragraph 56 that  he  had  no
    documentary evidence to prove that his parents had worked in the United
    Kingdom, thus showing that they were  exercising  treaty  rights.   The
    judge found in paragraph 68 of his  determination  that  the  appellant
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  one
    of the fundamental interests of society and  that  there  were  serious
    grounds of public policy and security.  This was in the  light  of  the
    appellant's series of serious criminal offences and  the  risk  to  the
    public if he offended again.

6.   The judge concluded by considering the issue of proportionality in  the
    light of paragraph 21(6) of the EEA Regulations.  He referred first  to
    the appellant's appalling criminal  record  and  length  of  residence,
    concluding that the appellant had no real contact with  family  members
    in Portugal.  He found that the appellant had a  child  in  the  United
    Kingdom but it was too early to form  a  concluded  view  on  the  best
    interests of the child  and  the  factor  was  neutral.   He  noted  in
    paragraph 77 that there was little documentary  information  about  the
    appellant and to support his  claims.   He  found  that  the  appellant
    represented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to
    society and that the issue of rehabilitation had little weight although
    not no weight in the case.  The judge nevertheless concluded  that  the
    appellant's deportation would not be  proportionate.   He  allowed  the
    appeal.

7.   The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal.   Permission
    was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but Upper Tribunal Judge  Taylor
    granted permission on 8 July 2015, finding it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the  decision  that
    deportation would not be proportionate.  She added that the grounds had
    merit and may be argued generally and if established the  appeal  would
    have to be reheard by a differently constituted Tribunal, since one  of
    the issues to be resolved is whether the appellant had a child  in  the
    UK and if so the nature of the relationship the appellant had, if  any,
    with that child.

8.   At the hearing Mr Melvin relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  his
    skeleton argument.  In the grounds it was argued  that  the  judge  had
    failed to give reasons for finding that the appellant had  a  child  in
    the UK in the absence of DNA evidence  or  a  birth  certificate.   The
    judge had acknowledged that little documentary evidence had been put in
    to support the appellant's case.  The respondent pointed out  that  the
    judge had found that the appellant had support in the  UK  but  not  in
    Portugal, whereas the NOMS report had stated that the appellant posed a
    risk  to  his  mother,  girlfriend,  daughter  and  the   public,   and
    accordingly the judge had erred in considering the  appellant's  actual
    or alleged family members as "support".  The  grounds  point  out  that
    during the course of the determination the judge had recorded that  the
    appellant said he had a gambling addiction and still had it.  There was
    no documentary evidence to prove that  the  appellant  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.  The judge had  misapplied  the  relevant
    burden of proof which remained on the appellant.

9.   In the grounds it was argued that the judge's findings under Article  8
    added nothing to the findings in relation to the EEA  Regulations.   In
    the skeleton argument it was additionally argued by Mr Melvin  that  in
    relation to Article 8 the judge ought to have considered Section 117 of
    the 2002 Act.  In his oral submissions Mr Melvin relied on  the  points
    that had been made in the grounds and skeleton argument and added  that
    the judge's findings came close to being irrational and perverse.

10.  The appellant confirmed that he had been waiting for the results  of  a
    recent DNA test and I was given a copy of a letter dated  11  September
    2015 referring to a DNA paternity test which would be available  on  15
    September - the day after the hearing.  The appellant said his  partner
    was in court.  I was told that she had paid for the DNA  herself.   She
    was aged 19.  The appellant and her partner were back together over the
    last five or six months.

11.  Having carefully  considered  the  representations  on  each  side  and
    having reminded myself that I can only interfere with the  decision  if
    it was materially  flawed  in  law,  I  find  there  is  force  in  the
    suggestion that the determination is materially lacking in reasons, and
    such reasons as have been given  have  been  made  in  the  absence  of
    appropriate supporting evidence.  The findings that the judge made,  as
    the respondent  contends,  make  it  difficult  to  understand  why  he
    concluded that deportation would not be proportionate.  The findings in
    relation to Article 8 add nothing and as Mr Melvin argues, it would  be
    necessary to take into account the amendments made by the 2014 Act.

12.  In the  circumstances  I  have  concluded  that  the  determination  is
    materially flawed in law.

13.  Having  reached  that  conclusion  I  find  that  I  should  apply  the
    assessment of Judge Taylor in granting permission in  this  case.   She
    concluded that if the grounds were established that  the  appeal  would
    have to be reheard by a differently constituted Tribunal.   It  appears
    implicit that such a rehearing would be before the First-tier  Tribunal
    since a hearing before the Upper Tribunal would involve  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal in any event.

14.  She was doubtless of the view that this was a case in  which  what  was
    said at paragraph 7.2(b) of the Senior President's Practice  Directions
    applied and I agree that this is the appropriate outcome in this  case.



15.  I note that there are two potential  developments  since  the  previous
    hearing of potential significance.  The first is that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his partner is said  to  be  re-established  and  his
    partner was present in court, and, secondly, that DNA evidence has been
    sought to support the claimed paternity of the child.

16.  Accordingly in the light of what  was  said  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Taylor this appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
    afresh by a different First-tier Judge.

    Notice of Decision

    The determination is flawed by a material error of law.  Accordingly  I
    set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be heard afresh before a
    different First-tier Judge.

    Anonymity Direction

    The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and no anonymity direction
    is made.

    Fee award

    I make no fee award


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr

