
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01652/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2015                     |On 29 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                           colleen elaine robinson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Furner, Solicitor from Birnberg Peirce &
Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this appeal touches on the welfare  of  children  the  relevant
    facts are not intimate and we see  no  need  for  an  order  restraining
    publication of any details about this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal's  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent on
    17 July 2014 to refuse to revoke a deportation order made against her on
    26 November 1998.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica. She has shown a disregard for the
    immigration rules and the criminal law that is discreditable.

 4. She is a citizen of Jamaica.  She first arrived in the United Kingdom in
    February 1997 and in April 1997 she claimed asylum.  The application was
    refused but she remained in the United  Kingdom  and  committed  serious
    criminal offences.  On 13 February 1998 at the Crown  Court  sitting  at
    Knightsbridge she was convicted of two offences of  being  concerned  in
    the supply of class A controlled drugs  and  one  offence  of  supplying
    class A controlled drugs. She was sentenced to 30  months'  imprisonment
    as well as other orders.  She was  recommended  for  deportation  and  a
    deportation order was signed on 26 November 1998.  She was  deported  on
    20 March 1999 and on 2 April 1999, barely two weeks later, she  returned
    to the United Kingdom in breach of the terms of  the  deportation  order
    using a forged passport.  She made an application of some kind to remain
    as a student in February 2001.  The application was refused and  in  May
    2001 she was arrested for drugs offences.  She was removed as an illegal
    entrant on 23 August 2001. Slightly less than a year later, on 19 August
    2002 she was given six months' leave to enter in the false  identity  of
    Tina Tricia Clarence and on 10 February 2003, using that false identity,
    she was given leave to remain in stages until 17 February 2006.

 5. On 27 September 2005 she was encountered and identified  as  an  illegal
    entrant in the identity of Donna Faith Thelwell.

 6. On 10 March 2006 she applied to remain on the basis that  removal  would
    be contrary to the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 7. On 13 July 2006 she  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of  deception  and
    sentenced to 60 days' imprisonment.

 8. On 4 July 2008 she was served  with  notice  of  illegal  entry  in  the
    identity of Colleen Elaine Robinson  which  she  accepted  as  her  true
    identity.

 9. The human rights application mentioned above was refused on 29 September
    2008.  She appealed that decision unsuccessfully,  judicial  review  was
    refused and on 29 March 2010 she was removed.

10. By letter dated 11 April 2013 she applied for the deportation  order  to
    be revoked.

11. The application  for  revocation  was  made  at  the  same  time  as  an
    application for leave to enter as a visitor.  For reasons that  are  not
    clear details of that application were not included in the  papers.   Mr
    Jarvis  suggested  the  explanation  was  that  the  refusal  of   entry
    clearance, unlike the refusal to revoke a deportation order, was not  in
    the circumstances subject to appeal.  Our experience of the operation of
    government departments makes us  inclined  to  accept  this  explanation
    which, although Mr Jarvis clearly offered it in good faith, was  only  a
    suggestion.  However we do find it regrettable that the system does  not
    have sufficient flexibility for those involved in  the  appeals  process
    not to realise the potential importance, or at least relevance,  of  the
    whole terms of the application being before the Tribunal.  The Secretary
    of State's case could not be in any way disadvantaged  unfairly  by  the
    disclosure of all that was said and although we do not think there is  a
    sinister reason for the non-disclosure failure  to  provide  the  papers
    relating to the visitor application is the kind  of  blinkered  approach
    which could lead to an unjustified sense of grievance.

12. The Notice of Immigration Decision is dated 15 May  2013  but  there  is
    nothing in our copy to show it was ever sent to  the  appellant  and  we
    wonder if we have been shown a draft decision.

13. Be that as it may, the  appellant  made  the  application  in  the  name
    Colleen Elaine Robinson and drew attention to  the  fact  that  she  had
    previously used the name Donna Thelwell.

14. She said that the main purpose of a visit to the United  Kingdom  was  a
    family visit intending to last for one month starting in July 2013.

15. The appellant indicated that she had several children and three of  them
    would travel with her.  It is not apparent  from  the  application  form
    that they are in fact British citizens.  They are Jounte  Clarence  born
    on 9 September 1997 and so now aged 17 years, Bryana Ashley  Smith  born
    on 21 July 2006 and now aged nearly 9 years  and  Jayden  Daykwan  Smith
    born on 24 May 2008 and so now 8  years  old.   The  appellant  answered
    questions about her income and said that "me and kids' father" would pay
    for the travel to the United Kingdom and the only cost to her personally
    would be the cost of her ticket.  She answered frankly  questions  about
    her past immigration history and her convictions although  we  can  only
    see reference to one sentence of imprisonment and that was for 30 months
    in 1997.  In answer to questions  on  the  forms  she  showed  that  she
    intended to stay with her daughter in the United Kingdom at her  address
    in Luton.

16. The appellant was interviewed on 15 May 2013.  She  explained  that  she
    wanted to visit her daughter, her grandchildren and her son who  was  in
    prison.  She confirmed that she intended to stay for  four  weeks  or  a
    month.

17. When prompted she also admitted that she had been sent to prison for  60
    days for theft from a shop.

18. Perhaps not  entirely  unsurprisingly,  given  her  history,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer did not believe her assertions about accommodation  or
    length of visit but also  refused  the  application  with  reference  to
    paragraph 320(11) saying that there was nothing to justify issuing entry
    clearance given that the Rules require an application should normally be
    refused because of her past misconduct, in  particular  her  overstaying
    and being removed to the public expense, and additionally  refused  with
    reference to paragraph 320(19) because her exclusion is conducive to the
    public good.

19. Given her  history  an  interested  observer  unfamiliar  with  ways  of
    immigration control and the need to consider  often  conflicting  rights
    might wonder how she might  ever  have  thought  the  application  could
    possibly have succeeded.

20. The answer lies in the letter from Birnberg Pierce dated 11  April  2013
    to the Entry Clearance Officer at  Kingston.   It  emphasises  that  the
    appellant intended only a short visit to the United Kingdom but asserted
    that she was  entitled  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  under  European
    Community law.  The crucial paragraph is the third paragraph and  I  set
    it out below:

         "Because these children are British citizens they are also European
         nationals and citizens, and are therefore  entitled  to  enjoy  the
         rights and benefits of European citizens to live within the  EEA  -
         in this case to live in the United  Kingdom.   They  are,  however,
         entirely dependent on our client and cannot visit or  stay  in  the
         United Kingdom without her.  Our  client  wishes  to  come  to  the
         United Kingdom for a temporary visit with  the  children,  so  that
         they can see other relatives and friends  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         These relatives and friends would not be able  to  look  after  the
         children, even for a short period of  time,  and  therefore  it  is
         necessary for our client to come with them.  To prevent the British
         children exercising their rights as  British/European  citizens  in
         the UK would be contrary to European Community law, as explained in
         the case of Ruiz Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09."

21. The Secretary of State did not agree and gave reasons in a letter  dated
    11 July 2014.

22. The letter sets out the appellant's immigration  history  including  her
    criminal activities.  It acknowledges  that  it  is  an  application  to
    facilitate the rights of EEA (in this case British) nationals and  noted
    that there was no evidence that  the  children  were  other  than  well-
    established in Jamaica and concluded there were no  grounds  that  could
    make it "unduly harsh" for the children to remain there.

23. At paragraph 24 of the letter the respondent  described  the  children's
    status as British citizens as being a "significant weighty factor in the
    consideration of whether to revoke" the deportation order.

24. The letter then  pointed  out  that  the  children  could  resume  their
    British citizenship when they were old enough to do so (this  must  mean
    when it is practical; it is not suggested that they are not entitled  to
    settle in the United Kingdom until they reach their majority) and  their
    family links can be preserved by other means.

25. The letter then addressed in more  detail  the  appellant's  criminality
    and referred to the determination of her appeal on human rights  grounds
    promulgated in February 2009.  The  letter  said  that  the  appellant's
    conduct in the United Kingdom had been "appalling" and  her  convictions
    "tip heavily in the balance against her and in favour of the public need
    to be protected from her and her activities".

26. The letter concluded that the deportation order should  not  be  revoked
    and there were no exceptional facts raised to warrant a  departure  from
    the ordinary position.

27. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal are  in  the  following
    terms:

         "The decision is wrong in law, in particular the decision fails  to
         give sufficient weight and/or apply the law  appropriately  to  the
         status of the appellant's  three  children  as  European  citizens.
         Further it failed to pay sufficient regard to  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's conviction is now spent."

28. The  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Youngerwood  who
    dismissed the appeal.  It is clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  would
    have had no hesitation in dismissing the appeal apart from "the Zambrano
    issue".

29. It is also clear that the First-tier Tribunal  understood  the  argument
    that the appellant should be allowed to enter the United Kingdom so that
    her EU national could exercise their rights.

30. Whether or not the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  right  in  law  his
    reasons for his decision were extremely clear.  Having said in paragraph
    J(q) that the appellant had recognised there was a sister in the  United
    Kingdom and referred to there being  relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom
    said:

         "I am not prepared to speculate that there are no  other  relatives
         in the UK, given  the  total  absence  of  any  evidence  from  the
         appellant as to her relatives in  the  UK  and  her  intentions  in
         relation  to  the  proposed  short  visit.   That   conclusion   is
         reinforced by the findings in the earlier determination as  to  the
         circumstances of the children being looked after when the appellant
         was in prison.  The  appellant,  on  my  findings,  is  not  to  be
         considered as a family member within the EEA Regulations,  for  the
         simple fact that she is not established  to  be  dependent  on  her
         children and is, therefore, not an ascendant relative but that begs
         the question of whether it is established  by  the  appellant,  the
         burden of proof being on her, that there are no other relatives  in
         the UK who are able and willing to look after her children,  should
         they wish to exercise their rights of residence as EU citizens."

31. In short, although the arguments of the law were  all  very  interesting
    the case turned on its facts and the crucial facts were  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  needed  their
    mother's support to exercise their treaty rights.

32.  The  appellant  appealed.   The  grounds  extended   to   some   eleven
    paragraphs.  Permission was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr
    Jarvis was concerned that Mr Furner's skeleton argument, which  was  not
    provided until the morning of the hearing, went beyond the scope of  the
    grant of permission to appeal.  The courts should generally be  slow  to
    decide cases on pleading points and  human  rights  cases  involved  the
    welfare of children really should be determined on their  merits  rather
    than procedural steps unless fairness to  all  parties  really  requires
    strict interpretation of the Rules and arguments submitted.  It  was  Mr
    Jarvis's contention  not  so  much  that  the  argument  should  not  be
    entertained but rather if it went beyond the  scope  of  what  had  been
    considered he  should  be  given  opportunity  to  consider  the  matter
    further.  If there were points that were entirely fresh then  permission
    needed to be sought.

33. We agree with that analysis.  We do not agree that there is anything  in
    the skeleton argument that should not have been reasonably anticipated.

34. Mr Furner submitted that the proper legal test was to be drawn from  the
    analogous cases of removing a parent from the United Kingdom.   He  said
    that removal was not permissible when it would "compel" or  "oblige"  or
    "require" the EU national child to leave.  He further submitted that the
    word "compel" which came from case law should not  be  interpreted  with
    strict literary statutory force.  Very  few  cases  would  truly  compel
    something if that meaning was  given.   There  must  be  an  element  of
    practicality and reasonableness involved in deciding if the  appellant's
    removal prevented the children from exercising their rights.

35. We do not agree with Mr Jarvis that the skeleton  argument  goes  beyond
    the scope of grant.

36. Where we do disagree very strongly with  Mr  Furner  is  his  contention
    that  it  is  immaterial  whether  a  short  stay   or   settlement   is
    contemplated.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  then  Secretary  of  State
    dealing with the  application  were  dealing  with  an  application  not
    brought by children who need no permission to be in the  United  Kingdom
    but by a parent who expressed a desire to be in the United  Kingdom  for
    the purpose of the visit lasting about a  month.   We  do  not  have  to
    consider the refusal of that application on its  merits  except  to  the
    extent the children are involved  but  it  is  clear  that  she  has  an
    appalling immigration history and although  the  index  offence  is  now
    spent, there is significant more recent misbehaviour.

37. Neither do we see any basis for  criticising  the  earlier  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.  Human rights add nothing to
    the core point here which is the exercise of EU rights by the  children.
    We do not agree that the respondent  should  have  approached  the  case
    expressed to be permission to enter for a short time as  if  it  were  a
    settlement case.  The respondent should have addressed its mind to  what
    the appellant wanted and the appellant wanted permission to stay  for  a
    short time.   If  that  permission  had  been  granted  British  citizen
    children could be expected to travel with her to the United  Kingdom  to
    visit their family.  We incline to the view, without  actually  deciding
    it, that an EU right might have the effect of "trumping" exclusion in  a
    case such as this.  However that is only relevant if it is necessary for
    the EU right to be exercised.

38. We repeat what was contemplated here was a short holiday  for  visitors.
    The appellant has not, as far as we can see addressed her  mind  at  any
    point at all to explaining in detail why the  children  have  to  travel
    with her or why she has to remain with them while they exercise a  short
    stay in the United Kingdom.  Although the children are  young  they  are
    not so small that they cannot fly without their mother being  with  them
    and they could be expected to travel in the care of  the  older  sibling
    who is now close on 17 years old.  It  was  not  really  touched  on  in
    interview or in the application.  The  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the father could not assist was not really material.   The
    appellant must prove her case.

39. Mr Furner contended  that  the  appellant  was  preparing  her  case  in
    response to the refusal letter and the reasons for refusal did  not  say
    that the children could manage without her for the purpose  of  a  short
    stay.  That is undeniably right and is something that has taxed us.   To
    an extent appellants do prepare their cases to deal with the reasons for
    refusal advanced by the respondent.  That does not alter the  fact  that
    it is fundamental to this case to explain why the children  need  to  be
    cared for by their mother for the short period contemplated.   This  has
    not been done by anyone and the First-tier Tribunal in the circumstances
    was entitled to find, as it did, that the appellant had not  proved  her
    case.

40. We understand Mr Furner's contention that there is a  certain  irony  in
    it being harder for the appellant to prove that she is entitled to visit
    the United Kingdom for a short stay than it might be  to  prove  she  is
    entitled to settle in the United Kingdom.  We do not  know  that  to  be
    right.  If she had wanted to settle the case should have been looked  at
    from a different perspective but  even  if  it  is  right  that  is  not
    relevant.  The respondent was responding to  the  application  that  the
    appellant had made which was for permission to be in the United  Kingdom
    for a short time.  The only way she could hope to succeed in that is  if
    she could be admitted as the carer  of  children  exercising  their  EEA
    rights and she wholly failed to do that.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    has not indulged in speculation as alleged.  As is  so  often  the  case
    with  the  benefit  of  hindsight  the  determination  could  have  been
    expressed a little differently on the point but a fair reading of it  is
    quite clear.  The appellant has not shown why her presence is  necessary
    for what was proposed.  All the judge was doing in referring to the role
    of other relatives is making the point that there were  reasons  in  the
    background to think it was not fanciful or unjustifiably speculative  to
    suggest that the children could be looked after in a way  that  did  not
    involve their mother being with them.  It was never contemplated in  the
    application that the children would be  permanently  deprived  of  their
    mother's support and the case should not have been assessed as  if  that
    was in issue.  It was not.

41. Although Mr Furner and Mr Jarvis have  made  thoughtful  submissions  on
    the law and we appreciate the care taken by both of them to explain  the
    legal basis behind this c ase, this is on  its  proper  understanding  a
    case decided on its facts.  The decision based on the facts was the only
    reasonable conclusion that could be  made  because  of  the  absence  of
    evidence and the evidence was not there because the point had  not  been
    addressed by the appellant and it should have been.

    Notice of Decision

    There is no material error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal and we
    dismiss this appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 May 2015                    |

