
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01691/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JAYESH PATEL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Barca
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson whereby she allowed the respondent's
    appeal against what was regarded by the  Secretary  of  State  and  was
    dealt with before her as a refusal to revoke a deportation order  which
    had been made against him pursuant to Section 5(2) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.

2.   That was made as a result of his conviction back in 2001  for  using  a
    false passport in order to attempt to travel to New York. He said  then
    that he had arrived in this country  in  December  1999  but  later  in
    interview appeared to accept that it was not in  fact  until  March  or
    April 2001 that he entered this country by using a false passport.

3.    He  appeared  before  Uxbridge  Magistrates  Court  charged  with  two
    offences, one of obtaining services by  deception  and  the  other  for
    possessing a false  instrument  and  he  was  sentenced  to  concurrent
    sentences of six months' imprisonment and he was then  recommended  for
    deportation.  The then Secretary of State signed a deportation order on
    9 November 2001 but it seems that that order was never served upon  the
    respondent.  In any event he applied for asylum. That  application  was
    refused in December 2003 and his appeal against that was  dismissed  in
    May and he became appeal rights exhausted on 17 May 2004.

4.   However nothing was done to remove him despite  the  deportation  order
    following his conviction.  It seems that he  met  his  present  partner
    when she came to this country on a visit visa  in  November  2007.  She
    overstayed but she and the respondent were married in August 2008 in  a
    Hindu ceremony, but there has  not  been  a  formal  marriage  in  this
    country. However it is accepted that she is his partner and indeed they
    have a daughter who was born in September 2009.

5.   In 2010 his then legal representatives made an  application  for  leave
    to remain including his partner and  child  as  dependents.   That  was
    under the legacy arrangement  but  that  application  was  rejected  in
    February 2011 and in April of that year the family was served  with  an
    IS151A.

6.   The solicitors said that they had had no response to their  application
    for ILR although it appears there had been.  However, in June 2013  the
    Older Live Cases Unit requested the respondent to provide any recent or
    new information for consideration as part of his claim for  ILR.   That
    was produced but in 2014 there  was  a  lengthy  refusal  letter  which
    indicated that there was no basis in the view of the Secretary of State
    whereby the respondent and his dependants  should  be  able  to  remain
    here.

7.   However, the matter was  dealt  with  on  the  basis  that  it  was  an
    application to revoke the deportation order and that decision was  made
    over a year ago now, on 12 August 2014.

8.   The decision considered in some detail the Article 8 claim made by  the
    respondent insofar as also it affected his wife and child.   Of  course
    Section 55 was material in relation to the child. But it was said  that
    the presumption was that the public interest  favoured  deportation  in
    accordance with paragraph 396 of the Immigration Rules and to an extent
    the foundation of  the  decision  rested  on  the  conviction  and  the
    deportation that was regarded as desirable and in the  public  interest
    as a result of such a conviction.

9.   Judge Robinson in considering  the  question  whether  the  refusal  to
    revoke was in accordance with the Rules took into account the fact that
    under the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act the conviction for which  six
    months  in  total  had  been  imposed  would  have  been   subject   to
    rehabilitation after five years, thus in August 2006.

10.  Furthermore, by now ten years have  elapsed  and  there  is  a  general
    approach by the Secretary of State where that is the situation and  the
    sentence was under four years, it can be taken into account as a reason
    in itself for possibly revoking a deportation order.  It  is  a  matter
    that is to be taken into account, it is not automatic in these cases.

11.  The grounds of appeal and  the  leave  to  appeal  were  based  on  two
    matters. First it was said to be arguable that the immigration decision
    by the Secretary  of  State  was  exempt  from  the  Rehabilitation  of
    Offenders Act 1974.  It was also said  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    consider the Article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration  Rules  as
    they were at the date of the refusal, that is  August  2014.   We  will
    come to the question of Article 8 in due course but we concentrate  for
    the moment on the Rules in relation to deportation.

12.  Rule 390 of the Immigration Rules deals generally with revocation of  a
    deportation order and it provides :-
         "390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will  be
         reconsidered in the light of all the  circumstances  including  the
         following:
             (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;
             (ii)  any representations made in support of revocation;
             (iii)     the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                  maintenance of effective immigration control; and
             (iv)  the   interests   of   the   applicant   including   any
                  compassionate circumstances."

13.  In relation to rights of appeal against a  decision  not  to  revoke  a
    deportation order Rules starting  with  396  are  material.   Rule  396
    provides
         "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall  be
         that the public interest requires deportation.  It is in the public
         interest to deport  where  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
         deportation order in accordance with Section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007."

14.  This particular deportation order following the conviction in 2001  was
    not covered by Section 32 of the Borders Act and it was not a  question
    of automatic deportation.

15.  Rule 397 says that a deportation order will  not  be  made  if  removal
    pursuant to the order will be contrary to the Human  Rights  Convention
    but if it would not be contrary to those obligations it would  only  be
    in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation is
    outweighed.

16.  It is to be noted that in dealing with deportation and Article  8  Rule
    398 only covers cases where there has been a sentence  of  imprisonment
    of at least twelve months. It is not necessary for us to go  into  full
    detail, the Rules can if necessary be referred  to.   Accordingly  Rule
    399 onwards do not apply but 396 and 397 are material.

17.  The whole purpose behind the deportation of one  who  has  committed  a
    criminal offence is that deportation  should  take  place  as  soon  as
    reasonably possible.  Delays such as have occurred  in  this  case  are
    little short of scandalous.  We have offences which were serious enough
    but there is no  suggestion  that  the  respondent  has  committed  any
    further criminal offences apart from staying here when he  should  not,
    and certainly there is nothing against him in respect of any reasons to
    believe that it would be conducive to the public interest  that  he  be
    the subject of a  deportation  order  save  only  one  based  upon  the
    original conviction.

18.  The sooner it is appreciated that these  delays  are  unacceptable  the
    better.  However in the circumstances of this case there is no question
    but that having regard to the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act which was
    material then, and the fact that now ten years have elapsed, indeed had
    elapsed by the  time  the  application  was  made  even  in  2013,  the
    Secretary of State should consider whether  the  deportation  order  is
    still required.

19.  We should perhaps refer to the 2012 Act provisions. It is  Section  140
    which provides no rehabilitation for certain immigration or nationality
    purposes and provides that the relevant sections of the  Rehabilitation
    of Offenders Act do not apply in relation to any proceedings in respect
    of a relevant immigration decision or a relevant  nationality  decision
    or otherwise for the  purposes  of  or  in  connection  with  any  such
    decision.  The transitional provisions  in  Section  141   of  the  Act
    provide  by  subsection  9B  that  Section  140  does  not  affect  any
    applications for immigration or  nationality  decisions  made  but  not
    finally determined before the commencement date.

20.  That shows beyond any doubt that the provisions of the 2012 Act do  not
    apply in the circumstances of this case.

21.  Accordingly as we have said, these convictions  were  rehabilitated  in
    2006.

22.  So far as the Article 8 side is concerned, the  Immigration  Judge  did
    consider it. There were very detailed  reasons  given  in  the  refusal
    letter why in the view of the Secretary of State the respondent was not
    able to rely on Article 8 and indeed that it was proportionate that  he
    should be removed.

23.  Judge Robinson dealt with the Article 8 aspect relatively briefly.  She
    referred to Huang. She said she considered the family and private life,
    recognised that his partner's immigration status was, as  it  was  put,
    problematic. She is here it  seems  unlawfully,  and  has  been  for  a
    significant period of time.   But nowhere did she consider the detailed
    matters that have to be taken into account in accordance with the Rules
    as they applied at the relevant time. Indeed it seems  clear  that  the
    respondent is not able to bring himself within the Rules that relate to
    Article 8 and will have to depend upon a decision  outside  the  Rules.
    But  it  seems  to  us  in  the  circumstances  that  Judge  Robinson's
    conclusion in relation to Article 8 was regrettably superficial and did
    not deal with the real issues that had  been  raised  in  the  decision
    letter.

24.  However for the reasons that we have given, we take the view  that  she
    was correct to say that the decision  not  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order was one which should not stand, that the Secretary of  State  had
    not properly taken account of the rehabilitation and of the  length  of
    time that had elapsed since the commission of the offences and the fact
    that there was nothing against  the  respondent's  conduct  other  than
    overstaying since that time.

25.  We make it clear that the fact that  we  uphold  the  Judge  Robinson's
    decision in allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  does  not
    mean and cannot mean  that  the  respondent  has  a  right  to  remain.
    Although we reject the respondent's  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Robinson that the deportation order should be revoked,  we  allow
    the appeal in  relation  to  her  decision  on  human  rights  grounds.
    Technically I think all that we need  say  is  that  her  reasoning  in
    respect of Article  8  cannot  stand  and  therefore  her  decision  in
    relation to Article 8 cannot form  the  basis  of  any  application  or
    cannot be used by the respondent to his  benefit  in  relation  to  any
    decision that will have to be made in relation to leave to remain.

26.  It seems to us in the circumstances that  the  sensible  course  is  to
    remit the matter to the Secretary of State so  that  the  Secretary  of
    State can decide and give further reasons which are not based upon  the
    commission of the offence and the decision to deport based  upon  those
    convictions as to whether leave to remain should be permitted.

27.  Since a year has elapsed since  the  decision  was  made  it  would  be
    sensible for the Secretary of State to require the respondent  to  make
    representations on the  up-to-date  position  as  to  why  he  and  his
    dependents should now be permitted to remain in  the  country  and  the
    Secretary of State will then make a decision one way or the  other  and
    that may well be subject to an appeal if removal is  still  maintained.
    But that wiill involve a proper and detailed consideration on appeal if
    the decision to remove which will be a decision  under  Section  10  is
    maintained. The full circumstances will be taken into account.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

For the reasons set out in the decision,  the  matter  is  remitted  to  the
Secretary of State to reconsider any claim by the respondent to remain.

[pic]

Signed   Date: 12 November 2015
Mr Justice Collins

