
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01993/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 May 2014                                  |On 28th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              meiran umer fatah

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Green


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Meiran Umer Fatah, was born on 5 February 1974 and is a
    male citizen of Iraq.  I shall hereafter refer  to  the  respondent  as
    "the appellant" and to the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    as "the respondent" (as they were respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant appealed against a decision of the respondent
    dated 4 October 2013 to  make  a  deportation  order.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a determination promulgated on 30 December  2013,  allowed
    the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary of State  appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal and was granted permission by Judge  McGeachy  on
    10 February 2014.

 2. Relying on MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 112 and  Masih  (deportation  -
    public interest - basic principles) Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00046,  the
    grounds of appeal (and Miss Johnstone in her oral  submissions)  assert
    that the Tribunal failed to carry out a proper and fair analysis of the
    evidence in order to assess  the  proportionality  of  the  appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom.  Notwithstanding the  fact  that  this
    appeal postdates the changes to the  Immigration  Rules  (which,  inter
    alia, introduced Appendix FM) there was  no  mention  whatever  of  the
    Rules and  their  application  in  the  determination.   The  two-stage
    process detailed in MF was overlooked entirely by the Tribunal.

 3. I find that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set
    aside.  I have reached that finding for the  following  reasons.    The
    Tribunal  noted  that  the  appellant  had  received   twelve   months'
    imprisonment for a criminal offence "as long ago as  4  October  2002".
    The Tribunal found there to have been a "singular lack of  urgency"  on
    the part of the respondent in allowing "the appellant  to  establish  a
    family  and  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  having  formed  a
    relationship in 2006 with a British national with  whom  he  has  lived
    since 2007".  The Tribunal noted [23] that the appellant's partner  has
    a child "which clearly the evidence indicates the appellant has adopted
    as his own ..." At [24],  the  Tribunal  found  that  the  respondent's
    "decision to make a deportation order is to totally ignore the position
    of the appellant, his partner and their child" and that such a decision
    was "not in accordance with the law".  The Tribunal went on  to  assert
    that it had "taken into account the  guidance  given  in  the  case  of
    Razgar."  The Tribunal considered "the respondent's  behaviour  towards
    the appellant [2] to amount to "an abuse of process."  The Tribunal  at
    [28] found that the respondent had not  "give  a  proper  and  detailed
    consideration to the obligations upon him (sic) under Section 55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009".  The respondent "cannot
    decide the burden of proof upon him (sic) and satisfy us that his (sic)
    decision is in accordance with the law ..."

 4.  The  tone  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  is   somewhat
    intemperate.  The Tribunal clearly was not impressed by the  fact  that
    the respondent  had  taken  several  years  following  the  appellant's
    criminal conviction  to  seek  to  deport  him.   However,  whilst  the
    Tribunal was, of course, entitled to give weight to that factor in  the
    proportionality exercise, it should not have done so to  the  exclusion
    (following MF) of a proper consideration  of  the  position  under  the
    Immigration Rules and of all the relevant facts (for  and  against  the
    appellant's deportation) which might indicate whether  his  deportation
    was lawful.  There was, for example, no consideration whatsoever of the
    public interest concerned with the deportation of a  foreign  criminal.
    No attempt was made to engage  with  the  refusal  letter  (which,  for
    example, explained why the appellant had not been  considered  eligible
    for voluntary return to Iraq).  The strong impression left  by  reading
    the determination is that the Tribunal has taken one aspect of the case
    (the delay in making the immigration decision) and has  determined  the
    appeal solely by reference to it.  By failing to carry out a structured
    and   even-handed   analysis   of   even-handed   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of the decision to deport the appellant constitutes  an
    error of law such that the determination falls to be set aside.

 5. Miss Green submitted that the facts of  the  case  indicated  only  one
    possible outcome to the appeal, namely that  the  appellant  should  be
    allowed to remain in this country with his partner and her child.  I do
    not deny that, on the face of the facts, the  appellant  has  a  strong
    case.  He does  not,  however,  have  an  unarguably  strong  case.   A
    Tribunal, properly directing itself  as  to  the  law,  might  reach  a
    different outcome.  The next Tribunal will need to apply principles  of
    MF and to carry out a two-stage process involving an application of the
    relevant Immigration Rules followed,  should  it  be  necessary,  by  a
    consideration of the Article 8 ECHR  grounds.   I  do  not  accept  the
    submission that the need to carry out a two-stage process  only  arises
    where there is some possibility that an appellant may qualify under the
    Immigration Rules; Miss Green submitted that, in  the  present  appeal,
    there was no prospect of the appellant doing so, so  the  Tribunal  had
    not erred in law by moving directly to an  Article  8  analysis.   That
    approach ignores the fact that the judicial decision maker will  embark
    on the Article 8 ECHR analysis aware that the appellant fails  to  meet
    the requirements of the complete code now provided by  the  Immigration
    Rules and aware also that only  cases  having  exceptional  or  unusual
    facts (lying outside the broad range of circumstances  contemplated  by
    the Rules) are likely to succeed under Article 8 where they have failed
    under the Rules.  By failing to consider the Immigration Rules  at  all
    in the present appeal, the Tribunal did  not  approach  the  Article  8
    assessment with that mindset.

 6.  I  find  that  the  Tribunal  has,  in  effect,  failed  to  give  the
    respondent's arguments a proper hearing.  It is for that reason that  I
    have decided to direct that this appeal be returned to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision.   None  of  the
    findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 30 December
    2013 is set aside.  The appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge M Davies; Mr B B Yates) to remake the decision.






Signed                              Date 27 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
