
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01349/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 12th August 2013                           |On 16th August 2013          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                               SHUPIKAI MBIZVO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs Harrison of Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent: Mr Mangion - Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher and Dr J
        O de Barros (hereinafter referred to as 'the  Panel'),  promulgated
        on 28th February 2013, in  which  they  dismissed  the  appellant's
        appeal on all grounds against the order for  her  deportation  from
        the United Kingdom made pursuant  to  section  32  (5)  of  the  UK
        Borders Act 2007.


     2. Permission to appeal was granted by a Designated Judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal on 18th March 2013 on the basis of an arguable  error
        of law relating to paragraph 18 of the determination. The appeal is
        opposed by the Secretary of State.


     3. The  Panel  set  out  their  findings  from  paragraph  12  of  the
        determination  with  two  key  findings   relating   to   political
        activities being made in paragraphs 14 and 18.  In paragraph 14 the
        Panel did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  has  any  significant
        commitment to the MDC, had  not  attend  any  demonstrations  since
        2008, and had failed to adduce satisfactory evidence that  she  had
        drawn herself to the attention of the authorities at either of  the
        two vigils she said she attended outside the Zimbabwe Embassy.  The
        Panel further found in paragraph 14 that the appellant's  claim  to
        have fled  from  Zimbabwe  in  fear  of  her  life  was  completely
        contradicted by her conduct in failing to claim asylum until over a
        year after  her  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  then  only
        following the refusal of her application for leave to remain  as  a
        student.


     4. In paragraph 16 the Panel found that as the appellant worked  as  a
        bus conductor owned by an MDC supporter and that if the vehicle  on
        which she was working was attacked it was because of the livery and
        her boss's opposition rather than as a result of  any  interest  in
        the appellant. She was found to be a local and low-level  supporter
        of the MDC in Zimbabwe whose UK activities did little  if  anything
        to change her profile.


     5. In paragraph 18 the Panel find:


     18.  Even if we accept that the appellant's home area is  Silobela,  in
   the        Midlands Province of Zimbabwe, the tribunal held  in  CM  that
     internal relocation  from  a  rural  area  of  Harare  or  Bulawayo  is
   realistic,  although  the  socio-economics  circumstances  in   which   a
   person would find him or herself would need  to  be  considered.  In  his
   unsuccessful asylum appeal, her  partner's  home  area  was  said  to  be
   Chiweshe,  which  was  about  one   hour's   drive   from   Harare.   The
   appellant's  account  was  that  she  had  spent  some  time  working  in
   Harare. If the appellant could not  relocate  to  Bulawayo,  due  to  her
   Shona ethnicity, we found that it  would  not  be  unreasonable  for  the
   appellant and her partner, who has no leave  to  remain  in  the  UK,  to
   return to the Harare area.  Both  of  them  claimed  to  have  worked  in
   the past, and there was no reason to doubt that they  would  be  able  to
   find  work  on  return,  so  their  socio-economics  circumstances  would
   not be unreasonable. Given that the appellant  has  not  engaged  in  any
   political activities in the UK for something in the region of five years,
          we could  not  accept  that  she  would  seek  to  participate  in
   political      activities on return  on  a  scale  which  was  likely  to
   attract the adverse          attention of Zanu PF,  particularly  if  she
   has not, according to            previous findings, done so. There was no
   medical evidence to              confirm the appellants account about her
   health, or her prognosis.        Mr Boyle accepted that she was unable to
   meet the threshold in N v        UK. However, the  lack  of  evidence  of
   health prevented us from              making  any  positive  findings  in
   that regard on the issue of internal      relocation.




Discussion



     6. It is  alleged  the  Panel  made  an  error  in  finding  that  the
        appellant's MDC activity ceased approximately five years ago for at
        pages 14 and 15 of her bundle were  e-mails  from  activists  dated
        November 2012 regarding a hope of establishing a local MDC group in
        Middlesbrough.  It was argued on the appellant's behalf that  whist
        it was not necessarily unreasonable for a  non-active  claimant  in
        the UK to return and not be active in Zimbabwe, although  this  was
        not the appellants evidence, she stated that she  continued  to  be
        active and wished to remain active until very recently, even though
        there was no official local group and even though she  lived  in  a
        small town over ten miles from Middlesbrough.


     7. There is no challenge to the factual findings that the appellant is
        a low-level member of the MDC or that she had produced  photographs
        of herself at demonstrations from the time she lived in London.   I
        accept evidence was available showing that she has been  unable  to
        attend demonstrations since being relocated to Hartlepool, although
        she claimed she remained active within the MDC.  I  also  find  the
        Panel's finding that  the  appellant  was  a  local  and  low-level
        supporter of the MDC in Zimbabwe  and  that  her  profile  has  not
        changed as a result of the UK-based activities to be in  accordance
        with the evidence.


     8. In relation to any risk  at  the  point  of  return,  the  relevant
        country guidance is still that of  HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)
        Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094. I  find  that  even  taken  at  its
        highest the appellant's profile is not such as to place her at risk
        on return to the airport  in  Zimbabwe  as  the  finding  that  her
        activities are not sufficient to attract the adverse  attention  of
        Zanu PF is sustainable in relation to the point of  return.  In  CM
        (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe   CG   [2013]   UKUT
        00059(IAC) the Tribunal held that the fresh evidence regarding  the
        position at the point of return does not indicate any  increase  in
        risk since the Country Guidance was given in HS.


     9. In relation to the position within Zimbabwe, the Panel make a clear
        finding that the  appellant  could  reasonably  relocate  with  her
        partner  on  the   basis   of   their   potential   socio-economics
        circumstances. The categories of those at risk on  return  are  set
        out in CM in which it was found, inter alia,  that  a  returnee  to
        Harare will in general face no significant difficulties,  if  going
        to a low-density or medium-density area. Whilst the  socio-economic
        situation in high-density areas is more challenging, in  general  a
        person  without  ZANU-PF  connections  will  not  face  significant
        problems there (including a "loyalty test"), unless he or she has a
        significant MDC profile, which might cause him or her to feature on
        a list of those targeted for harassment, or would otherwise  engage
        in political activities likely to attract the adverse attention  of
        ZANU-PF,  or  would  be  reasonably  likely  to  engage   in   such
        activities, but for  a  fear  of  thereby  coming  to  the  adverse
        attention of ZANU-PF. There was no evidence the appellant  and  her
        partner will find it necessary to settle in a high density area  or
        that she has a significant MDC profile.


    10.  The  Panel  took  into  account  the  appellant's  past  political
        activities, which it is reasonable to find, are illustrative of her
        future activities,  and  noted  that  she  was  a  low-level  local
        supporter of the MDC.  Her activities in the  United  Kingdom  have
        been similar and therefore the finding that she has not proved  she
        would participate in any political activities on return  which  are
        likely to attract the adverse attention of Zanu PF, is a finding in
        accordance with the evidence.


    11. Although the grounds refer to HJ (Iran) this is not  a  case  where
        the evidence supports a claim that but for the fear of  persecution
        the appellant would do more, as even when there has been no fear of
        persecution in the UK her activities have been  extremely  limited.
        The Panel also made sustainable findings about the appellant's lack
        of credibility and motives. In paragraph 15 they find that she  was
        prepared to resort to dishonesty to achieve her aims.


    12. I find that even if the Panel erred in claiming that the  appellant
        had not engaged in  political  activities  for  approximately  five
        years, as there was evidence of e-mails dated November  2012,  such
        error is not material. The key question is  has  the  appellant  an
        actual or imputed adverse political profile such as to place her at
        risk on return to Zimbabwe at the  date  of  the  hearing.  On  the
        evidence the Panel found  the  appellant  had  not  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon her to the required standard to prove this was
        so and, accordingly, I find no material error proved. The  findings
        are in the range of permissible findings the Panel were entitled to
        make on the evidence in light  of  the  country  material  and  the
        current country guidance cases.


Decision

    13. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as no application was made for the  same  and
   no grounds          established for the making of such an order.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12th August 2013.
