
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01887/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the City Centre Tower,      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |On 11 February 2016                  |
|On 8 February 2016                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                            mr dahir farah ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 1  July  2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew.  The decision refused the appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal dated 1 October 2014 to  revoke
    the deportation order made against him on 6 November 2007.

 2. There was no-one present for the appellant. The  Tribunal  file  showed
    good service of  the  notice  of  hearing  on  him  and  on  his  legal
    representatives. There was nothing on the Tribunal file to indicate why
    there was no appearance. Mr Mills informed me that he had been told  on
    the telephone by the legal representatives that  they  were  no  longer
    acting but there was nothing before me to indicate that this  had  been
    communicated  in  the  proper  form  to  the  Tribunal.  In   all   the
    circumstances, with reference to the overriding objective in Rule 2 for
    the Tribunal "to deal with cases fairly and justly" and Rule 38 it  was
    my view that good notice had been given of the hearing and that it  was
    in the interests of justice to proceed in the absence of the  appellant
    and his legal representatives.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the UK on 6
    April 1999 and claimed asylum.  That claim was refused on 30 March 2000
    but he was granted exceptional leave to remain until 30 March 2004.  On
    16 November 2004 he was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   As  a
    result of nineteen convictions for 25 offences the  respondent  made  a
    deportation order against him on 6 November 2007.  Removal was set  for
    21 November 2007 but was cancelled on 15 November 2007 due to  a  human
    rights claim under Rule 39 made to the European Court of  Human  Rights
    (ECtHR).  The deportation was further delayed as on 6 February 2009 the
    FCO advised that all Somali  cases  should  be  adjourned  pending  the
    conclusion of ECtHR proceedings.  The appellant  continued  to  offend.
    In late 2011 and 2012 he  appeared  to  wish  to  co-operate  with  the
    Facilitated Return Scheme but  this  was  not  continued  as  he  never
    completed the full paperwork.  He then claimed asylum in Belfast on  18
    October 2013 under an alias.  This led to a  conviction  for  dishonest
    representation on 23 January 2014.  The respondent looked at  his  case
    again and on 1 October 2014 refused to revoke his deportation order.

 4. The appellant's claim before First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew was  that
    his deportation order should be revoked as he was a refugee, on Article
    3 ECHR and humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

 5. His grounds of appeal against the decision read as follows:

         "Appellant has well-founded fear of persecution.  It is unfortunate
         that he was unable to provide documentation from  the  internet  or
         indeed in English.  He would like an opportunity  to  present  this
         documentation  to  aid  his  appeal.   He  therefore   wishes   for
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal for a fair hearing.

         Appellant states the country guidance is out of date and Al-Shabaab
         are still active in Mogadishu, and there is  a  general  threat  to
         all.

         He had written articles against government practices and would like
         the Tribunal to consider these accordingly  and  subjectively,  not
         objectively.

         Furthermore appellant has European wife and his rights under EU law
         should be considered.  She is currently residing with  him  in  the
         UK."

 6.  Judge  Andrew's  view  of  the  appellant's  asylum,  Article  3   and
    humanitarian protection claims is contained in paragraphs 20 to  27  of
    her decision.  These read as follows:

         "20. I have given careful consideration, in the round, to  all  the
             evidence that is before me.

         21.  I have taken into account the decision that is at Annex  K  of
             the respondent's bundle.  The starred decision  in  Devaseelan
             clearly applies to the  findings  made  in  this  decision  at
             paragraphs 16 to 24.  I am told, however, that the marriage to
             a girl in Switzerland referred  to  in  paragraph  20  of  the
             decision no longer subsists,  a  talaq  divorce  having  taken
             place.  However, I have seen no evidence of this.  I  have  to
             say that paragraph 21 of this decision would not seem to apply
             to this appellant and I have taken no note of this.

         22.  The appellant's claim now is that he would be at real risk  on
             is (sic) return to Somalia because of various articles he  has
             written: he now describes himself as a journalist.  He  claims
             that he has heard from a friend in Somalia that he will be  at
             risk if he returns there.  He hears from this  friend  through
             Facebook.  (At this point in the hearing the appellant  showed
             us his mobile telephone but in  view  of  the  fact  that  any
             communication was in Somali I am unable to take note of this).
              The appellant  also  claims  that  a  member  of  the  Somali
             Parliament visited Turkey about a year ago.  His  cousin  went
             to see  him  and  the  MP  told  the  appellant's  cousin  the
             appellant could not return.

         23.  However, I have no evidence of  any  of  this.   The  articles
             which are claimed to be politically offensive and are  in  the
             appellant's bundle are all written  in  the  Somali  language.
             None of them have been translated and in accordance  with  the
             Procedure Rules I am unable to place ay (sic) weight on  these
             documents.   I  have  no  evidence  either  from  either   the
             appellant's friend in Somalia or  the  appellant's  cousin  to
             confirm the assertions that have been made about the  warnings
             given to him through them.  In this regard I bear in mind  the
             appellant's  evidence  that  is  (sic)  cousin   is   now   in
             Birmingham.  The appellant has been professionally advised  in
             these proceedings and I would have expected him to be asked to
             provide corroborative evidence of his claims.

         24.  In saying this I have noted  the  letter  at  page  7  of  the
             bundle.   However,  it  is  clear  from  the  appellant's  own
             evidence to me that the information contained  in  the  second
             paragraph of this letter  came  from  the  appellant  himself.
             Thus I place no weight on this  letter  as  confirmation  that
             there is a real risk of persecution should  the  appellant  be
             returned to Somalia.

         25.  I have taken into account the country guidance case of  MOJ  &
             Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC).
             This case makes it clear that there was no longer a real  risk
             of clan-based violence in Mogadishu.  The appellant did  refer
             to his clan but I apply the country guidance in MOJ  and  find
             he would have no real fear of persecution because of his clan.

         26.  The appellant has also claimed he is afraid of  Al-Shabaab  in
             Mogadishu.  However, again in accordance with the findings  in
             MOJ I am satisfied that there i (sic)  no  real  risk  of  the
             appellant being persecuted by Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu.

         27.  Accordingly I am satisfied that there would not  be  any  very
             significant  obstacles  in  the  appellant's  integration   in
             Somalia.  He has a friend there.  He speaks the language.   He
             continues to meet with Somali people in  the  United  Kingdom.
             Whilst he may no longer have property in Somalia he does  have
             at least one friend there.  He can no doubt put  to  good  use
             any skills he has obtained in the United Kingdom on his return
             to that country.

         28.  I accordingly,  and  for  these  reasons,  reject  his  asylum
             claim."

    The decision goes on to indicate at  paragraphs  30  and  31  that  the
    appellant's humanitarian protection and Article 2 and 3  claims  failed
    for the same reasons.

 7. Addressing the appellant's grounds as set out in the application  form,
    the first ground has no merit where the appellant  was  represented  by
    professional legal advisers in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  had  the
    opportunity to submit any supporting evidence for that appeal.  He  has
    adduced nothing to show that he was prevented from doing so and that he
    did not have a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The second
    paragraph of the grounds of appeal also  has  no  merit  where  nothing
    before me indicates that there was material before  Judge  Andrew  that
    could have led her to distinguish the country guidance case of MOJ.

 8. Judge Andrew dealt comprehensively with the appellant's claim to be  at
    risk on return because he wrote anti-government articles in  paragraphs
    22 to 24 of her determination.  Those findings, set out in full  above,
    are not open to challenge where the relevant material  was  taken  into
    account but not found to be sufficient to support the appellant's claim
    or show a risk on return.  The reference in the  third  ground  to  the
    judge considering this part of the claim "subjectively not objectively"
    goes against well-established case law principles for assessing a claim
    and risk on return.

 9. The fourth paragraph of the grounds relates to the appellant's claim to
    have a  family  life  with  a  Norwegian  national.   As  indicated  at
    paragraph 34 and paragraph 41 (VI) the appellant's evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was that his partner is a  Norwegian  citizen,  was
    living there and that he would like to join her there. The relationship
    could not found an  EEA  or  Article  8  claim  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where the partner was not in the UK.  If she has come  to  the
    UK since the decision of First-tier Tribunal Andrew it is open  to  the
    applicant to make a new Article 8 claim on that basis.

10. I noted that the grant of permission to appeal dated 27 July 2015  made
    a reference to paragraph (ix) of the headnote of MOJ.   This,  together
    with paragraph (x) reads as follows:

         "(ix)    If it is  accepted  that  a  person  facing  a  return  to
             Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear  family  or
             close relatives in the city to assist him  in  re-establishing
             himself on return, there will need to be a careful  assessment
             of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These  considerations   will
             include, but are not limited to:

                . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

                . length of absence from Mogadishu;

                . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

                . access to financial resources;

                . prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self employment;

                . availability of remittances from abroad;

                . means of support during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
                  Kingdom;

                . why his ability to fund the journey to the West no  longer
                  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                  return.

         (x)  Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away."

11. As in paragraph (x) of MOJ, it is for the appellant to explain  why  he
    would not be able to access the economic opportunities now available in
    Mogadishu.  The grounds do not indicate what it  was  in  the  material
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  could  have  led  to  a
    conclusion that the appellant would be unable to return  to  Mogadishu.
    Judge Andrew addresses this part of the ratio of MOJ  in  paragraph  27
    toward the end of her consideration of the protection claim. She  finds
    that the  appellant  would  not  face  very  significant  obstacles  in
    reintegrating into Somalia, that he has a friend there with whom he had
    recently been in touch, speaks  the  language,  has  remained  able  to
    operate within Somali culture in the UK and would be  able  to  put  to
    good use any skills he has  obtained  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Those
    findings were open to the judge on the evidence before her. It  is  not
    my judgment that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  apply  or
    misapplying the guidance contained in (ix) and (x) of the head note  of
    MOJ.

12. For all of these reasons I do not find that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal was in error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  disclose  an  error  and
shall stand.


Signed   [pic]    Date 8 February 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
