

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01685/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 23 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              THOMAS BALIUKONIS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Figiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr C. Lam, counsel instructed by Edward Marshall
solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of a panel of the First-tier
      Tribunal  (Judge  Archer  sitting  with  a  non-legal  member  of  the
      Tribunal) who, by a  determination  promulgated  on  18  August  2014,
      allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  against  a  decision  to  make   a
      deportation order. That deportation decision was made as a consequence
      of his conviction before the Snaresbrook Crown Court of an offence  of
      assault occasioning actual bodily harm, the  victim  of  that  offence
      being the  respondent's  long  term  partner.  Both  are  citizens  of
      Lithuania who arrived together in the United Kingdom  in  August  2004
      since when they have remained here and they now live as a family  unit
      together with their son, who was born in April 2011.


   2. As the respondent is an EEA national  the  deportation  decision  made
      under s5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 was informed by the provisions
      of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

   3. In the determination the panel set out a summary of  the  respondent's
      relevant history:

           "The appellant first came to adverse attention on 5 August  2008
           for failing to surrender to custody at Inner London Crown Court;
           he was subsequently sentenced to 7 days imprisonment. He was not
           convicted of  possession  of  a  bladed  article.  He  was  then
           convicted at Snaresbrook Crown  Court  for  assault  occasioning
           actual bodily harm. He was sentenced to 16 months  imprisonment.
           The respondent wrote to the appellant on 15 May 2013  requesting
           evidence of continuous residence in the UK. He supplied  various
           documents in response and the respondent accepts that they  show
           that he was working in the UK between December 2004 and November
           2006 and then April 2011 to April 2012. That is not a continuous
           period of five years. He has not acquired a permanent  right  of
           residence in the UK."


      There followed a summary of the offence that led to the decision;  the
      background fact relating  to  it  and  the  respondent's  reasons  for
      concluding that a deportation decision was justified:


           "The victim of the offence was Agne  [the  appellant's  partner]
           and the assault was prolonged and resulted  in  serious  injury.
           The appellant is  subject  to  MAPPA  level  I  monitoring.  The
           offender manager  who  completed  the  NOMS  1  found  that  the
           appellant posed a medium risk of harm  to  women  with  whom  he
           formed a relationship. The victim must  have  been  traumatised.
           The sentencing judge indicated a number of aggravating features.
           The offender manager noted that the risk  of  reoffending  would
           increase if the appellant should be reconciled with the  victim.
           The appellant has a tendency to commit offences whilst under the
           influence of alcohol. There is  no  evidence  of  any  offending
           behaviour courses. The appellant represents a  genuine,  present
           and sufficiently serious threat to justify his deportation.  The
           5 and 10 year tests would also be  satisfied.  The  decision  is
           proportionate. There is no one  to  assist  the  appellant  with
           rehabilitation in the UK."

   4. Having made clear that  the  seriously  aggravating  features  of  the
      assault had been recognised, the panel  noted  that  the  respondent's
      partner had not sought  a  restraining  order.  The  NOMS  report  was
      written on the basis that she wanted  nothing  more  to  do  with  the
      respondent  but  that  was  not  the  case.  In  oral   evidence   the
      respondent's partner made clear that the relationship had at no  stage
      been ended. She had visited him frequently while he  was  serving  his
      prison sentence and said that she had forgiven him and that he  should
      be given another chance. It was plain that she  saw  their  future  as
      living together as a family unit and the respondent had agreed to seek
      help for his excessive drinking. He had a good chance of securing work
      again as a bricklayer.


   5. The panel then recorded the following clear findings:

           " We find that the relationship between the talents and Agne  is
           genuine and subsisting. Agne  has  maintained  the  relationship
           whilst the appellant has been imprisoned through regular contact
           and visits. The parties have discussed the thoughts and wish  to
           continue with the relationship. They will seek help from  social
           services and the appellant has recently taken the positive  step
           of completing the AIM course..... Preceding  the  index  offence
           there was no history of offending  and  the  appellant  has  not
           established a history of offending. The risk of serious harm  is
           medium but limited to physical violence to Agne and other  women
           with whom he develops a relationship and known adults.
           ...
           We consider that the risk of further offending is low.  Agne  is
           at some risk of repeated domestic violence but is fully aware of
           the risk and  both  parties  intend  to  seek  help  before  the
           appellant returns home. We accent that the appellant  is  not  a
           generally violent man and has behaved kindly to the children and
           his cousin."

   6. The key findings that led to the decision to allow the appeal are  set
      out between paragraphs  27-30  of  the  determination,  with  emphasis
      added:


           "Against that factual background,  we  go  on  to  consider  the
           requirements of the Regulations. We have not seen  comprehensive
           evidence of exercising Treaty rights from 2006 to  2013  in  the
           form of payslips, bank  statements  and  P  60s.  The  appellant
           accepted in oral evidence that he lived off Agne's income for  a
           period when he was out of work. However, the respondent does not
           dispute that the appellant is  a  bricklayer  and  that  he  has
           worked in the UK. The respondent accepts that  Agne  has  worked
           continuously in the UK since 2007 and that the parties have been
           in a durable relationship. We find on balance  of  probabilities
           that the appellant has resided continuously  in  the  UK  for  a
           period of 5 years in accordance with the Regulations, either  as
           a worker or a jobseeker. The standard for removal  is  therefore
           high for this appellant because he falls within the second level
           of EEA nationals. He can only be removed on serious  grounds  of
           public policy or public security. We  emphasise  that  we  would
           have reached the same decision even if the  appellant  had  only
           fallen in the first level of EEA nationals.


           ... We recognise that for any deportation of an EEA national  to
           be justified on public good  grounds  then  the  claimants  must
           constitute a present threat. The fact of a  criminal  conviction
           is not  enough  and  deterrence  principles  are  irrelevant.  A
           candidate for EEA deportation must represent a present threat by
           reason of propensity to reoffend or an unacceptably high risk of
           re-offending. We have not seen any  evidence  of  propensity  or
           such a risk of reoffending.


           ... We find that the appellant does  not  constitute  a  present
           threat and is well advanced in rehabilitation in  a  host  state
           where there is a substantial degree of integration.  Taking  all
           of our findings into account, we  therefore  conclude  that  the
           tests in paragraphs 21 (three) and 21 (five) of the  regulations
           are not met. The decision does not comply with the principle  of
           proportionality."

   7. Permission to appeal having been refused upon application to the First-
      tier Tribunal, the grounds for renewing that application were:


           " The finding that the appellant has gained permanent  residence
           in the UK (see paragraph 27) is inadequately reasoned. The  SSHD
           did not accept that the appellant had the  requisite  period  of
           qualifying residence in the UK and it is arguably inadequate  to
           merely reflect on the appellant's partners status  to  conclude,
           for example, that the appellant was also genuinely seeking  work
           when subsisting from her earnings. It is  also  noticeable  that
           the appellant was not resident in the UK 2004 to 2006."


   8. The respondent's representatives have  submitted  a  response  to  the
      grant of permission in which they say:

           " The panel has also made it very clear  in  paragraph  27  that
           they  would  have  reached  the  same  conclusion  even  if  the
           appellant had only fallen in the first level of  EEA  nationals.
           It is therefore submitted  that  whether  the  appellant  was  a
           worker or a permanent resident is largely irrelevant."


   9. For the  appellant,  Ms  Vigiwala  accepts,  realistically,  that  the
      finding in the alternative made by the panel is a complete  answer  to
      the challenge brought in respect  of  which  permission  was  granted.
      Given that the panel has made clear that the outcome would  have  been
      the same even if they were wrong  to  find  that  the  respondent  had
      acquired a permanent right of residence, the challenge raised  by  the
      grounds is simply unarguable and the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      cannot succeed.


Summary of decision:

  10. The First-tier Tribunal made no error of  law  and  the  determination
      shall stand.


  11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                               Signed              [pic]






                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 21 April 2015

