
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01409/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|23 July 2015                         |2 September 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          GARFIELD MARK EARL BENNETT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richard, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms D Revill, instructed by Peer & Co. Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals,  with  permission,  to  this  Tribunal
    against the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Troup)
    allowing the appeal of the respondent (whom we  shall  "the  claimant")
    against the decision on 17  June  2014  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him.  We heard submissions from Mr Richards on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State; we did not need to call on Ms Revill.

 2. The regime applying to deportation appeals is markedly altered  by  the
    Immigration Act  2014.   This  appeal  is  of  what  may  be  termed  a
    transitional nature: because of the date of the decision, the appeal is
    indeed against the decision  to  make  a  deportation  order,  and  the
    claimant has available to him the grounds set out in  s  84(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 before  its  amendment  by
    the 2014 Act.  The provisions of sections 117A-117D of  the  2002  Act,
    however, apply to the Tribunal's consideration of the appeal.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor with leave  to
    enter for six months in 1994.  He has had no  subsequent  leave.   That
    appears not to have troubled the authorities until 2007,  when  he  was
    served with notice of illegal entry.

 4. The claimant has been convicted of five separate sets  of  offences  in
    the period 2002 to 2008, most of which were alcohol related.  They were
    as follows:

|12 February 2002 |Excess alcohol          |Fined                   |
|24 October 2003  |Common assault          |Community rehabilitation|
|                 |                        |order                   |
|18 August 2006   |Excess alcohol, no      |Fined and disqualified  |
|                 |insurance and no driving|from driving for three  |
|                 |licence                 |years                   |
|7 June 2007      |Failing to provide a    |Community order - 12    |
|                 |specimen for analysis   |months.                 |
|                 |                        |Disqualification five   |
|                 |                        |years                   |
|2 December 2008  |Driving whilst          |Four months             |
|                 |disqualified            |                        |
|                 |Excess alcohol          |Four months             |
|                 |Perverting the course of|10 months               |
|                 |justice                 |                        |


 5. In the light of the most recent offence the claimant was subject  to  a
    deportation order made on 14  April  2009.   It  was  revoked  when  he
    claimed asylum.  The claim  was  apparently  wholly  unmeritorious  but
    enabled the claimant to stay in the United Kingdom for a further  three
    years before the asylum application was refused.   He  did  not  appeal
    against the refusal on 18 April 2012.  After the refusal of asylum  the
    deportation action was pursued, and the claimant succeeded in an appeal
    against  the  deportation  order  on  the  basis  of  ongoing   contact
    proceedings with his children.  He was granted leave to remain until 29
    October 2013, apparently for that purpose.  During the course  of  that
    leave he applied for further leave.  The respondent refused it and made
    a new deportation order.

 6. The claimant has six children, by four  different  women.   The  oldest
    were born on 10 May 2000 and 22 August 2000 and so are now 15 years old
    or nearly so.  All his children are British citizens.

 7. Given that the claimant's criminality is the motive for  the  Secretary
    of State's deportation decisions, it is necessary  to  consider  in  to
    which of the categories  established  by  legislation  and  immigration
    rules the claimant falls.  It is now common  ground  that  because  his
    longest sentence of imprisonment for a single offence was 10 months  he
    is not a "foreign criminal" within the  meaning  of  s  32  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  Further, under para 398 of the Statement of  Changes
    in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended), the  applicable  wording  is
    that in sub-paragraph (c) and  the  relevant  part  of  that  paragraph
    therefore reads as follows:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention; and

         ...

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because, in the view of
             the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused  serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows  a  disregard
             for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

 8. The judge considered the material before him, which  included  evidence
    of rehabilitation from alcohol dependence, no offences since 2008,  and
    a "close and  continuing  relationship"  with  some  at  least  of  his
    children.  The judge's primary conclusion  was  that  "the  appellant's
    offending has not caused serious harm and he is not  now  a  persistent
    offender  with  a  particular  disregard  for  the  law".    In   those
    circumstances he considered  that  the  claimant  was  not  subject  to
    deportation, and that his appeal therefore fell to be  allowed  on  the
    basis, apparently, that no provision of the immigration rules justified
    his deportation.  The judge went on to conclude  that  his  removal  to
    Jamaica as a deportee, which would, in the judge's  view,  prevent  him
    seeing his children for at least ten years, would be "unduly harsh  and
    disproportionate".  To the extent that paragraphs 399 and/or 399A  were
    engaged, therefore, the judge found in the claimant's favour.

 9. The Secretary of State raised two grounds of appeal.  The first is that
    the judge's conclusion in relation to paragraph 398(c) failed  to  take
    into account the Secretary of State's published guidance  and  her  own
    conclusion that the  claimant's  crimes  are  sufficiently  serious  to
    warrant deportation.  The grounds describe the  judge's  conclusion  as
    "palpably  wrong".   The  second  ground  is   that   the   judge   had
    misunderstood the meaning  of  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"  and  that,
    bearing in mind that the claimant does not live with his children  now,
    the conclusion that his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be
    disproportionate was not merited.

10. We began our consideration of the matter by considering  the  terms  of
    the immigration  rules  and  the  judge's  conclusion  in  relation  to
    paragraph 398(c).  It seems to us clear that the judge was in error  in
    considering that he was entitled to determine whether it was correct to
    say of the claimant that "their offending has caused  serious  harm  or
    they are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
    law".  The requirements of the rule are clearly met if the Secretary of
    State takes that view; and, if the Secretary of State  does  take  that
    view, it is not for a judge to say that that provision is not met.  The
    Secretary of State makes an assessment and takes a view: this is not  a
    matter of discretion (such as would enable a judge to allow  an  appeal
    on  the  ground  that  the  discretion  should  have   been   exercised
    differently); it is simply a matter of precedent fact.

11. The judge's enquiry under  this  head  ought  therefore  to  have  been
    directed to whether there was material  before  him  showing  that  the
    Secretary of State did have either of the views  set  out  as  engaging
    paragraph 398(c).  Inspection of the lengthy decision letter, dated  12
    June 2014, is not helpful to the Secretary of State  in  that  respect.
    In paragraph 1 of the letter the most recent prison sentences  are  set
    out,  and  described  as  "making  a  combined  total  of   14   months
    imprisonment".  The paragraph goes on to say that "for the reasons  set
    out below" it has been concluded that the claimant's deportation  would
    be conducive to the public good.  The claimant's  immigration  history,
    including his asylum claim,  are  set  out  in  subsequent  paragraphs,
    including at paragraph 69 a conclusion that the claimant has  no  right
    to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection, or article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    The letter  then  turns  to  the  claimant's  criminal  convictions  at
    paragraph 70.  The history of offending is set out at paragraphs 71  to
    77; the presumption in favour of the deportation of "a person liable to
    deportation", contained in paragraph 396 of the  Immigration  Rules  is
    set out at paragraph 78.  The letter then notes the circumstances under
    which an article 8 claim may  interact  with  the  public  interest  in
    deportation, before setting out the principle of paragraph 396 again at
    paragraph 82.  Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules is then  set  out
    in  full,  divided  between  paragraphs  83  and  84.   The  next  four
    paragraphs, with their heading, read as follows:

         "Sentences between 12 months and 4 years' imprisonment

         85.  Your client was convicted of perverting the cause  of  justice
             and motoring offences and sentenced to a period of  10  months
             and 4 months imprisonment,  to  run  consecutively,  making  a
             combined total of 14 moths imprisonment.

         86.  The Immigration Rules state  that  where  a  person  has  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12  months
             but less than 4 years, in assessing a claim  that  deportation
             would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR, the  Secretary  of  State
             will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies.

         87.   If  neither  applies,  it  will  only   be   in   exceptional
             circumstances that a person's right to family  and/or  private
             life or other reasons would outweigh the  public  interest  in
             seeing a person deported.

         88.  It  is  considered  that  paragraph  398(c)  applies  in  your
             client's case because of  criminal  history.   Overall,  since
             your client claims to he entered the UK, he has been convicted
             on 5 occasions and committed 15 offences."

12. There is no further consideration of the terms of  paragraph  398:  the
    discussion then moves to paragraphs 399 and 399A.

13. The structure of paragraphs 85 to 88 is curious.  Despite the reference
    to paragraph 398(c) in paragraph 88, the heading to  the  section,  and
    paragraphs 85 and 86 (paragraph 87 adds nothing) show that  the  writer
    of the letter was thinking that a total sentence of 14 months  put  the
    claimant in paragraph 398(b), which, as we have noted  in  paragraph  7
    above, it does not.  Paragraph 88 makes it clear that at some stage  it
    was realised that paragraph 398(c) was the appropriate  one,  but  that
    sub-paragraph was said to apply solely "because of  criminal  history":
    and, in case that phrase is ambiguous, it is  expanded  in  the  second
    sentence of paragraph 88.

14. It appears to us that the identification of a "criminal history" is not
    sufficient to show  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  followed  the
    decision-making process appropriate to  paragraph  398(c).   That  sub-
    paragraph envisages two alternatives arising out of a criminal history:
    one is that the Secretary of State considers that  the  individual  has
    "caused serious harm": the other is that the person  is  "a  persistent
    offender who shows a particular disregard for the law".  No  doubt  all
    offences cause some harm; and no doubt all offences show some disregard
    for the law; but in order for paragraph 398(c) to apply, the  Secretary
    of State must have reached a view as to seriousness or as to particular
    disregard for the law.  There is simply no trace in paragraphs 85 to 88
    of the decision letter that that has been done in this case.

15. It follows in our judgement that  the  claimant's  appeal  fell  to  be
    allowed under the Immigration Rules, not because it is for the Tribunal
    to reach a conclusion under paragraph 398(c), but because  it  was  for
    the Secretary of State to reach that conclusion and she did not do  so.
    In the circumstances the claimant falls within none of the  three  sub-
    paragraphs of paragraph 398.  The restrictive provisions of  paragraphs
    399 and 399A therefore do not apply.  To put that in another  way,  the
    claimant's offending, when  looked  at  from  the  perspective  of  the
    present time, falls at a level below that envisaged in  paragraph  398.
    The whole structure of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision,  applying
    paragraph  398  and  accordingly  applying  paragraphs  399  and  399A,
    therefore, is not  that  envisaged  by  the  rules  properly  read  and
    interpreted.

16. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law by purporting  to  substitute  his
    view of the claimant's criminality for that of the Secretary of  State.
    We substitute a determination, allowing the claimant's  appeal  on  the
    ground that the decision against which he appealed was  "otherwise  not
    in accordance of the law" within the meaning of section 84(1)(e).


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 6 August 2015
