
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01304/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court           |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 March 2014                                |On 16th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M. A. HALL



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           enoch samuel SUTHERLAND

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior  Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Olubisose, M. Olubi, Solicitors






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. We shall refer to Enoch  Samuel  Sutherland,  the  respondent  in  this
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal, as the appellant (as  he  was  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal)  and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.  The background to the appeal is set out in  in  detail  in
    the determination of Upper Tribunal Judge  Southern  and  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coates, sitting as a panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  at
    Sheldon Court, Birmingham, on 30 January 2014, the full text of   which
    we set out below:


   1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to  appeal  against
      the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who,  by  a  determination
      promulgated on 22 October 2013, allowed Mr Sutherland's appeal against
      a decision that he should be deported, pursuant to section 32  of  the
      UK Borders Act 2007, as an automatic consequence of his conviction and
      imprisonment for an offence of rape. The appeal  was  allowed  on  the
      basis  that  the   deportation   would   impermissibly   infringe   Mr
      Sutherland's rights, protected by article 8 of the  ECHR,  to  respect
      for his private and family life or, as the First-tier Tribunal put  it
      at paragraph 29 of the determination:


           "... we find that interference in  the  appellant's  family  and
           private life is not necessary for any reason set out in  article
           8(2) of the ECHR."


   2. In those circumstances, Mr Sutherland is, of  course,  the  respondent
      before the Upper  Tribunal  but,  for  ease  of  reference,  we  shall
      continue to refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. It was the respondent's case before the First-tier  Tribunal
      that the deportation of the appellant was necessary in  light  of  the
      legitimate aim being pursued in making the deportation decision.


   3. The background to  the  decision  under  challenge  is  summarised  at
      paragraph 2 of the determination which we reproduce below:

           "The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 8th  December  1998
           with valid entry clearance in order to  visit  his  parents  who
           were in the United  Kingdom.  Subsequently,  the  appellant  was
           granted indefinite leave to remain in line with his  parents  on
           9th January  2003.  On  10th  October  2011  the  appellant  was
           convicted of rape of a young woman over the age of  17.  On  7th
           November 2011 the appellant was sentenced to five years and four
           months detention in a young offenders' institution and placed on
           the Sex Offenders Register for life. On 3rd  February  2012  the
           appellant was served  with  notice  of  liability  to  automatic
           deportation  action.  Following  that,  the  respondent  made  a
           deportation order, a decision the appellant appealed  and  hence
           the matter before us."


   4. At the hearing, the  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  heard  oral
      evidence from no less than eleven  witnesses,  including  friends  and
      relatives of the appellant and members of  a  church  with  which  the
      family was associated. The panel took into account that the  appellant
      had lived here since a very young age and he now had little in the way
      of any ties remaining with Ghana,  his  country  of  nationality.  The
      panel recognised that the appellant had committed  a  serious  offence
      but the witnesses now spoke of the appellant's "honesty integrity  and
      intelligence"  and  the  panel  concluded  that  the   appellant   was
      remorseful for his past actions, had engaged well in arrangements  for
      his rehabilitation and now represented  a  low  risk  of  reoffending.
      Drawing all that together, the panel concluded that:


           "... there  are  sufficiently  compelling  reasons  (exceptional
           circumstances) which outweigh the public interest in  favour  of
           deportation."

   5. In granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mailer
      said:


           "The grounds assert that the panel failed to consider the  cases
           of AM [2012] and Masih [2012] regarding the deterrent effect  of
           deportation and public confidence. There is a strong presumption
           in favour of deportation of  those  who  exceed  the  sentencing
           guidelines outlined in para 398(a). Further, "exceptional"  mean
           circumstances  in  which  deportation   would   result   in   an
           unjustifiably harsh outcome. His family life is  one  of  normal
           emotional ties.


           It is arguable that  the  panel  did  not  properly  taken  into
           account  and  consider  the  strong  presumption  in  favour  of
           deportation  in  a  case   such   as   this.   The   appellant's
           circumstances  were  arguably  not  shown  to  be   sufficiently
           compelling  to  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in  his
           deportation....."

   6. As Mr Olubisose commenced his submissions we invited him to take us to
      anything said in the determination from which it could be deduced that
      the panel had had  any  regard  at  all  to  the  public  interest  in
      deterring others, or indeed to anything said in the determination from
      which it could be drawn that  the  panel  had  carried  out  a  proper
      assessment of the level of criminality  involved  in  the  appellant's
      offending. He was unable to do so, other than  to  suggest  that  this
      might be inferred from a reading of  the  determination  as  a  whole,
      although he accepted, as he was bound to, that there  is  no  specific
      mention or discussion of the issue  of  deterrence  arising  from  the
      deportation of foreign criminals. This reinforces our conclusion  that
      these were matters that were simply left out of account altogether  by
      the panel.


   7. That is of considerable importance because the effect of  leaving  out
      of account a material consideration meant that we cannot be sure  that
      the outcome would have been the same had the panel  adopted  a  proper
      approach.

   8. There can be no doubt that this was a material consideration that  the
      panel were bound to factor into their  assessment  as  they  struck  a
      balance between the competing interests in play. That  has  been  made
      clear, consistently, in guidance given by the superior  courts.  In  N
      (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ Judge LJ (as he then was) said at  para
      83:
           "83. The "public  good"  and  the  "public  interest"  are  wide
           ranging  but  undefined  concepts.  In  my   judgment   (whether
           expressly referred to in any  decision  letter  or  not),  broad
           issues  of  social  cohesion  and  public  confidence   in   the
           administration of the system by which control is exercised  over
           non-British citizens who enter and remain in the United  Kingdom
           are engaged. They include an  element  of  deterrence,  to  non-
           British citizens who are already here, even if they are  genuine
           refugees and to those minded to come, so as to ensure that  they
           clearly understand that whatever the circumstances, one  of  the
           consequences of serious crime may well be deportation ..."


      At paragraph 64 May LJ said:


           "Where a person who is not a British citizen commits a number of
           very serious crimes, the public interest  side  of  the  balance
           will include importantly, although not exclusively,  the  public
           policy need to deter and to express society's revulsion  at  the
           seriousness of the criminality."

      So that, in the case under consideration:

           "...I consider that a proper reading of the determination  as  a
           whole does not support the submission that the adjudicator  took
           properly into account the public interest considerations. If  he
           had, it is, in my view, plain that he would  not  have  reversed
           the Secretary of State's decision as to deportation.".


   9. More recently, in AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, as  is  specifically
      relied upon in the grounds for seeking permission to appeal, Pitchford
      LJ, having referred to this dicta said at paragraph 24:
           "Deportation in pursuit of  the  legitimate  aim  of  preventing
           crime and disorder  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  seen  as  one-
           dimensional in its  effect.  It  has  the  effect  not  only  of
           removing the risk of re-offending by the deportee  himself,  but
           also of deterring other foreign nationals in a similar position.
           Furthermore, deportation of foreign criminals  preserves  public
           confidence in a system of control whose loss would  itself  tend
           towards crime and disorder."
  10. The importance of these  considerations  was  emphasised  also  in  JO
      (Uganda) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10, per Richards LJ at paragraph 29:


           "...the factors in favour of expulsion are, in my view,  capable
           of carrying greater weight in a deportation case than in a  case
           of ordinary removal. The maintenance  of  effective  immigration
           control is an important matter, but the  protection  of  society
           against serious crime is even more important and can properly be
           given corresponding greater weight in the balancing exercise..."


  11. The same approach was taken by  a  Presidential  panel  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal  in  the  reported  decision  of  Masih   (deportation-public
      interest-basic principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC). The guidance
      is summarised in the head note as follows:


          "The following basic principles can be derived from the present
          case law concerning the issue of the public interest in relation
          to the deportation of foreign criminals:


          (a)       In a case of automatic deportation, full account must be
              taken of the  strong  public  interest  in  removing  foreign
              citizens  convicted of serious offences, which lies not  only
              in the prevention of further offences  on  the  part  of  the
              individual concerned, but in deterring others from committing
              them in the first place.

          (b)       Deportation of  foreign  criminals  expresses  society's
              condemnation of serious criminal activity and promotes public
              confidence in the treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
              committed them.

          (c)        The starting-point  for  assessing  the  facts  of  the
              offence of which an individual has been committed, and  their
              effect on others, and on the public as a whole, must  be  the
              view taken by the sentencing judge. .."

  12. If anything more were required to establish the significance  if  this
      issue, it may perhaps be found in the judgment of the House  of  Lords
      in Huang [2007] UKHL 11 . Having made  the  point,  at  paragraph  16,
      that:


           "...  There  will,  in  almost  any  case,  be  certain  general
           considerations to bear in mind..."


      The Committee set out some key considerations which included:


           "...the need to discourage non-nationals admitted to the country
           temporarily from believing that they can commit  serious  crimes
           and yet be allowed to remain;


  13. As we have observed, there is nothing in the determination to indicate
      that any regard was had to this issue and so  the  balancing  exercise
      carried out was legally flawed. That is sufficient to  establish  that
      the panel of the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law such  as  to
      require their decision to be set  aside.  However,  the  determination
      discloses other  legal  errors  which  we  can  summarise  briefly  as
      follows.


  14. Although the panel had before them  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks,
      from which it is unambiguously clear  that  he  regarded  the  offence
      committed by the appellant to be particular grave, there is nothing to
      indicate that any regard was had to those  remarks,  the  focus  being
      mainly upon the case advanced by the appellant in support of his claim
      to have established a significant private and family life. Thus, there
      was no real or sufficient analysis of the criminality involved,  which
      was an essential ingredient in any proper balancing exercise.

  15. This being a case where paragraphs 399 and 399A  did  not  apply,  the
      focus was on the concluding sentence of paragraph 398:

           "The Secretary of State in assessing that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,  it
           will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
           interest in deportation would be outweighed by other factors."


      As was made clear by the Court of Appeal in MF v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
      1192, those circumstances have to be (with emphasis added):


           "..  sufficiently  compelling  (and  therefore  exceptional)  to
           outweigh the public interest in deportation..."


      Thus, the assessment of the circumstances is to be carried out in  the
      context of the countervailing public interests arguments  and  not  in
      isolation considered by themselves. One plank of the  public  interest
      argument, though, had been left out of account.

  16. Thus the Panel made errors of  law  such  as  to  require  that  their
      determination be set aside. The decision must be re-made by the  Upper
      Tribunal. Having heard from the parties we accepted  that,  since  the
      appellant had himself not been produced from detention, given that  he
      had  been  successful  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal,   it   was
      inappropriate to remake the decision in his  absence.  Therefore,  the
      appeal is adjourned to a resumed hearing for that purpose. We  do  not
      reserve the appeal to ourselves and so it may  be  listed  before  any
      constitution of the Upper Tribunal.





   Directions

      Not later than 21 days from the date upon which these  directions  are
sent out:

        a.  Mr Sutherland's representatives are to file with  the  Tribunal
           and serve upon the respondent an indexed  and  paginated  bundle
           containing all documentary evidence relied upon. If reliance  is
           placed upon documentary evidence already served, there is to  be
           a single composite index including reference to that material as
           well as any additional documentary material.


        b. In respect of any witness who is  to  be  called  to  give  oral
           evidence there must be a witness statement drawn  in  sufficient
           detail to stand as evidence in chief filed with the Tribunal and
           served upon the respondent. The  respondent  will  be  asked  to
           indicate, at  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  whether  any
           assertion of fact contained in any such statement is challenged.

        c. Mr Sutherland's representatives are to file  with  the  Tribunal
           and serve upon the other party a skeleton argument  setting  out
           all lines of argument to be pursued at the hearing.





 2. The resumed hearing took place at Birmingham Magistrates  Court  on  25
    March 2014.  As the previous panel of the Upper Tribunal  had  recorded
    at [15], this is an appeal which cannot succeed under paragraph 399  or
    399A of HC 395.  The appeal proceeded by reference to the existence  of
    "exceptional circumstances" (that is, pursuant to paragraph 398  of  HC
    395) and also Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard of  proof  (as
    regards the appeal on Article 8 ECHR and Immigration Rules grounds)  is
    the balance of probabilities. We heard evidence from the appellant; his
    father, Edward Sutherland, his mother, Cynthia Sutherland;  his  sister
    Edrina Sutherland; his brother Edwin Sutherland;  the  Reverend  Joseph
    Acquaye.  Each of these  witnesses  adopted  their  respective  written
    statements as their evidence-in-chief.  Each witness expressed  his  or
    her surprise that the appellant had committed the offence of  rape  and
    gave their views as to how the appellant's deportation to  Ghana  might
    affect his close family. We accept that the  appellant's  family  is  a
    close-knit one and that each of its members would wish the appellant to
    continue  being  a  daily  part  of  the  family.   It  was,   however,
    unfortunate that the appellant's parents, Edward Sutherland and Cynthia
    Sutherland,  gave  unreliable  evidence  regarding  the  existence  and
    circumstances of Cynthia Sutherland's mother, who lives in  Ghana.   We
    say that this was unfortunate because we have  little  doubt  that  the
    motive in each case for failing to tell the truth to the  Tribunal  lay
    in the genuine wish of each witness to do everything possible to ensure
    that the appellant remains living in the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant told us that his only close relative who  remains  living
    in Ghana is his maternal grandmother.  He said  that  she  lives  in  a
    rented room and is not in good health (she is  in  her  seventies)  and
    requires someone to look after her.

 5. Edward  Sutherland  needed  to  be  prompted  in  cross-examination  to
    acknowledge that his mother-in-law is alive and in  Ghana.   First,  Mr
    Sutherland said that the appellant could not live with his  grandmother
    because he was "a man".  He then explained that the  grandmother  lives
    in an apartment which would be too small for both the appellant and his
    grandmother.  He also said that his United  Kingdom  family's  expenses
    are "very high" and that he and his wife would be unable to support the
    appellant or his grandmother.

 6. Cynthia Sutherland was asked in cross-examination whether  any  of  the
    appellant's grandparents remain living in Ghana.  She said clearly that
    all four grandparents had died; her own mother had died in 2005.   When
    it was pointed out to her that both the appellant and Mr Sutherland had
    claimed that her mother was still alive, she told us that she had  been
    referring to her stepmother and agreed that her natural mother is still
    alive and aged 74 years. She went on  to  explain  that  she  pays  her
    mother's rent in Ghana. She said that her husband did  not  know  about
    that arrangement.  Re-examined, Mrs Sutherland  said  that  her  mother
    lives in two rooms in a compound ("a room and a  chamber").   She  said
    that she considered it her responsibility as a daughter to continue  to
    pay the rent.

 7. We have no doubt whatsoever that Mrs Sutherland sought deliberately  to
    mislead the Tribunal when she stated in her evidence that  all  of  the
    appellant's grandparents had died. Her subsequent  attempt  (only  made
    after a significant pause in her testimony) to claim that she had  been
    referring to her  stepmother  was  wholly  unpersuasive.   As  we  have
    recorded above, we have no doubt that Mrs Sutherland sought to  deceive
    the Tribunal because she believed this would assist her  son's  appeal.
    However, her evidence and the lack of candour shown  by  Mr  Sutherland
    has significantly altered the factual matrix which we  find  exists  in
    this case.  We consider it  more  likely  than  not  that  Mr  and  Mrs
    Sutherland did not wish to tell the Tribunal of the true  circumstances
    of Mrs Sutherland's mother in Ghana because they feared that this would
    weaken their son's case. We find that the appellant's grandmother is  a
    woman in her seventies who lives in Ghana in rented accommodation.   We
    do not find it likely that the accommodation is so small that it  would
    be impossible for the appellant to live with his  grandmother.   We  do
    not consider the fact that the appellant is a male should  in  any  way
    inhibit his ability to live with his own  grandmother.   Significantly,
    we find that there is in existence a financial  mechanism  whereby  Mrs
    Sutherland remits money to her mother in Ghana  to  pay  for  rent  and
    possibly other expenses. Mrs Sutherland does not, at  present,  receive
    any financial assistance from Mr Sutherland (although we doubt that  he
    is has been, as he claims, unaware of the arrangement). We  find  that,
    if the appellant were to be deported  to  Ghana,  not  only  would  Mrs
    Sutherland continue with the present arrangement but that it is  highly
    likely  that  Mr  Sutherland  would  assist  financially  by  the  same
    mechanism to support both the appellant and his grandmother.   We  find
    that there is no possibility, in the light of those arrangements,  that
    the appellant would be destitute upon his return to Ghana. Further, the
    appellant told us that he had achieved several academic  qualifications
    whilst in prison. We accept Mr Mills's submission  that  the  appellant
    would be able to use those qualifications in order to  obtain  work  in
    Ghana; the appellant's complaint that he has never worked before in his
    life seems to us to be irrelevant.

 8. So far as the  appellant's  circumstances  upon  return  to  Ghana  are
    concerned, the findings which we have set out in  the  paragraph  above
    lead us to conclude that he would  not  encounter  circumstances  which
    would be unjustifiably harsh. He would be returning to the  country  of
    his nationality where  the  appellant's  first  language  (English)  is
    widely  spoken  and  in  which  government  and  official  business  is
    conducted.  We attach little weight to the appellant's  complaint  that
    he would not be able to speak the "dialect"; his  anticipated  problems
    in this regard were never properly explained to us.  He would,  in  any
    event, have the assistance of his  grandmother.     We  find  that  the
    appellant would be able to look for work  and,  in  the  shorter  term,
    would receive financial assistance  from  his  parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 9. There  is,  in  our  opinion,  nothing  "sufficiently  compelling  (and
    therefore exceptional) to outweigh the public interest in  deportation"
    regarding the likely circumstances of the appellant on return to  Ghana
    which we have detailed above (see MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192).
    What then of  the  impact  of  the  appellant's  deportation  upon  his
    existing family and private life and the family and  private  lives  of
    his close family members?  We find  that  the  appellant's  mother,  in
    particular, has been gravely upset by the emotional  trauma  caused  by
    her son's criminality and conviction.  We accept that she has  suffered
    from stress and depression.  We also have no doubt that his father  and
    siblings are also very distressed by  what  has  occurred  and  by  the
    prospect of the appellant's removal to Ghana.  Whilst we are well aware
    that continued communication by email or telephone is a poor substitute
    for day-to-day, face to face contact, we do find that this is a  stable
    moderately well-off family  whose  members  would  be  in  a  financial
    position to arrange to visit the appellant in Ghana, quite probably  on
    a regular basis.  Further, the impact of the appellant's deportation on
    the Article 8 rights of all involved must be considered in the  context
    of the fact that the appellant  is  now,  like  all  the  other  family
    members involved, an adult.  He would, in  natural  course,  have  been
    expecting to leave his parents' home at the age of 20 years.

10. In light of the findings and observations which we have set out  above,
    we are unable to conclude that, notwithstanding  the  evident  distress
    which would be caused, the deportation of the appellant to  Ghana  will
    have consequences upon the family and private lives  of  the  appellant
    himself and his family  members  which  are  so  harsh  as  to  warrant
    allowing his appeal.   Mr Mills submitted that this  family,  far  from
    being exceptional, was entirely normal, consisting of caring and loving
    family members closely committed to each other's welfare. We agree with
    that submission; there is nothing unusual about the family  itself  or,
    as a consequence of the criminal behaviour of one of its  members,  the
    circumstances in which it now finds itself.  Whilst we  have  no  doubt
    that the appellant's removal will deepen the distress of  close  family
    members (especially Mrs Sutherland) neither the interference caused  to
    family life in the United Kingdom nor  the  material  circumstances  to
    which the appellant will be removed in Ghana are such as to signify the
    circumstances of this appeal as exceptional.

11. In addition, we do find that this is a case where, notwithstanding  the
    fact that the appellant is not a repeat offender, there exists  a  very
    powerful public interest concerned with his  deportation.   Whilst  the
    probation reports indicate  that  the  appellant  is  at  low  risk  of
    reoffending, any offending which he may perpetrate in the future is  at
    risk of causing considerable harm to individuals in the community.   Mr
    Mills cited the decision of the Court of Appeal in RE  (Turkey)  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 249 at[ [14]:

         Ms Hulse submits that this was a misdirection by the AIT because in
         truth the immigration judge did  properly  take  into  account  the
         impact of the appellant's  criminal  convictions.  She  did  so  at
         paragraph 36 of her determination  before  setting  out  as  bullet
         points the factors which, as I have  already  indicated,  she  held
         favoured the appellant not  being  removed.  At  paragraph  36  she
         stated:
         "The offences were indeed abhorrent, and the fact that  he  pleaded
         not guilty,  and  put  his  former  wife  and  children  through  a
         contested hearing is to be deprecated. His former wife  was  likely
         to have been traumatised by the experience."
         I have to say  I  consider  that  this  seriously  understates  the
         gravity of the appellant's crime. The AIT's point moreover was  not
         that the immigration judge had forgotten or ignored the fact of the
         appellant's criminal convictions but that they had simply failed to
         accord anything like due weight to their gravity. Rape is  a  crime
         which causes much revulsion in the mind of  right-thinking  people.
         If it is committed by an alien with no right or  settled  right  to
         remain here, public policy will very likely call for the criminal's
         removal or deportation; and only the  most  pressing  compassionate
         factors will be capable of tilting the balance  the  other  way.  I
         regard such a proposition as no  more  than  dictated  by  ordinary
         humanity. The immigration judge did  not  recognise  that  critical
         aspect of the balance to be struck. Her decision contains  what  is
         little more than a perfunctory acknowledgment of the gravity of the
         crime followed by a list of bullet point factors said to go in  the
         appellant's favour, none of  which  is  as  pressing  as  might  be
         required and some of which do no more than point to the absence  of
         further vice rather than the presence of virtue.  I  consider  that
         the immigration judge's approach was unreasonable, with respect  to
         her, and the AIT were quite right to find an error of law.



12. Consideration of the public interest brings us to  the  application  of
    Maslov v Austria (Application 1638/03) ECHR, in particular [75]:

    In short, the Court considers  that  for  a  settled  migrant  who  has
    lawfully spent all or the major part of his or her childhood and  youth
    in the host country  very  serious  reasons  are  required  to  justify
    expulsion. This is all the more so where the person concerned committed
    the offences underlying the expulsion measure as a juvenile.

13. We have had regard to the comments of Laws LJ  in  RE  as  regards  the
    repugnance with which the crime of rape  is  considered  in  the  wider
    community and having considered also the sentencing remarks of Recorder
    Elson, we find that this is a case where, whilst  we  acknowledge  that
    the appellant came to the United Kingdom when he was only 5 years  old,
    there exist very serious reasons and a legitimate  public  interest  to
    justify his deportation.

14.  Having   considered   paragraphs   398   of   HC   395   ("exceptional
    circumstances") and having applied  to  the  facts  of  this  case  the
    relevant Strasbourg jurisprudence concerning Article  8  ECHR,  we  are
    brought to the same conclusion.  The deportation of this  appellant  to
    Ghana represents a proportionate response to his criminality when it is
    considered in the context of his and his close family members'  private
    and family lives and the interference that  will  be  caused  to  those
    lives by his removal. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

15. This appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules is dismissed.

16. This appeal is dismissed human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).









Signed                              Date 8 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

