
[pic]
IAC-hw-mp-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01766/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 January 2016                   |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SULEIMAN HUSSEIN JAFFAR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Willcocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Claimant: Ms P Glass, instructed by Freemans Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (a panel comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge A
    W Khan and Mrs L Schmitt JP) promulgated on 3 December 2014,  in  which
    it allowed the appeal of Mr Hussein (the "claimant") appeal against the
    decision of the Secretary of State (whom I refer to as  the  respondent
    as she was below) made on 5 September 2014 that he is a person to  whom
    section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies as  he  is  a  foreign
    criminal.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Uganda who, it appears, was on 11 May 2005
    granted indefinite leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as  part  of  a
    family reunion exercise but in the false name of Ronald Kavumar. He did
    not, however, enter the United Kingdom in that name but in a  different
    identity, Geoffrey Nakendo using a student visa. On 3 March 2008 he was
    granted a "no time limit" endorsement in his passport held in the  name
    of Ronald Kavumar.  The claimant's use of aliases came to the attention
    of the respondent and his leave  was  cancelled;  his  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his residence here, and the family life
    established was refused. On 20  September  2013  he  was  convicted  of
    offences  of  conspiracy,  frauds  and  possession  of  false  identity
    documents and was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment, on  account  of
    which the respondent made the decision to deport him.

 3. The appellant's partner, Ms Kaganda, is a British Citizen and they have
    two children who are also British Citizens, aged  4  and  3  years.  Ms
    Kaganda has suffered from leukaemia since 2007, her condition  becoming
    more acute and requiring a bone marrow transplant. She has been, on any
    view, extremely ill, and she has only recently started work again part-
    time. She is unable to travel to  Uganda  as  she  requires  continuing
    complex monitoring and treatment in the United  Kingdom;  she  is  also
    unable  to  undergo  immunisation  rendering  any  travel   to   Uganda
    hazardous.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant was in  a  relationship
    with his wife but [24] that the requirements of paragraph  399  (b)  of
    the Immigration Rules could not be met as the claimant did not meet the
    requirement of paragraph 399 (b) (i) to have lived here  for  15  years
    with valid leave prior to the date of decision.

 5. The Tribunal also directed itself [19] whether  the  claimant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration  Rules,  concluding
    [22] that this was not a case whether there was no other family  member
    able to look after the family.

 6. The Tribunal did, however, find  [27]  and  [28]  that  it  was  not  a
    realistic proposition for Ms Kaganda to go to live in Uganda, given her
    health problems, and it was not reasonable for her to relocate there.

 7. After directing itself [29] - [33] as to the effect of  sections  117A-
    117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the  Tribunal
    found:

      i) That by virtue section 117C (5), Exception 2 applied  [34]  as  the
         effect of deportation on the claimant's  partner  would  be  unduly
         harsh, it not being reasonable to expect he to go  to  Uganda  with
         him;

     ii) That the effect of deportation on  his  children  would  be  unduly
         harsh as it w would mean a break up of family life, as it would  be
         in the children's best interests to remain in  the  UK  with  their
         mother [34], [35];

    iii) That in this  case  the  public  interest  was  outweighed  by  the
         exceptional circumstances which exist [36]-[38]; and,  accordingly,
         deportation would be disproportionate.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    and on human rights grounds.

 9. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) The Tribunal had erred in determining the appeal on the basis of  a
         version of the Immigration Rules which had been superseded [1];

     ii) The Tribunal's conclusion that the effect  of  deportation  on  the
         claimant's partner and children would be unduly harsh  was  flawed,
         as little weight should be attached to  a  relationship  which  was
         formed while the claimant's immigration status was  precarious  [2]
         and there was no evidence to show that medical treatment would  not
         be available in Uganda;

    iii) The Tribunal had erred in its  finding  that  relocation  would  be
         unduly harsh as it had found relocation would be possible once  the
         partner's  condition  had  improved,  and  thus  the  choice   over
         relocation was one the family made [3], and the best  interests  of
         the children could be met by remaining here with their mother;

     iv) The Tribunal had erred  in  finding  that  the  circumstances  were
         exceptional,  and  that  any   separation   of   the   family   was
         proportionate, the claimant's assistance being preferable  was  not
         sufficient [4]; and,  thus,  as  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the
         exceptions set out in paragraph 399 (a) and 399 (b), it  would  not
         be unduly harsh for partner  and  children  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the claimant;

      v) The Tribunal had erred in its  approach  to  the  public  interest,
         wrongly starting from a neutral point rather than appreciating that
         the public interest is heavily in favour of deportation, and failed
         to take into  account  whether  the  appellant  had  addressed  his
         behaviour [6];

10. On 14 April 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Storey granted permission on  all
    grounds.

Findings

11. It was agreed by both representatives that  the  Tribunal  had,  as  is
    evident from their discussion of the relevant Immigration Rules at [19]
    and [24] in particular, had applied the previous version of  paragraphs
    398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules.  The current version of the rules
    differs from the earlier provisions in a number of important respects.

12. That said, it is clear from the Tribunal's findings at  [22]  and  [24]
    that they did not accept that the  claimant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 399(a) of 399(b) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  follows,
    therefore, that the appeal was allowed on the basis there were, as  was
    found at [38], exceptional circumstances do  exist,  having  considered
    the effect of sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act.

13. The current rules provide, however, at paragraph 398  as follows:-

         '...

         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A [emphasis added]'

14. In the circumstances, I am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  misdirected
    itself materially  in  respect  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  that
    accordingly, the decision must  be  set  aside.   Despite  the  valiant
    submissions to the contrary, and not without some hesitation, I am  not
    satisfied that it can properly be argued that  the  result  would  have
    been the same as the error is so fundamental to the conclusion reached.



15. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision did involve  the
    making of an error of law, and I set it aside.  As it  is  now  over  a
    year since the findings of fact were made, I consider that it would  be
    necessary for fresh findings of  fact,  and  to  receive  new  evidence
    regarding Ms Kaganda's  medical  condition,  and  the  availability  of
    relevant treatment in Uganda, if that is possible, as well as  updating
    on the position of the children. Further account would need to be taken
    of any further  offending  by  the  claimant.   In  the  circumstances,
    therefore, I consider that it would be appropriate to remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all relevant issues.



Summary of conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  on
    all issues.


Signed   Date: 28 January 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

