
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01406/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2016                      |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                             mr Mario d'ambrosio
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bobb, Solicitor of Aylish Alexander Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born on 3 January 1969, is a national of  Italy,
    who claims to have arrived in this country in 2006, although as  he  is
    an EEA national and therefore not subject to  immigration  control,  no
    record of his entry was made.  In circumstances which will be  set  out
    below, the respondent on 26 June 2013 made a decision to deport him but
    the appellant's appeal against this decision was allowed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert sitting  at  Hendon  Magistrates'  Court  on  19
    August 2015.  The respondent appealed against this decision  and  in  a
    hearing before me on 9 November 2015,  I  found  that  Judge  Herbert's
    decision had contained a material error of law such that  the  decision
    had to be re-made. It having  been  accepted  at  the  outset  by  both
    parties that in the event that I found there to have been an  error  of
    law in Judge Herbert's decision it  should  be  re-made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the hearing was then adjourned so that I  could  re-make  the
    decision,  having  heard  up-to-date  evidence  from   the   appellant.
    Accordingly, as this is the re-hearing of  the  appellant's  appeal,  I
    shall again refer to the parties as they were originally, that is to Mr
    D'Ambrosio as "the appellant" and to the Secretary  of  State  as  "the
    respondent".

 2. Following the hearing on 9  November  2015,  I  gave  a  full  judgment
    setting out the background to the decision to deport the appellant  and
    also my reasons for finding that Judge  Herbert's  decision  could  not
    stand.  I incorporate much of what was said in that decision below.

 3. Before entering this country, the appellant had been living in the USA,
    where he had eight convictions recorded against him from 1990  to  2007
    (as appeared from the  pre-sentence  report  which  had  been  prepared
    before his sentence for the index offence which  will  be  referred  to
    below).  These include robbery, assault,  harassment  and  drug-related
    offences.  He also has convictions in Italy for failure to  report  for
    call-up, but it was the appellant's case (again set out within the pre-
    sentence report) that he  should  not  have  been  convicted  of  these
    offences, because he had been living in  the  USA  when  he  was  first
    called for national service.

 4. In this country, the appellant was  convicted  at  Thames  Magistrates'
    Court  on  24  June  2011  for  battery  and   criminal   damage,   the
    circumstances being that he punched and kicked  a  female  victim  with
    whom he lived when she  returned  home  after  going  out  without  him
    (because he had been too intoxicated to attend a party with  her),  and
    damaged her property.  He denied the offences, but  was  convicted  and
    sentenced  to  a  community  order  (100  hours  of  unpaid  work   and
    supervision for twelve months).

 5. Although other complaints were made against the appellant alleging very
    serious offences, these did  not  lead  to  criminal  charges,  on  one
    occasion because an alleged  victim  claimed  that  the  appellant  had
    threatened to kill her if he was convicted.  These allegations are also
    set out within the pre-sentence report.

 6. Then on 24 January 2013 the appellant was convicted of an exceptionally
    serious offence of rape, for which he  was  sentenced  to  a  total  of
    eleven years' imprisonment, being eight years' custody plus  a  further
    three years' extended license period.  He was also convicted of a count
    of  assault  in  connection  with  this  rape.   There   were   several
    aggravating features within this offence.  The offence  was  sustained,
    it involved serious violence,  including  the  use  of  a  weapon,  and
    furthermore, after being bailed with a condition  not  to  contact  the
    victim, in defiance of that order, the appellant approached the victim,
    threatened her and subjected her to further violence.  He ran a defence
    which was not believed (that the victim had been a willing party  in  a
    sadomasochistic relationship) but in the judge's words "the  jury  were
    not deceived, they were not hoodwinked and you were convicted".   Again
    in the judge's words "in  my  view...  this  was  a  sustained  attack,
    involving the use of a weapon, and it has  other  aggravating  features
    about being in her own home".  With regard to the danger posed  by  the
    appellant, the judge found as follows:

         "... Ignoring ... the convictions in the United States  of  America
         and also ignoring ... the allegations made by other women,  I  have
         come to the firm view that you do present as a significant risk  of
         serious harm by the commission of further specified offending."

 7.  Subsequent  to  the  appellant's  conviction  and  sentence  for  this
    exceptionally serious offence, the respondent on 26 June 2013 made  the
    decision to deport him which was the subject of the appeal before Judge
    Herbert.

 8. The appellant's appeal before Judge Herbert was heard on 19 August 2015
    and, as already noted above, in a Decision and Reasons  promulgated  on
    28 August 2015, Judge Herbert allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.   When
    granting the respondent permission to  appeal  against  this  decision,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes noted that "it was  common  ground
    before the judge that the [appellant] had never  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence in the UK".  This was because although  on  his  own
    case he had been resident in the UK for over five  years,  he  had  not
    been exercising treaty rights throughout that time.

 9. The respondent's arguments, which had been set out within the very full
    grounds and expanded orally before me at the previous hearing  were  as
    follows.  First, Judge Herbert had been wrong when stating  within  one
    of the numerous paragraphs within his paragraph 9 that  "Regulation  21
    therefore applies and therefore deportation  can  only  be  made  [sic]
    except on serious grounds of public policy,  public  health  or  public
    security", because this is a test which would apply in the  case  of  a
    European national who had acquired  a  right  of  permanent  residence,
    which this appellant  had  not.   Secondly,  and  in  any  event,  when
    considering whether the personal conduct of the appellant represented a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of society", in light of the judge's finding (set
    out within the sixth paragraph within paragraph  9  of  that  decision)
    that the evidence which he considered "lead me to the clear  view  that
    he does pose a medium risk  of  re-offending  and  that  that  risk  is
    towards the lower end of  the  medium  bracket  of  re-offending",  his
    conclusion that the appellant does not present a "sufficiently  serious
    threat" is inadequately reasoned.  Thirdly, Judge Herbert's reliance on
    what  he  considered  to  be  the  appellant's  improved  prospects  of
    rehabilitation if he remained in the UK rather than  being  removed  to
    Italy was not open to him in light of the guidance given by  the  Court
    of Appeal in SSHD v Dumliauskas & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 145.   It  was
    submitted on behalf of the respondent that in  light  of  the  guidance
    given in that case Judge Herbert should  not  have  regarded  it  as  a
    factor of any weight (even if such a finding was open  to  him  on  the
    evidence) that, as he put it at paragraph 12 "put bluntly, there  is  a
    greater risk of the appellant re-offending  should  he  be  removed  to
    Italy than should he remain in  the  United  Kingdom".   Fourthly,  the
    judge had been wrong to find as he  also  did  at  paragraph  12,  that
    "there is no risk at present and will not be a risk to  anybody  either
    in Italy or here as the appellant will be incarcerated until  at  least
    July 2016" and then going  on  to  state  that  "to  a  certain  extent
    therefore his decision is somewhat premature and therefore  I  have  to
    cast my mind forward to some extent to see what the future  risk  would
    be in a year's time".

10. Mr Jarvis, who had been representing  the  respondent  at  the  earlier
    hearing as well as at this re-hearing of  the  appeal,  submitted  that
    "with respect to Judge  Herbert"  his  decision  had  been  "manifestly
    unlawful from top to bottom".  The judge had misunderstood  the  nature
    of the different protection levels applicable depending on  whether  or
    not an applicant had a permanent right of residence and did not  appear
    to appreciate the high public interest in deporting this appellant.  Mr
    Jarvis at the error of law hearing did not shy away from the submission
    that on the facts of this case the decision which Judge Herbert reached
    was perverse.

11. In my previous Decision I recorded that Mr Bobb's submissions in answer
    to the respondent's case were  very  brief.   He  accepted  that  Judge
    Herbert's statement within his multi-paragraph  9  that  in  this  case
    "deportation can only be made  except  on  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy, public health or public security [sic]" did not correctly state
    the law but suggested that this was "nothing but a typing error"  which
    Mr Bobb suggested was clear when one read the decision as a  whole,  in
    which reference as  made  as  to  whether  the  appellant  presented  a
    "sufficiently serious threat" which was the correct test.  With  regard
    to the judge's finding that he would pose a greater risk in Italy  than
    in the UK, Mr Bobb said that the judge had been correct.

12. I was in no doubt that Judge Herbert's statement in the first paragraph
    of his paragraph 9 that in the case of this appellant "deportation  can
    only be made... on serious grounds of public policy, public  health  or
    public security" was clearly wrong (because this  test  was  applicable
    only where an applicant had a permanent right of residence, which  this
    appellant did not) and could not be explained away as a "typing error".
     I also considered that the  judge  appeared  to  have  considered  the
    appeal through the prism of what might  be  best  for  this  appellant,
    without having  due  regard  to  the  very  great  public  interest  in
    deporting  those  who  represent  a  serious  threat  to  one  of   the
    fundamental interests of society, which in this case was  the  need  to
    protect the public from the risk of  serious  crime.   So,  when  Judge
    Herbert stated, within the sixth paragraph of paragraph 9 that "my view
    is in this rather sensitive and borderline case that the assessment  by
    NOMS in May 2013 of a medium risk does not  reach  the  high  threshold
    that the appellant poses, two years  later,  a  serious  threat",  this
    betrays  a  misunderstanding  of  what  must  be   established   before
    deportation can be justified.  The test is not, as the  judge  appeared
    to believe, whether or not there was a high risk of the  appellant  re-
    offending, but whether the risk posed  by  this  appellant's  continued
    presence in the UK was sufficiently serious  as  to  justify  deporting
    him.  Nowhere in his decision did Judge Herbert demonstrate that he had
    in mind the public interest in removing from this country  persons  who
    pose even a medium risk of committing offences of such a serious nature
    as this appellant had in the past and might in the future  continue  to
    commit.  Without needing to make a finding as to  whether  or  not  the
    decision was perverse I considered  that  it  was  sufficient  for  the
    purpose of finding a material error of law (which I did) that I set out
    my finding that Judge Herbert  had  not  adequately  explained  why  he
    considered that a person who poses even a "medium" risk  of  continuing
    to commit such exceptionally serious offences does not for this  reason
    represent a serious threat.

13. Insofar as Judge Herbert considered that it may have been  relevant  to
    his decision that the prospects of  rehabilitation  of  this  appellant
    were higher in this country than they would be in  Italy,  he  did  not
    appear to have had regard to what was  said  in  the  judgment  of  Sir
    Stanley Burnton in Dumliauskas (with whose judgment the  other  members
    of the court agreed) at paragraph 54, as follows:

         "I do not consider  that  in  the  case  of  an  offender  with  no
         permanent right of residence substantial weight should be given  to
         rehabilitation.  I  appreciate  that  all  member  states  have  an
         interest in  reducing  criminality,  and  that  deportation  merely
         exports  the  offender,  leaving  him  free  to  offend  elsewhere.
         However, the whole point of deportation  is  to  remove  from  this
         country someone whose offending renders him a risk to  the  public.
         The Directive recognises that the more  serious  the  risk  of  re-
         offending, any offences that he may commit, the greater  the  right
         to interfere with the right of residence."

14. In my previous decision, giving my reasons for finding an error of law,
    I also set out what  Judge  Herbert  stated  at  paragraph  10  of  his
    decision, as follows:

         "I am also mindful, although it is not a direct  consideration  but
         as a matter of commonsense, there must be concern if a person is to
         be  deported  to  another  European  jurisdiction  where  all   the
         safeguards in place are designed, written and set out  in  English.
         With the best will in the world it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the
         various documents, probation reports and body of  evidence  on  the
         appellant's progress of [sic] lack of it whilst in custody would be
         available to the Italian authorities.   One  of  the  dangers  that
         occur when foreign criminals either come to the United  Kingdom  or
         are removed is that the full documentation does not accompany them.
          That matter simply needs to be recorded  in  such  a  decision  as
         this."

15. As I have already found, Judge Herbert does not seem to have had regard
    to the judgment in  Dumliauskas  when  setting  out  this  concern,  in
    particular to what is  said  at  paragraph  55  of  that  judgment,  as
    follows:

         "Furthermore, as I mentioned above, a deported  offender  will  not
         normally  have  committed  an  offence  within  the  state  of  his
         nationality.  There is a  real  risk  of  his  re-offending,  since
         otherwise the power to deport does not arise.  Nonetheless, he will
         not normally have access to a probation officer or the  equivalent.
         That must have been obvious to the European Parliament and  to  the
         Commission when they adopted the Directive.  For the lack  of  such
         support to preclude deportation is difficult to reconcile with  the
         express power to deport.  In my judgment it should not, in general,
         do so."

16. Accordingly I found that Judge Herbert  had  not  applied  the  correct
    test, considering wrongly  that  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy,
    public health or public security" had to be made out, and failing  also
    to explain adequately why in this case  the  fact  that  the  appellant
    posed a medium risk of  re-offending,  given  the  seriousness  of  the
    offences he had shown he may commit, did not constitute a  sufficiently
    serious threat to justify his deportation.   For  these  reasons  Judge
    Herbert's decision had to be set aside and re-made.

17. It is right that I record again that although  at  the  outset  of  the
    error of law hearing, both representatives had agreed that in the event
    that the Tribunal was to find an error of law the decision should be re-
    made by the Upper Tribunal, at the conclusion of that hearing,  when  I
    had indicated that I would find an error of law  because  I  considered
    that there were serious errors  within  Judge  Herbert's  decision,  Mr
    Bobb, on behalf of the appellant, asked me to  consider  remitting  the
    appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal and  recusing  myself  from  any
    further involvement in this appeal.  His reason for so asking  appeared
    to be that I had  expressed  the  view  during  the  hearing  that  the
    appellant's offending had been exceptionally serious and that the judge
    had not put in the balance properly, as he ought, the very high  public
    interest there must be in protecting the public in  this  country  from
    further offences of this type.  Having considered Mr Bobb's submissions
    in this regard very seriously indeed, I was not persuaded  either  that
    the appeal should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-
    hearing or that I should recuse myself.

18. With regard to retaining the appeal within the  Upper  Tribunal,  Judge
    Herbert had already found that at the very least this appellant posed a
    medium risk of re-offending, and it had also been accepted that he  had
    not established the right  to  permanent  residence  in  this  country.
    Accordingly, there was no need for there to be  a  complete  re-hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the proper course was for the  Upper
    Tribunal to re-hear the appeal with the benefit of such further updated
    reports as might be adduced, if either party wished to do so, and  also
    hearing evidence from the appellant and anyone else he wished  to  call
    on his behalf.

19. With regard to the suggestion that I should  recuse  myself,  I  repeat
    what I have already stated in this regard, which is that  there  is  no
    legitimate reason why I should do  so.   This  appeal  was  part  heard
    before me, and the reasons which I gave  (and  have  repeated  in  this
    Decision) for finding an error of law  were  founded  entirely  on  the
    papers contained within the file together with the submissions made  by
    the parties' respective representatives, and were bound to  be  carried
    forward into the resumed hearing.  That is what happens when an  appeal
    is adjourned part heard.  An applicant is not entitled to a  change  of
    judge part way through a hearing because he or his  representative  are
    unhappy about the way his case is progressing.

20. Accordingly, I gave directions for the re-hearing to be  heard,  before
    me, on 11 July 2016, which it has  been,  which  included  a  direction
    giving the parties permission to adduce further evidence if so  advised
    so long as this was filed and served by a specified date.

The Resumed Hearing

21. At the hearing, I heard evidence from the appellant,  who  adopted  his
    most recent witness statement, prepared for this hearing, and was cross-
    examined.  I was referred to an updated OASys assessment dated 27  June
    2016 (that is just before the hearing) (although the interview on which
    it was based had  been  conducted  the  previous  February)  and  heard
    submissions on behalf of both  parties.   I  will  not  set  out  below
    everything which was contained within the report  or  everything  which
    was said to me during the course of the hearing, but I have had  regard
    to everything contained within the file, whether or  not  the  same  is
    specifically referred to below.

22. In cross-examination, the appellant was asked whether he recalled  some
    of the matters set out in the updated OASys Report, such as refusing to
    return to his cell on 18 June 2015 and having to be  restrained,  which
    the appellant claimed not to recall.  He also disputed a  lot  of  what
    was written about disputes he had had whilst in custody.  His  answers,
    in my judgment, were evasive when  asked  about  the  circumstances  in
    which he had admitted that he had committed  rape.   He  said  that  in
    order to be accepted on a course he knew he had to accept  the  charge,
    but claimed that he had in fact accepted his guilt some  time  earlier,
    "within a year from my last time I was in court, sometime  last  year".
    He claimed this was immediately after the hearing before Judge Herbert,
    in about November 2015.  When it was pointed out to him by the Tribunal
    that the probation officer who wrote the most recent  OASys  assessment
    stated that during her interview with him he had continued to deny  the
    offence the appellant claimed that "we never  had  that  conversation".
    He said further that "I don't recall telling her that I didn't  do  the
    offence".  Later on, he also disputed other observations  made  by  the
    Probation Officer such as where she said that he had not said  that  he
    believed in male superiority.  He went as far as to say that the report
    "should be positive" because "I  am  looked  at  as  a  role  model  in
    prison".  He claimed that he had never had a proper introduction to his
    probation officer "because of the charge of rape".

23. The appellant also claimed to have been targeted by one of  the  prison
    officers who had taken it upon himself to attack him.  He  also  denied
    saying in interview that he was in debt.

24. In re-examination the appellant claimed that he  had  been  "trying  to
    recover my belief in God"  and  denied  that  he  had  ever  threatened
    officers.  He also denied sexually touching the victim when he had  had
    the argument with her.  He also denied that he had ever  subjected  his
    wife to sexual abuse.

Submissions

25. On behalf of the respondent, Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that,  as  required
    within Regulation 21(5) of the 2006  EEA  Regulations  (which  will  be
    discussed below), this appellant did constitute a genuine, present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to this country.   The  appellant  did  not
    have a permanent right of residence and the nature of the risk  of  re-
    offending was sufficiently serious as to  justify  his  deportation  on
    grounds of public policy.  In the circumstances it was proportionate to
    deport him to Italy.

26. Mr Jarvis addressed the Tribunal as to what was meant by various  terms
    contained within the  OASys  Report,  for  example  that  there  was  a
    probability of proven re-offending of 30% in the first year.   He  also
    referred to that part of the report which assessed that  the  appellant
    was a high risk to members  of  the  public.   Although  the  probation
    service regarded a risk of a 1 in 3 chance of re-offending, low in  the
    context of their own work in terms of what this Tribunal had to assess,
    this was more than enough to show a present threat.

27. Mr Jarvis also submitted (and this is a matter which I consider  below)
    that the appellant was an unreliable witness who had lied in  the  past
    and been  found  to  have  lied  by  a  jury.   He  had  a  history  of
    manipulating evidence and never genuinely accepts he is at fault,  save
    when it is an alternative to deportation.  The Tribunal  had  heard  no
    evidence from his sister or mother, and insofar as it is said  that  he
    knows nothing and no one in Italy, there is no reason why he could  not
    be supported by his family.  There is no evidence that he would not be.
     Further, no case had been put forward that he could not work in  Italy
    nor had the Tribunal been given any evidence of private or family  life
    in the UK.

28. On behalf of the appellant,  it  was  submitted  that  Judge  Herbert's
    findings of fact that the appellant did have a private and family  life
    in this country should stand.  While it could not be disputed  that  if
    this appellant re-offended there would  be  a  possibility  of  serious
    harm, the issue which had to be determined was whether it was  probable
    that he would offend again.  The report assessed the probability of the
    appellant re-offending as "low".

29. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to whether or not  it  was
    accepted that a 30% risk was a serious threat, Mr Bobb  submitted  that
    the Tribunal either accepted he was a "low" risk or not.

30. Referring to the finding at page 13 of the OASys assessment that "it is
    my assessment there is a high risk of [the appellant] committing sexual
    and physical violence towards women  he  is  involved  in  an  intimate
    relationship  with",  Mr  Bobb  emphasised  that  this  assessment  was
    qualified by the caveat that "the risk can only be reduced should  [the
    appellant] address the causes of his offending".   That  would  address
    the issue.  While it was acknowledged that there was a public  interest
    in  deporting  serious  criminals,  the  decision  still  had   to   be
    proportionate.  The process of being in prison must reduce the risk  in
    some way, especially  if  the  prisoner  has  addressed  his  offending
    behaviour.

31. Regarding the risk of re-offending, Mr  Bobb  repeated  his  submission
    that if the risk was reduced, that would go to the question of  whether
    he now presented a sufficiently serious threat to date to  justify  his
    deportation.  He asked the Tribunal to accept that  the  appellant  had
    made efforts to address his offending.  He also emphasised that in  the
    OASys Report it was suggested that he should undergo other courses when
    he was on licence, which would all go towards reducing  any  risk  that
    was currently there.

32. While Mr Bobb accepted that the Court  of  Appeal  in  Dumliauskas  had
    stated that "substantial" weight should not be given to the prospect of
    rehabilitation in this country as opposed to the country  to  which  an
    applicant would be deported, this did not mean that no weight should be
    given to the prospects of rehabilitation.

33. In the absence of the appellant, Mr Bobb then addressed  the  court  on
    the  basis  that  the  OASys  Report  had  given   no   indication   or
    consideration whatsoever as to how losing a wife and two children and a
    home might have impacted on this appellant's character and personality.
     As Mr Bobb put it, "we are not saying he is a great upstanding guy" or
    that he had an unblemished character; it was accepted he had  committed
    a terrible crime but as made clear in the witness  statement  given  by
    his mother, no one seemed to recognise that he had just lost his  wife.
    With regard to his wife, there was no evidence of abuse to her and  the
    Tribunal was invited to disregard a suggestion that he had  abused  his
    wife.

34. With regard to the gaps in his explanation of his motivation,  Mr  Bobb
    suggested that it might be that  the  appellant's  failure  to  explain
    himself  properly  was  because  people  were   sceptical   about   any
    explanation he gave.  He was entitled to have his  side  of  the  story
    told, although ultimately it was a decision for the Tribunal as to what
    view the Tribunal took  as  to  his  explanation.   The  Tribunal  must
    appreciate the circumstances in which he committed  this  crime,  which
    was relevant when considering what risk he posed in the future.

35. When attempting to distinguish the decision in  Dumliauskas  from  this
    case, Mr Bobb advanced what I regarded as the extraordinary proposition
    that "it would not be in anyone's interest for  him  to  be  deported",
    because although it might be said that the  citizens  of  this  country
    would be safer "what is to say that a British citizen would not  go  on
    holiday to Italy and be raped there?"

36. Having made this rather bizarre suggestion Mr Bobb continued by stating
    that "a degree of commonsense has to be  shown.   A  degree  of  shared
    interest in people not committing crimes anywhere in the EU", which the
    Tribunal noted at the time seemed to be precisely  the  argument  which
    had been rejected so robustly by the Court of Appeal in Dumliauskas.

37. Having then submitted that the appellant was not a "recidivist  rapist"
    and was "not somebody who is likely to do this again" (which is not  as
    will be discussed below consistent with  what  is  said  in  the  OASys
    Report), Mr Bobb then suggested that the decision was not proportionate
    anyway because his right to physical and moral  integrity  encapsulated
    his right to continue his rehabilitation.  He also had  a  family  life
    with his brother and his sister in this country.  It would, claimed  Mr
    Bobb, be "unduly harsh to seek to deport someone to  Italy  who  hasn't
    been there for 42 years".  The Tribunal  would  have  to  give  maximum
    weight to the period of time spent in the UK.

38. In conclusion, Mr Bobb submitted that:

         "If one really delves into the facts  of  this  case,  although  he
         committed a really serious crime - which was not his first offence,
         because he had had a few brushes with the law - on the totality  of
         the evidence and in particular that of his mother and  his  brother
         and sister and his own evidence, it was possible to  conclude  that
         this was  a  one  off  offence  brought  about  by  the  particular
         situation he found himself in".

39. When it was pointed out to him by the Tribunal that the  index  offence
    could not sensibly be described as a  "one  off"  offence  because  the
    appellant had returned and assaulted the victim again, Mr Bobb accepted
    that there could be no excuse for  his  returning  and  assaulting  the
    victim.  However, whatever the  Tribunal  made  of  the  evidence,  the
    appellant does now say  that  he  accepts  his  guilt.   While  it  was
    conceded that in the initial stages he did not accept his  guilt,  many
    offenders had difficulty in accepting guilt initially.

Discussion and Findings

40. It is common ground that because this appellant  is  an  EEA  national,
    when considering whether or not to uphold the decision to  deport  him,
    the Tribunal must have regard to Regulation 21 of the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2006, which provides as follows:

         "21- (1) In this regulation a  'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
                  decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                  security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                  ends....

             (5)   Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of  public
                  policy  or  public  security  it  shall,  in  addition  to
                  complying  with   the   preceding   paragraphs   of   this
                  regulation, be taken  in  accordance  with  the  following
                  principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of
                      society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy or public security in relation to  a  person
                  who is resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker
                  must take account of considerations such as the age, state
                  of health, family and economic situation  of  the  person,
                  the person's length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,
                  the person's social  and  cultural  integration  into  the
                  United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
                  his country of origin...".

41. Accordingly the first question that must be addressed is whether or not
    (in accordance with Regulation 21(5)(c)  the  appellant  represents  "a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society" such as to justify  his  deportation.
    This decision would have to be proportionate.

42. Clearly, there is a huge  public  interest  in  reducing  the  risk  of
    serious crime in this country, and to the extent that  the  appellant's
    conduct represents a serious threat that he will commit further crimes,
    especially given the seriousness of the crimes he has shown he  may  be
    likely to commit, this would affect one of the fundamental interests of
    society.  The first issue that must be decided is  accordingly  whether
    or not the threat the appellant poses is a present one and sufficiently
    serious such that deportation would  be  proportionate.   The  Tribunal
    must have regard to the factors set out within Regulation 21(6),  which
    I have had.  I note that the appellant is relatively young and healthy,
    there is no reason why he cannot get a job if returned to Italy, and he
    had been in the UK only about six years before being sentenced to  such
    a long term of imprisonment.  It is apparent from  his  offending  also
    that his social and cultural integration into this country was not high
    and I take account of the fact that very little evidence was  given  as
    to his private or family life here.  Although he left Italy when he was
    very young, he has lived there since  (as  noted  in  the  respondent's
    original grounds of appeal he spent six months living in Italy in  2010
    "fighting to obtain his residency and obtain acceptance that he was  an
    Italian national") and he was previously married in  that  country  and
    speaks Italian.  It appears that he has a brother and  extended  family
    in Italy as well and he had previously been deported  from  the  United
    States to Italy following convictions for  criminal  offences  in  that
    country.

43. Having  factored  into  my  decision  the  considerations  set  out  in
    Regulation 21(6), I now have to consider whether the  threat  posed  by
    the appellant if he is allowed to remain in this  country  is  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious to justify his deportation and in this
    regard I take into account the most recent OASys Report, together  with
    the evidence he gave and the submissions which were made on his behalf.

44. Turning to the OASys Report, it is right that  I  record  that  I  have
    rarely seen a more discouraging report about an  offender.   I  do  not
    propose to set out what is said in this report in huge detail, but will
    refer to some extracts from it.  The offence itself  (as  described  at
    page 8) was obviously horrific, but what makes this appellant the  more
    dangerous is not just that he was a person who was prepared  to  commit
    such an awful offence but that in the view of the writer of  the  OASys
    assessment he did not recognise the  impact  and  consequences  of  his
    offending on the victim, the community or wider society (see at 2.6  on
    page 9 of the very long assessment).  It is also the case (and  I  note
    that this was inconsistent with the evidence which the  appellant  gave
    to the Tribunal at the hearing) that according to  the  writer  of  the
    report the appellant "vehemently denied the offences that he  has  been
    convicted for" giving a different account, which is set out at page 10.
     It is recorded that he told the probation  officer  that  "the  victim
    introduced him to the world  of  sadomasochism".   The  writer  of  the
    report noted again that the appellant  had  "vehemently  protested  his
    innocence throughout the interview" and regarded his version of  events
    "overall... [as] a calculated ploy... to defame the victim's  character
    in order to favour his".  She further found that "it is  my  assessment
    that [the appellant's] offending behaviour is strongly  underpinned  by
    his sexist and hostile attitudes towards women... [which]  attitude  is
    characterised by a belief in male superiority, thus promoting a  desire
    to  dominate  and  exert  violent  control".   Further,  the  appellant
    "presented himself as  an  individual  with  no  consideration  to  the
    ramifications of his behaviour, victim empathy or remorse".

45. Then later (at page 12) the writer of the  report  considers  that  the
    appellant's "criminal history demonstrates an individual  who  is  more
    than willing to use violent behaviour against a stranger when he  feels
    it is justified and I am of the belief that his robbery conviction  may
    have been to sustain his drug use, however, I am unable to substantiate
    this".  At page 13, the following assessment is made:

         "[The appellant] currently poses a high risk  of  serious  harm  to
         members of the public, specifically females.  This is  due  to  his
         denial of the offences, disdain towards the victim, his hostile and
         sexist attitudes towards women which I believe stem from  his  view
         of male superiority.  In addition he  minimises  history  of  being
         abusive towards women.  It is my assessment there is a high risk of
         [the appellant] committing sexual  and  physical  violence  towards
         women he is involved in an intimate relationship with".

46. It is right that the writer does then state (as Mr  Bobb  referred  the
    Tribunal to in his submissions) that "the  risk  can  only  be  reduced
    should [the appellant] address the causes of his offending".

47. The assessment contains details of occasions when the appellant was  in
    dispute with those running the prison he was incarcerated in, which  as
    I have noted the appellant continues to deny.

48. In the formal assessment, under "probability of  proven  re-offending",
    the probability is said to be 30% within one year, which while this may
    be "low" in the context of other prisoners, is still, in my judgment, a
    very serious risk indeed when one considers the sort of  offence  which
    the appellant is capable of committing and the effect this  would  have
    on the public.  The risk in the community is  said  to  be  "medium  to
    children, high towards members of the  public  and  low  in  all  other
    categories".   He  is  also  said  to  represent  a  "medium  risk   of
    reconviction for a sexual crime, high for a non sexual violent crime".

49. On the final page of the report,  when  assessing  the  "likelihood  of
    serious harm to others",  although the risk in custody is  said  to  be
    low (presumably because the appellant is not at  large)  his  "risk  in
    community" is stated to be high to the public, high to  a  known  adult
    and medium to children.

50. Although signed off in June of  this  year,  the  assessment  had  been
    conducted on 8 February 2016, but this  is  beyond  the  time  when  in
    evidence the appellant claimed to have accepted his guilt.

51. I have to have in mind that the evidence which the  appellant  gave  to
    the Tribunal is completely  at  odds  with  what  is  recorded  in  the
    assessment by an  experienced  probation  officer.   There  is,  in  my
    judgment, no reason whatsoever  why  she  should  not  accurately  have
    recorded what the  appellant  had  told  her,  so  I  accept  that  the
    appellant did indeed continue vociferously to deny having committed the
    offence of which he was convicted, as he had before the jury.  I  found
    the answer that the appellant gave the Tribunal that  he  had  accepted
    his guilt because without an acceptance of guilt he would not  be  able
    to go on a course revealing; in my judgment, his motivation  for  going
    on this course is not because he considers he has a problem (if he  did
    he would have accepted his  guilt  from  the  outset)  but  because  he
    considered  that  unless  he  went  on  the  course  his   chances   of
    successfully challenging the deportation order would  be  significantly
    reduced.  It is the case that this appellant  has  consistently  denied
    committing the very serious rape but  has  been  disbelieved  on  every
    occasion.

52. In my judgment, this appellant  represents  an  enormous  risk  to  the
    public if he is at large  in  this  country.   He  is  clearly  a  very
    dangerous individual  and  the  threat  which  he  poses  currently  is
    extremely serious, such that the decision to  deport  him  is  entirely
    proportionate.  I do not regard this decision  as  in  any  way  finely
    balanced; having regard to all the factors in this  case,  as  set  out
    above, the decision is entirely justified.  Mr Bobb's suggestion in his
    closing submissions that it would be in nobody's interest to deport him
    clearly had no merit.  It is in the interests of  the  British  public,
    who would otherwise be at considerable risk of becoming a victim to his
    continued offending.  The risk to the public is in my judgment so  high
    that, having regard to the factors set out within Regulation  21(6)  of
    the 2006 Regulations, his deportation is  entirely  proportionate.   It
    follows  that  when  re-making  this  decision,  I  must  dismiss   the
    appellant's appeal.



Decision

I set aside the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  who  had
allowed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  to  deport
him and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 4 November 2016

