
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01165/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 May 2014                                |On 3 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                    Claimant


                                     and



                          MR JOSEPH JANBAZIAN ZULU
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss V Hutton, Counsel, instructed by Cotisens,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (a panel comprising First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mitchell and Sir Jeffrey James KBE, CMG) in  which  they
    allowed the appeal of Mr Joseph Janbazian Zulu, a Zambian  citizen  (to
    whom I refer as the claimant) against a decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State made on 22 May 2013 that he is a person to whom Section 32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 applies and thus must be deported as a  foreign
    criminal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal also imposed an anonymity order preventing  the
    claimant's name being published or him being otherwise identified.  The
    Secretary of State has not challenged that decision. Nonetheless, I  do
    not consider that such an order can be justified. The claimant's crimes
    are a matter of public record, and there is no good reason advanced why
    he should be protected from  publicity  and  the  consequences  of  his
    wrongdoing. For that reason, having taken into account the views of the
    parties, I consider that the anonymity order  should  not  continue  in
    respect of this decision. I do, however, maintain the  anonymity  order
    in respect of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Zambia born on 7  April  1994  in  Kwekwe,
    Zimbabwe.  His  mother  is  Congolese  by  origin,  obtaining   Zambian
    citizenship through her step-father; the claimant's father, to whom his
    mother was never married, is a German citizen of Lebanese origin. It is
    not  part  of  the  claimant's  case  that  he  has   acquired   German
    nationality.

 4. The claimant has never lived in Zambia  although  has  visited  on  one
    occasion en route to the United Kingdom in 2003  to  join  his  mother.
    Until then he had lived in Zimbabwe where he was educated. He has lived
    here ever since and was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  10
    September 2010 as a dependant of his  mother.   The  claimant  has  two
    older brothers who also live in the United Kingdom and two younger half-
    siblings whose father is a Nigerian national to whom his mother is  now
    married.

 5. On 13 July 2012 the claimant was convicted of violent disorder and  two
    counts of arson.  The offences took place during the 2011 London  riots
    and he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for  violent  disorder,
    54 months' imprisonment for the first count of arson and 42 months  for
    the second count, the sentences to run concurrently.  That  is  without
    doubt a significant sentence.

 6. The Secretary of State's  case  is  that  the  claimant  is  a  foreign
    national who must be deported and, as he has been sentenced to  a  term
    of  imprisonment  in  excess  of  four  years,  it  would  only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation would
    be outweighed by other factors and that  there  were  in  his  case  no
    exceptional circumstances such that  deportation  should  not  proceed.
    She considered that he could keep contact with his siblings  by  modern
    forms of communications and visits  to  him;  that  he  had  failed  to
    establish that there is family  life  between  himself  and  his  adult
    family members.  She also considered that he had failed to show that he
    had never lived in Zambia, finding that he had left at approximately  6
    years old; that, as the official language of Zambia  is  English  there
    would be linguistic barrier to hinder his successful reintegration into
    Zambian society and whilst that would be challenging, he possesses  the
    necessary  language,  education  and  knowledge  to  make  his   return
    successful.  She was not satisfied  that  there  was  anything  in  the
    claimant's private life which  would  prevent  his  deportation  to  or
    reintegration into life in Zambia.

 7. The claimant's case is that he has never lived in Zambia and thus would
    not be re-integrating to society there, but going  to  a  country  with
    which he has no connection other  than  his  nationality.   He  has  no
    friends, relatives or contacts there; he would have no  employment,  no
    accommodation and no prospects.  It is also his  case  that  he  has  a
    close relationship with his siblings, mother and step-father  and  that
    he has had to look after the younger children effectively as  a  parent
    owing to his mother and step-father's illness and thus his  deportation
    was disproportionate.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the  claimant,  his  mother
    and step-father all of whom were cross-examined.  It  was  accepted  by
    both parties that the claimant is a Zambian national and that he  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraphs 399 or 399A of the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Tribunal found that:-

      i) paragraphs 398 and  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules  constitute  a
         complete code [79];  that  the  claimant  has  committed  extremely
         serious offences [81] and that the Immigration Rules make it  clear
         that it would only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public
         interest in deportation would be outweighed by other factors [82];

     ii) the claimant's and his witnesses' evidence was credible [68];

    iii) the claimant had been born in Zimbabwe and had lived his whole life
         there, until he arrived in the United Kingdom in 2003, never having
         spent a significant time in Zambia [69] and thus, deportation would
         be sending him to Zambia, not returning him there;

     iv) the claimant has  no  ties  or  connections  to  Zambia;  the  only
         relative he has outside the United Kingdom  is  a  grandmother  who
         lives in Zimbabwe; that he would be unfamiliar with the culture and
         all the social aspects of Zambia, would  be  unable  to  speak  any
         language spoken there other than English; that his situation  there
         would exacerbated by the fact that he is of mixed race  [74];  that
         in many countries being of mixed race is a significant disadvantage
         in acceptance [74] and given his ethnic heritage,  it  is  unlikely
         the claimant would have the facial characteristics or  skin  colour
         of many Zambians [75];

      v) the  claimant  has  a  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
         respondent's representative accepting that deporting  the  claimant
         would be an interference with that family life [80], and that there
         was no suggestion that  anyone  in  the  claimant's  family  should
         follow him to Zambia [83];

     vi) the  claimant  had  expressed  remorse  for  his  crimes,  has  not
         committed any other crimes, had no previous  convictions  and  they
         are unaware of any adjudications whilst in prison  [100],  that  he
         has disassociated himself from his friends  in  his  neighbourhood,
         has matured, has insight into his offending and the  best  evidence
         before them that the risk of his re-offending was low;

    vii) the claimant may have some difficulty in  obtaining  employment  in
         Zambia having never lived there and having no social  ties  and  or
         assistance from relatives [101] and he would  not  be  welcomed  by
         either the authorities or those in the community given his criminal
         record [102];

   viii) the claimant appears to have played  a  parental  role  within  his
         family  which  is  indicative  of  his  character  [104],  and  the
         situation of him having to play a parental role within  the  family
         increases the chances that he would not re-offend in the future  as
         he has substantial support as an integral  member  of  an  extended
         family;

     ix) while the claimant's qualifications and ability  to  speak  English
         may be of assistance to him  in  Zambia  [108]  he  would  have  no
         contacts or connections with the country; is of mixed race,  making
         it harder to integrate and avoid discrimination; and, he would  not
         be integrating into Zambian society for the first time  [109],  but
         entering it for the first time, having spent his formative years in
         the United Kingdom where he had been educated and  spent  half  his
         life;

      x) the Secretary of State's decision was  incorrectly  founded  on  an
         assumption that the claimant would have contacts in  Zambia  as  he
         had lived there in the past albeit when young  [107];  that  whilst
         the claimant's crime was not only serious but high profile in  that
         he took part in riots and that there are elements of this case that
         are unattractive and he had pleaded  not  guilty  to  the  offences
         resulting  in  a  trial  being  arranged;  that  his   family   has
         exaggerated to some extent his role within the family  [120];  but,
         that in all the circumstances the effects of deportation  would  be
         unjustifiably harsh [125] and therefore the decision would  not  be
         proportionate;

     xi) it was  appropriate  in  the  circumstances  to  put  in  place  an
         anonymity order.

 9. The  Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baird  on
    25 March 2014

10. The grounds on which the Secretary of State seeks to overturn the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision are discursive, and are  not  without  factual
    error. In essence, the Secretary of State's case is that  the  Tribunal
    erred in three ways when evaluating  whether  the  public  interest  in
    deporting the claimant was outweighed,  those  errors  being  that  the
    Tribunal:

      1) made a number of findings of fact which  were  unsupported  by  the
         evidence and had wrongly taken those into account in the claimant's
         favour;

      2) failed to give proper weight to the public  interest  in  deporting
         the claimant; and,

      3) failed to identify circumstances particular to the claimant  which,
         over and above the factors  identified  in  the  Immigration  Rules
         399A, were exceptional.

11. I deal with these errors in turn.

    Errors of Fact

12. The Secretary of State submits that the Tribunal made errors of fact in
    reaching findings, in the absence of proper evidence:-

      i) that the claimant would be disadvantaged  due  to  being  of  mixed
         race;

     ii) that he would not be welcomed back to Zambia  as  a  deportee  but,
         there being  no evidence to substantiate that;

    iii) as to the claimant's actual  involvement  with  his  family,  there
         being no evidence as to anyone being unable to cope in his absence,
         no relationship between the  claimant  and  his  family  not  being
         beyond normal emotional ties;

     iv) that the claimant would be unable to relocate to Zimbabwe given  he
         had spent the first nine years of his life there,  there  being  no
         evidence of him residing or illegally there or  that  he  had  made
         enquiries about living there, the conclusion thus being unreasoned;

      v) that the claimant intends to move upon release to a different area,
         there accordingly being a risk that he may associate with  negative
         peers again increasing his risk to society, there being in addition
         no  evidence  his  family  would  be  able  to  exert  insufficient
         influence over him as they had been able to do so before;

     vi) that the claimant's offence did  not  involve  violence  which  was
         incorrect.

13. In their determination at paragraph  [68]  the  panel  found  that  the
    claimant's and his witnesses'  evidence  was  credible.   There  is  no
    challenge to that in the grounds as pleaded by the Secretary of  State,
    nor is it established that a submission to the contrary was made to the
    First-tier Tribunal, or that  the  contrary  had  been  put  in  cross-
    examination.  It flows from this that the  Tribunal  were  entitled  to
    make findings of fact on the basis of the evidence put forward  by  the
    claimant.

14. In his witness statement the claimant said [17]  that  if  deported  to
    Zambia "I would have nowhere to live and would not be able  to  support
    myself.  I would be homeless and living on the streets.  I feel that as
    a mixed race person, I would be subject  to  attack  and  fear  for  my
    personal safety."

15. His mother, in her witness statement says:-

         "[26] I do not have any family in Zambia.   Joseph  does  not  know
             anyone in Zambia; he would have nowhere to live and would  end
             up on the streets.  He would have difficulty fitting into  any
             local community.   He  is  of  mixed  race  ethnicity.   I  am
             Congolese by birth, Zambian by nationality and his  father  is
             German.  I do not have any home town I belong to  in  Zambia."



16. The Secretary of State's grounds do not make an effective challenge  to
    that evidence, nor is it shown that this evidence was challenged before
    the First-tier Tribunal. It is in the circumstances not  arguable  that
    there was, as the  grounds  state  "no  evidence  to  substantiate  the
    finding the [claimant] would be disadvantaged"; the  material  was  set
    out in the witness statements. As Miss Hutton submitted,  the  evidence
    in the witness statement was not challenged by the Secretary of State's
    representative  in  cross-examination  or  his  oral  submissions.   Mr
    Bramble was unable to make any submissions to the contrary.

17. With regard to whether the claimant would be "welcomed" back to Zambia,
    the use of the word implies a positive  act  on  the  part  of  Zambian
    society, the authorities or family. In this context it must be borne in
    mind that there is no challenge to the finding that  the  claimant  had
    never been there except for a short  period  en  route  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was in the circumstances reasonable for  the  Tribunal  to
    conclude that the claimant would not be "welcomed back" bearing in mind
    that Zambia is not somewhere he had ever lived.  This is not a  finding
    that he would face difficulties from the  authorities;  it  is  nothing
    more than observation that it is  unlikely  that  there  would  be  any
    positive attitude towards him as he would be entering the country as  a
    convicted criminal and as a person with little or no connection to  the
    country other than nationality.

18. Mr Bramble developed his grounds, submitting that  at  paragraphs  103,
    104 and 120 the Tribunal had in effect contradicted themselves, finding
    that  the  claimant's  family  appeared  to  have  suffered  from   the
    consequences of imprisonment of a family member [103] but that this was
    not a reason for the claimant not to  be  deported  himself;  that  the
    claimant had played a parental  role  within  the  family  [104]  which
    increased the chances that he would not re-offend in  future;  yet,  at
    paragraph 120 that the family had exaggerated to some extent  his  role
    in the family and their reliance upon him.

19. Absent any  proper  challenge  to  the  assessment  of  the  witnesses'
    credibility, it is not arguable that the Tribunal  reached  conclusions
    at paragraphs 102 to 104 of the determination which were  not  open  to
    them.  The fact that the witnesses  exaggerated  is  not  a  sufficient
    basis to show that the Tribunal's finding that  nonetheless  there  was
    still a strong family life was perverse or irrational; it was  open  to
    the Tribunal, on considering the evidence, that while  an  attempt  had
    been made to show that family life was stronger than it  in  fact  was,
    nonetheless, it was still strong, and they gave proper reasons for that
    finding.

20. The grounds as pleaded by the Secretary of State fail to  identify  any
    basis on which the Tribunal erred in accepting the claimant's assurance
    that he had  matured  and  had  insight  into  his  offending  and  had
    disassociated himself from the friends.  The challenge as expressed  in
    paragraph 6 of the grounds is that there is no evidence he  intends  to
    move to a different area on release.  That is not  so.  It  is  evident
    from the trial court records that he was living in Wolverhampton at the
    time of his trial and it is evident from  his  witness  statement,  and
    this was not challenged by the secretary of State before the First-tier
    Tribunal, that at the time of the offences he  was  living  in  London.
    That was a number of months, nearly a year, earlier. As  was  noted  in
    the sentencing remarks made by the Judge,  the  claimant  had  been  in
    custody for only twelve days prior to the trial. The conclusion that he
    had moved away from his home area is thus  supported  by  the  evidence
    adduced by the Secretary of State  and  placed  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

21. Whilst it is submitted by the Secretary of State  that  the  Tribunal's
    finding as to the risk of the claimant re-offending is inadequate given
    that there is no evidence that  he  has  addressed  his  behaviour  and
    failed to consider the risk of harm, Mr Bramble was unable to direct me
    to any contrary evidence and it has not been shown on  the  grounds  as
    pleaded that these conclusions were not open to the Tribunal

22. Mr Bramble accepted that it  was  not  correct,  contrary  to  what  is
    pleaded, that the Tribunal had found that the offences did not  involve
    violence.  He also accepted that it had not been part of the  Secretary
    of State's case previously that  the  claimant  could  go  to  live  in
    Zimbabwe. While he was born there, it is not part of the  Secretary  of
    State's case that he has Zimbabwean  Citizenship;  as  neither  of  his
    parents had that nationality, that is  unsurprising.   Accordingly,  it
    cannot have been an error for the Tribunal not to consider whether  the
    claimant could relocate there.  In any  event,  it  would  be  somewhat
    surprising if he were  to  be  admitted  to  Zimbabwe  given  he  is  a
    convicted criminal and not a national.

23. With regard to the claimant's linguistic ability, it  is  not  disputed
    that English is the first language  of  Zambia  or  that  the  claimant
    speaks English.  Indeed he has been educated in that  medium  for  most
    his life.  He does, in his witness statement,  say  that  he  does  not
    speak the main language in  Zambia,  Nyanga  and  again  that  was  not
    disputed below.

24. There is, at first glance, an inconsistency in the Tribunal's  findings
    [101] that the claimant would have "some  difficulty"  in  obtaining  a
    job, but that is only if that factor is considered in isolation of  the
    other factors, such as the lack of means,  accommodation  and  support,
    and it would appear that in the use of  the  qualification  "some"  the
    Tribunal was, perhaps inadvisably, using understatement.

25. Taking these factors together I consider that the  Secretary  of  State
    has not shown that the Tribunal reached findings of fact which were not
    open to them and indeed there is no challenge to two important findings
    of fact - that the claimant despite being a citizen of Zambia had never
    lived there - or that he has established a family life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, a point  the  Secretary  of  State's  representative  conceded
    before the First-tier Tribunal in direct contrast to her  case  as  set
    out in the refusal letter.

26. For the reasons set out above, the Secretary of  State  has  failed  to
    establish that the Tribunal made any material errors of fact which were
    taken  into  account  in  evaluating  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances.





Failure to attach proper weight to the public interest

27. Mr Bramble submitted that the Tribunal's decision could have been  more
    fully reasoned in light of the decision in MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA  Civ  1192.   Miss  Hutton  submitted  that  in  consequence,  the
    Secretary of State's case is in effect a "reasons challenge".

28. It is at this point apposite to consider what was  said  in  English  v
    Emery Reimbold & Strick Limited [2002] EWCA Civ 3685 at [26]:

         "Where permission is granted to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
         judgment does not contain  adequate  reasons  the  Appellate  Court
         should first review the judgment, in the context  of  the  material
         evidence and submissions  at  the  trial,  in  order  to  determine
         whether, when all of these are considered, it is apparent  why  the
         judge reached the decision that he did.  It is satisfied  that  the
         reason is apparent that if there is a valid basis for the  judgment
         the appeal would be dismissed."

29. Further, as was stated in B v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 922 per Latham LJ at
    [17], [18]:

         "It may be that inadequate  reasoning  can  in  some  circumstances
         undermine the validity of a decision.  Certainly, if no reasons are
         given there is a well-known basis upon which  the  Appellate  Court
         can interfere, but where reasons have been given  it  seems  to  me
         that the essential question that the court has to answer is whether
         the decision is one to which no Tribunal could sensibly have come.

         The reasons that a Tribunal give may well provide a good  guide  as
         to whether or not this was a decision to which the  Tribunal  could
         properly have come and to that extent, inadequate reasons may be  a
         guide but they are only a guide to the ultimate question which,  in
         my judgment, is whether or not the decision is  one  to  which  the
         Tribunal was entitled to reach on the  evidence  which  was  before
         it."

30. In their determination, the Tribunal refer extensively to the  relevant
    case law in which the public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals. They also refer to the wider dimension over  and  above  the
    need to deter. The Tribunal also directed themselves in accordance with
    Kabia (MF: Para 298 - Exceptional Circumstances) [2013] UKUT 00569.

31. In this case, it is evident from their determination that the  Tribunal
    were  fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  it  was  only  in  exceptional
    circumstances  that  this  claimant  could  succeed.    They   directed
    themselves properly as to  the  relevant  case  law  noting  [95]  that
    exceptional cases are numerically rare and that "exceptional" refers to
    circumstances in which deportation would result in unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences to the individual  or  their  families  which  deportation
    would not be proportionate, a circumstance that is  likely  to  be  the
    case only very rarely.  They concluded that, on the facts of this case,
    the consequences would be unjustifiably  harsh,  and  thus  deportation
    would be disproportionate.





Failure to identify properly exceptional circumstances.

32. The Secretary of State submits  that  the  "exceptional  circumstances"
    within paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules,  must  be  circumstances
    which are over and above those set out in the Rules  at  paragraph  399
    and 399A and that what  the  Tribunal  had  identified  as  exceptional
    circumstances were simply those which would have availed  the  claimant
    had he come within the terms of paragraph 399 or 399A had he received a
    sentence of less than four years' duration but did not go beyond  that;
    and, thus, the Tribunal had erred not in the adequacy of their  reasons
    but  substantively  by  not  directing  themselves  to  the   type   of
    circumstances which are capable of outweighing the public  interest  in
    deporting a foreign criminal.

33.  The  exercise  to  be  undertaken  by  a  Tribunal  when   considering
    circumstances not provided for by the  Immigration  Rules  requires  an
    assessment of proportionality. In SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    550 the Court of Appeal underlined an aspect of the  weighing  exercise
    that any Tribunal is required to undertake but to which, in the view of
    the Court of Appeal, inadequate emphasis had hitherto been given.  This
    was in  relation  to  the  fact  that  the  presumption  in  favour  of
    deportation was a presumption embodied in primary legislation  and  was
    not therefore a policy formulated by executive decision. For the  Court
    of Appeal this was of real importance and meant that  when  the  public
    importance  was  placed  in  the  proportionality  scales  it   carried
    substantial weight. Laws LJ [28] stated of previous jurisprudence (from
    this jurisdiction but also from the Strasbourg  Court):  "There  is  no
    acknowledgement ... that the weight to be attached in an article 8 case
    to a State's policy of deporting foreign criminals may be greater where
    the policy is made,  not  by  the  executive  government,  but  by  the
    legislature. But this seems to me to be of very great  importance".  In
    paragraph 50 he reiterated that: "... it is the importance attached  by
    Parliament itself that matters".

34. From this the Court of Appeal deduced that the width of the  margin  of
    appreciation of the SSHD in criminal deportation cases was a wide  one.
    This was because of the quintessentially political and moral nature  of
    the value judgment embodied in the legislation:

       52. "In my opinion, however,  this  is  a  central  element  in  the
          adjudication of Article 8 cases where it is proposed to deport  a
          foreign criminal pursuant to s.32 of the 2007 Act. The  width  of
          the primary legislator's discretionary area  of  judgment  is  in
          general   vouchsafed   by   high   authority:   Brown,   Lambert,
          Poplar,Marcic, Lichniak and Eastside Cheese, cited above. But  it
          is lent added force where, as here,  the  subject-matter  of  the
          legislature's policy lies in the field  of  moral  and  political
          judgment, as to which the first and natural arbiter of the extent
          to which it represents a "pressing social need" is  what  I  have
          called the elected arm of government: and especially the  primary
          legislature, whose Acts are the primary democratic  voice.  What,
          then, should we make of the weight which the democratic voice has
          accorded to the policy of deporting foreign criminals?

          (2) THE NATURE OF THE POLICY: MORAL AND POLITICAL

      53. The importance of the moral and political character of the policy
          shows that the two drivers  of  the  decision-maker's  margin  of
          discretion - the policy's nature and  its  source  -  operate  in
          tandem. An Act of Parliament is anyway to be specially respected;
          but all the more so when it declares policy of this kind. In this
          case, the policy is general and overarching. It is  circumscribed
          only by five carefully drawn exceptions, of which  the  first  is
          violation of a person's Convention/  Refugee  Convention  rights.
          (The others concern minors, EU cases, extradition cases and cases
          involving  persons  subject  to  orders   under   mental   health
          legislation.) Clearly, Parliament in the 2007  Act  has  attached
          very great weight to the policy as a  well  justified  imperative
          for the protection of the public  and  to  reflect  the  public's
          proper condemnation of serious wrongdoers.  Sedley  LJ  was  with
          respect right to state that "[in the case of a 'foreign criminal'
          the Act places in the proportionality scales a  markedly  greater
          weight than in other cases.

      54. I would draw particular attention to the provision  contained  in
          s.33(7):  "section  32(4)  applies  despite  the  application  of
          Exception 1...", that is to say, a foreign criminal's deportation
          remains  conducive  to  the  public  good   notwithstanding   his
          successful reliance on Article 8. I said  at  paragraph  46  that
          while the authorities  demonstrate  that  there  is  no  rule  of
          exceptionality for Article 8, they also  clearly  show  that  the
          more pressing the public interest in removal or deportation,  the
          stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is  to  prevail.
          The pressing nature  of  the  public  interest  here  is  vividly
          informed by the fact that by Parliament's express declaration the
          public interest is injured if the criminal's deportation  is  not
          effected. Such a result could in my judgment only be justified by
          a very strong claim indeed. "

35. The court emphasised, in the light of  this  consideration,  that  when
    applying  the  test  of  proportionality  a   principle   of   "minimal
    interference" should be adopted. This  meant  that  whilst  fundamental
    rights could never be treated as token or as a ritual  nonetheless  the
    discretionary judgment enjoyed by the  primary  decision-maker,  though
    variable, meant that the court's role was to keep in balance with  that
    of the elected arms of Government.

36. In paragraph 47 the court drew together various jurisprudential threads
    and stated:

    "47. It is worth drawing these general considerations together.

            1) The principle of  minimal  interference  is  the  essence  of
               proportionality: it ensures that the ECHR right  in  question
               is never treated as a token or a ritual, and thus  guarantees
               its force.

            2) In a  child's  case  the  right  in  question  (child's  best
               interests)  is  always   a   consideration   of   substantial
               importance.

            3) Article 8 contains no rule of 'exceptionality', but the  more
               pressing the public interest in removal or  deportation,  the
               stronger must be the claim  under  Article  8  if  it  is  to
               prevail.

            4)  Upon  the  question  whether  the   principle   of   minimal
               interference is fulfilled the primary decision-maker enjoys a
               variable margin of discretion,  at  its  broadest  where  the
               decision  applies   general   policy   created   by   primary
               legislation.

37. At paragraph 54 Laws LJ stated this about the strength of the Article 8
    evidence needed to counter the policy objection:

         "I would draw particular attention to the  provision  contained  in
         s.33(7):  'Section  32(4)  applies  despite  the   application   of
         Exception 1...', that is to say, a foreign  criminal's  deportation
         remains conducive to the public good notwithstanding his successful
         reliance on Article 8. I  said  at  paragraph  46  that  while  the
         authorities demonstrate that there is no rule of exceptionality for
         Article 8, they also clearly show that the more pressing the public
         interest in removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim
         under Article 8 if it is to prevail. The  pressing  nature  of  the
         public interest here is  vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by
         Parliament's express declaration the public interest is injured  if
         the criminal's deportation is not effected. Such a result could  in
         my judgment only be justified by a very strong claim indeed."

38. It is worthwhile reciting the summary of the facts in the  case  of  SS
    (Nigeria) set out by the Court [56] and [57]:

         56. This Appellant was convicted of serious  offences  of  peddling
         Class A drugs. He had no vestige of a right to be or remain in  the
         United  Kingdom,  so  that  immigration  policy  as  well  as   his
         criminality favours his deportation. He worked  illegally.  The  UT
         found (paragraph 57) that 'has the potential to present a real risk
         to members of the public and to  society  in  general  due  to  the
         effect of drugs'.

         57. As for the interest of the Appellant's son (now aged  5),  this
         is not a case where the Appellant's deportation  will  involve  the
         child's having to move to Nigeria. He will continue  to  be  looked
         after by his primary  carer,  his  mother,  as  he  was  while  the
         Appellant was in prison. The Secretary of State had made  enquiries
         of the child's mother and also  Walsall  Children's  Services.  The
         Appellant appears to have been selling drugs on the streets  whilst
         he had a very young son at home."

39. In MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  (decided  shortly  after  SS
    (Nigeria)) the Court of Appeal  also  addressed  the  strength  of  the
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals. In particular the court
    focused upon the strength of the "other factors" which  would  need  to
    exist before a justification for deportation would  be  set  aside.  In
    paragraph 40 of their judgment the Court of Appeal stated:

         "Does it follow that the new rules have effected  no  change  other
         than to spell out the circumstances in which a  foreign  criminal's
         claim that deportation would  breach  his  Article  8  rights  will
         succeed? At this point, it is necessary to focus on  the  statement
         that it will only be 'in exceptional circumstances that the  public
         interest in deportation will be outweighed by  other  factors'.  Ms
         Giovannetti submits that the reference to exceptional circumstances
         serves the purpose of emphasising that, in the balancing  exercise,
         great weight should be given to the public  interest  in  deporting
         foreign criminals who do not satisfy paras 398 and 399 or 399A.  It
         is only exceptionally that such foreign criminals will  succeed  in
         showing that their rights  under  Article  8(1)  trump  the  public
         interest in their deportation."

40. In paragraph 42 the Court stated that in cases of criminal deportation:
    "...the scales are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of  deportation  and
    something very compelling (which will be exceptional)  is  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in removal". In  paragraph  43  the  Court
    stated that the general rule was that in the case of foreign  prisoners
    to whom paragraphs 399 and 399A did not apply "very compelling reasons"
    would be required to outweigh the public interest in deportation

41. In the circumstances, the Tribunal did not err by referring  to  Razgar
    [112].  It is evident from the discussion above that if a Tribunal  has
    to consider whether there are exceptional circumstances,  there  is  of
    necessity still to be a balancing exercise  albeit  one  in  which  the
    scales in favour of deportation start heavily weighted in the Secretary
    of State's favour all  the  more  so  where,  as  here,  a  significant
    sentence in excess of four years has been passed.  It is  not  properly
    arguable that the Tribunal did not take that into account,  given  that
    they directed themselves properly as to the relevant case law.

42. It is evident reading the determination as a whole that there is no one
    factor which kept the balance in the claimant's favour and it is  worth
    noting that the Secretary of State herself said in the  refusal  letter
    that the claimant's return was likely to be challenging  (page  6),  an
    assessment was also predicated on the assumption that the claimant  had
    spent several years in Zambia, had contacts to turn to there,  and  had
    established no family life  here.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not,
    however, challenge the evidence that the claimant had  never  lived  in
    Zambia, and  conceded  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he  had
    established a family life here, contrary to her case as set out in  the
    refusal letter.

43. It was the claimant's evidence and that of his mother  as  set  out  in
    their witness statements and which was not  challenged  below  that  he
    would have no job, no accommodation, and no  money  on  deportation  to
    Zambia.  It is not properly established that  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted below that he could rely on funds submitted by relatives  nor
    is there evidence supporting such a submission.  More  importantly,  it
    is not established that the claimant's evidence on this was  challenged
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

44. It is evident that the  Tribunal  found  that  the  circumstances  were
    sufficient on the unusual facts of this case  to  make  the  Claimant's
    deportation disproportionate.  It cannot properly be argued  that  they
    gave insufficient  consideration  to  the  weight  to  be  attached  to
    deportation, referring as they  do  to  the  relevant  case  law  which
    establishes the deterrent effect as well as the  effect  of  preventing
    those affected from offending again after release  and  it  is  evident
    [121] that  they  were  aware  and  took  into  account  the  views  of
    Parliament.

45. In evaluating this situation the Tribunal were entitled to consider the
    decision in Maslov, indeed this was a matter conceded  by  Counsel  for
    the Secretary of State  in  MF  (Nigeria).   Further,  they  identified
    factors which, when taken cumulatively, they considered meant that  the
    consequences of deportation to a country where he has never  lived  and
    with  which  he  has  the  most  tenuous  of  connections,   would   be
    unjustifiably harsh, a conclusion open to them, the claimant's  serious
    criminality and the public interest in removing him notwithstanding.

    Conclusion

46. Returning to the decisions in English v Emery Reinbold and  B  v  SSHD,
    and  to  the  passages  cited  above,  it  is,  on  the  face  of   the
    determination why the First-tier Tribunal reached the  conclusion  that
    they did. Further, it was one which, on the material before them,  they
    were entitled to reach.

47. For these reasons, the Secretary  of  State  has  not  shown  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law, and, while it may not have been a decision to  which  the
    Upper Tribunal might have come, it must therefore be upheld.

48. That said, I am not satisfied that it is in the public interest that an
    anonymity order remain in  favour  of  the  claimant.  It  is  only  in
    exceptional circumstances that the strong  public  interest  in  public
    justice can be outweighed, and in this case, they are  not  insofar  as
    the claimant's identity is concerned.  That said, the determination  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal   contains   material   which   must   remain
    confidential given its nature and the  risks  to  others.  I  therefore
    maintain the anonymity order in respect of that determination.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law and I uphold it.
   2. The anonymity order put in place by the First-tier Tribunal remains so
      far as it relates to their determination, but does not apply  to  this
      determination.


Signed                                  Date: 1 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


