
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01329/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 29th April and 28th May 2015      |On 29th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR MARTIN GIRGA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
         Secretary of State.

    2.   The Respondent to this appeal is Mr Girga  but  for  the  sake  of
         continuity and clarity I will continue  to  refer  to  him  as  the
         Appellant and to the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent.  This
         appeal first came before me on 29th April 2015 when I decided  that
         the First-tier Tribunal had made a material error of  law  and  set
         aside its decision.  The error of law was inadequate reasoning that
         deportation was  disproportionate.  I  adjourned  the  case  for  a
         resumed hearing. Thus the matter came before me on 28th May.

    3.   The Appellant, born on 18th August 1978 is a  Czech  Roma  and  as
         such an EEA national. He appeared in person before  me  as  he  did
         before the First-tier Tribunal.

    4.   The Appellant first entered the  UK  in  April  2002  and  claimed
         asylum. His partner/wife claimed  asylum  in  her  own  right.  The
         asylum claims were refused in May 2002 and the  Appellant's  appeal
         against the refusal dismissed  in  December  2002.  He  had  sought
         asylum on the basis of mistreatment as a Czech Roma.  Mr  Page,  an
         Adjudicator, in his determination at paragraph 21 said that he  had
         reached the clearest view, upon all the evidence  before  him  that
         the Appellant had not shown that he was in  need  of  international
         protection. He found that he had not shown a well founded  fear  of
         persecution and was  claiming  asylum  as  a  means  to  obtain  an
         immigration status in the UK where he would prefer to live.

    5.   The Appellant was then removed from the United Kingdom in  January
         2003. The Czech Republic became a member of the EU on 1st May  2004
         and according to the Appellant, he returned to the UK in the middle
         of May 2004. He was accompanied by his wife, stepson and their  two
         children born in 1999 and 2003. The couple  have  subsequently  had
         two further children born in the UK in 2005 and 2009.

    6.   Throughout his time  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  Appellant  has
         amassed a considerable number of criminal  convictions.  His  first
         offence  was   in   June   2002   when   he   was   cautioned   for
         theft/shoplifting. In the period from 31st October 2002 until  11th
         March 2014 he has been convicted on 20 occasions  of  40  offences.
         The offences included two offences against the person, seven  fraud
         and kindred offences, seven theft and kindred offences, two  public
         order offences, 10 offences relating to police/courts/prisons,  one
         drug offence and 11 miscellaneous offences.

    7.   As a result of his offending the Secretary of State wrote  to  the
         Appellant  on  12th  June  2013  warning  him  that  his  offending
         behaviour was liable  to  result  in  deportation.  Undeterred,  he
         continued to commit offences. On 21st January  2014  the  Appellant
         was convicted at Bolton Magistrates Court of burglary and theft  of
         a non-dwelling and on 3rd March 2014 at Wigan and Leigh Magistrates
         Court of seven counts of making false representations to make  gain
         for himself or another or cause loss  to  others/expose  others  to
         risk. Additionally, on 11th March 2014 he was convicted  at  Bolton
         Magistrates Court of driving while disqualified and using a vehicle
         while uninsured. He was then sentenced to a total  of  nine  months
         imprisonment.

    8.   As a result of his offending a decision was taken on 19th May 2014
         to deport him to the Czech Republic under the Immigration (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).

    9.   At the First-tier Tribunal  hearing in  front  of  Judge  Farrelly
         consideration was given as to whether the Appellant  had a right of
         permanent residence in the United  Kingdom  and  whether  he  could
         demonstrate ten years  continuous  residence  in  the  UK.  On  the
         evidence before Judge Farrelly he found that  neither  applied  and
         only the lower level of  protection  afforded  by  the  Regulations
         apply to the Appellant. Judge Farrelly noted  the  absence  of  any
         documentary evidence  as  to  the  Appellant's  claimed  employment
         throughout his time in the UK.  Notwithstanding those  comments  by
         Judge Farrelly  the  Appellant  has  not  produced  any  additional
         evidence. He produced various payslips but these have been produced
         previously and do not show a period of five years  as  a  qualified
         person. The Appellant claimed that the reason he could  produce  no
         payslips was because there had been a  house  fire  in  2013  which
         destroyed his paperwork. I do not accept that as an adequate excuse
         as it would have been possible for the Appellant to obtain evidence
         from his various employers if it was indeed the case  that  he  had
         been in continuous employment as claimed. Furthermore, he has spent
         a considerable amount of time offending during  that  period  which
         suggests  it  is  unlikely  that  he  would   have   been   working
         continuously. Similarly as his time in the UK has  been  punctuated
         by  offending  and  numerous  prison  sentences  he   cannot   show
         continuous residence for ten years either.

    10.  Under the EEA Regulations  a  person  who  has  neither  permanent
         residence nor been continually resident for a period  of  10  years
         can be removed from the United Kingdom on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy under Regulation 19(5) and Regulation 19  (6)  requires  any
         action taken on the grounds of public policy to  be  in  accordance
         with Regulation 21.

    11.  Regulation 21 provides:-

         21.- Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public
         health grounds

             (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA
             decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
             security or public health.

             (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic
             ends.

             (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a
             person with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15
             except on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

             (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                  period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                  decision; or

                  (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision
                  is necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the
                  Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the
                  General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November
                  19891 .

             (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public
             policy or public security it shall, in addition to complying
             with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in
             accordance with the following principles-

                  (a) the decision must comply with the principle of
                  proportionality;

                  (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must
                  represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                  threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                  society;

                  (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                  which relate to considerations of general prevention do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                  themselves justify the decision.

             (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
             policy or public security in relation to a person who is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must take
             account of considerations such as the age, state of health,
             family and economic situation of the person, the person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin.

             (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds of
             public health-

                  (a) a disease that does not have epidemic potential as
                  defined by the relevant instruments of the World Health
                  Organisation or is not a disease [listed in Schedule 1 to
                  the Health Protection (Notification) Regulations 2010]
                  shall not constitute grounds for the decision;

                  and

                  (b) if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom,
                  diseases occurring after the three month period beginning
                  on the date on which he arrived in the United Kingdom
                  shall not constitute grounds for the decision.

    12.  Before considering the EEA Regulations however I must consider the
         best interests of the four children in this case. I  must  consider
         their interests as a primary consideration but  not  the  paramount
         consideration. Generally speaking, absent  countervailing  factors,
         it is in a child's best interests to live with and  be  brought  up
         with both of its parents. There are of course  numerous  situations
         where that does not happen such as where  parents  separate,  where
         one is abusive or as in cases such as  this  where  one  parent  is
         imprisoned.  Similarly where one parent is deported and  the  other
         chooses to remain.  Such instances are not inevitably  against  the
         children's best interests. I find that the Appellant by his actions
         in this case has not shown that it would be in his children's  best
         interests for him to remain with them. He is  a  spectacularly  bad
         role model and a person who has paid scant regard to their  welfare
         whilst committing his numerous offences. It is also  relevant  when
         considering the best interests of the  children,  to  consider  the
         circumstances of the Appellant's stepson. The  Secretary  of  State
         provided evidence that the Appellant's wife's son, Miroslav  Girga,
         is about to  be  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom  following  a
         conviction for burglary. The Appellant became quite aggressive when
         asked about his stepson refusing  to  answer  questions  about  him
         saying that it was irrelevant to his appeal.  However,  it  is  not
         irrelevant to his appeal because that stepson,  although  now  aged
         24, came to the UK as a child with the Appellant and his  wife  and
         lived in their household. He has clearly followed  the  example  of
         his stepfather so far as  criminality  is  concerned,  which  would
         indicate that the best interests of the Appellant's children do not
         require his continued presence in the household.  He is a poor role
         model, has shown disregard for their  welfare  and  has  chosen  by
         committing crimes  to  separate  himself  from  his  children  when
         imprisoned.

    13.  So far as the Regulations are concerned, Regulations  21  (5)  and
         (6) apply.  As noted by the First-tier Tribunal, this Appellant has
         a vast number of convictions. He blames this on the  fact  that  he
         was a drug addict and that if he had not taken drugs  and  he  only
         did so in the United Kingdom,  he  would  not  have  committed  the
         offences. That of course is an explanation not an  excuse.  He  has
         put forward no evidence of any  work  that  he  has  undertaken  in
         connection with drug abuse  and  he  told  me,  as  he  told  Judge
         Farrelly, that he has come off drugs purely through willpower. I am
         unable to accept that that is the case.  If  all  it  required  was
         willpower then in order to avoid committing  further  offences  and
         being incarcerated and possibly deported from the United Kingdom he
         could have exercised his willpower at any  time  between  2002  and
         2014 and yet he did not do so. He did not do so even after  he  had
         been warned by the Secretary of State that he would be deported  if
         he continued to offend. The sheer number and  variety  of  offences
         lead me to be far from reassured by his claim to have turned over a
         new leaf and that he will not commit further offences. His  history
         would indicate otherwise. He told me that his  wife  was  the  good
         influence that would prevent him either taking drugs  or  offending
         in future. However, his wife has not been able to  exert  any  such
         influence over the past 12 years; nor could she over her son. I  am
         therefore led to  the  inescapable  conclusion  that  the  personal
         conduct  of  this  Appellant  represents  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society. It is a fundamental interest of  society  for
         the public to be protected from serial criminals.

    14.  So far as Regulation 21 (6) is concerned I  am  required  to  take
         into account the Appellant's age. He is now aged 37. With regard to
         his state of health; there is no evidence that he is other than fit
         and well. So far as his family and economic situation is  concerned
         it is that on which he relies most heavily in order  to  remain  in
         the UK. His wife and his four children are all Czech nationals. The
         younger two children were born in  the  UK  and  all  four  are  in
         education. The Appellant said that he is currently working  for  an
         agency but without his passport is unable  to  work  full-time.  He
         told me that he wants to support his family and work.  He  told  me
         that the people that he currently works for want to employ him full-
         time because they are impressed by his work. There was no  evidence
         however from the company to that effect before me.

    15.  Given  the  Appellant's  criminal  record  and  how  he  has  been
         occupying himself over the past 12 years it seems  highly  unlikely
         that he has been providing financially for his family in the UK.  I
         was provided with no evidence from his wife that she is working and
         contributing to the family income, which means that the family  are
         likely to be dependent on public funds.

    16.  While the Appellant has been in the UK for a  considerable  length
         of time that time has been spent largely  committing  offences  and
         displaying a total disregard  for  the  UK  law  and  society.  The
         Appellant says that his wider family is in the UK and he no  longer
         has any family in the Czech Republic. However, it is of  note  that
         he used a Czech interpreter at the hearing and it was clear that he
         understood very little English. He conversed with his wife, he told
         me in Roma and Roma is the language they use at home. His  children
         speak both English  and  Roma.  Language  and  the  fact  that  the
         Appellant has committed so many criminal offences indicates that he
         has not integrated culturally into the UK. Had he done so, he would
         not show such a blatant disregard for the law. While the  Appellant
         has been in the United Kingdom for a long time, he was in the Czech
         Republic for longer than he has been in the UK. As I  have  already
         indicated he is fit and healthy and if he can find work  as  easily
         as he claims there is nothing to prevent his doing so in the  Czech
         Republic.

    17.  The public interest in deporting foreign national  criminals  from
         the United Kingdom is  extremely  high  and  by  his  actions  this
         Appellant has made his deportation  entirely  justified.  Whilst  I
         have found that the best interests of his children do  not  require
         his remaining in the United Kingdom, even if they  did  their  best
         interests would be outweighed by the public  interest  in  removing
         this Appellant from the  United  Kingdom.  As  EEA  nationals,  the
         family can only be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
         Regulations and no decision has been made to remove them.  That  of
         course does not prevent them returning to the Czech  Republic  with
         the Appellant if they wish to do so. The Appellant's wife will have
         a choice to make. She can either leave the UK with her children  to
         live with her husband in the Czech Republic or she  can  remain  in
         the UK with the children but without the  Appellant.  She  will  no
         doubt manage without the Appellant as she has done when he has been
         imprisoned. There is no evidence that either she  or  the  children
         came to any harm when the Appellant was in prison.

    18.  I was told that the wife would remain in the UK if  the  Appellant
         is deported. That is her choice.

    19.   I did not hear from the Appellant's wife.  Despite  my  stressing
         that the Appellant may wish to call her to give  evidence  and  her
         presence at court, he declined to do so.

    20.  For all of the above reasons the Secretary of  State's  appeal  to
         the Upper Tribunal is allowed with the result that the  Appellant's
         appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to deport him from
         the United Kingdom is dismissed.






    Signed   Dated 28th May 2015


    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
