
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01876/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          LAWRENCE OKECHUKWU ANEKE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ojo, Legal Representative


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the  First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in  this  particular  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
         appeals against a decision of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coleman
         promulgated on 6 May 2015 ("the Decision") allowing the Appellant's
         appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  1  October
         2014 that section 32 UK Borders  Act  2007  applies  and  making  a
         deportation order against him dated 19 September 2014.

      2. The background facts so far as it is necessary to  recite  them  at
         this stage are that the Appellant who  is  a  national  of  Nigeria
         arrived in the UK originally as a visitor in  2004.   He  travelled
         between Nigeria and the UK in that capacity in 2004 and 2005 before
         being refused entry in September 2005.  He appealed unsuccessfully.
          He then entered on a false  passport  in  2007.   He  was  refused
         entry,  prosecuted,  convicted  and  sentenced  to   eight   months
         imprisonment.  He applied for voluntary assisted return to  Nigeria
         on release but then absconded and did not come to light again until
         July 2012 when he applied for leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  and
         father of three children.  Whilst that application was pending,  he
         was convicted on 4  December  2013  of  an  offence  of  fraud  and
         sentenced to thirty months' imprisonment.  I  will  return  to  the
         nature and seriousness of that offence below. That offence  led  to
         the making of the deportation order against him.  I  note  at  this
         point that although at various times the  Respondent  has  disputed
         the genuineness of the relationship between the Appellant  and  his
         wife and whether he is in fact the father of  all  three  children,
         those facts are no longer at issue.  The appeal proceeds  therefore
         on the basis that he is in a relationship  with  his  wife  who  is
         originally from Nigeria and is the father of three children born in
         August 2004, February 2006 and June 2011 respectively and therefore
         now aged eleven years, nine years and four years.  The  Appellant's
         wife and children are all now British citizens.

      3. The Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal on human  rights  grounds,
         finding that deportation of the Appellant would be unduly harsh  in
         light of the position of his wife and  children.   The  appeal  was
         therefore allowed on the basis  that  the  Appellant  comes  within
         paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules.

    Error of Law Decision and Reasons

      4. The Respondent challenges the Decision on four grounds.  Ground one
         concerns a mistake of  fact  relating  to  the  Appellant's  wife's
         status in the UK.  It is submitted that this error is material  and
         fundamentally undermines  the  Judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to
         whether deportation would be unduly harsh.  Ground two concerns the
         Judge's treatment of the evidence given by the  Appellant  and  his
         wife.  Ground three asserts that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  give
         appropriate weight to the public interest in  deportation.   Ground
         four proceeds on the basis that the Judge has wrongly  treated  the
         best interests of the children as being a  paramount  factor  which
         cannot be outweighed by the public interest.  Permission to  appeal
         was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Reid  based  predominantly
         on ground one but was not limited to that ground.  I deal with each
         of the grounds in turn.

    Ground one

      5. The Appellant's wife is, as noted at  [2]  above,  originally  from
         Nigeria.  The Judge in the Decision at  [13]  notes  that  she  was
         granted asylum in the UK.  At [31] the Judge notes  that  the  Home
         Office Presenting Officer accepted that she was granted asylum.  On
         that basis, unsurprisingly, the Judge found at [31] that "the  fact
         that she has had reason to fear persecution in Nigeria does clearly
         constitute  insuperable  obstacles  to  her  returning  there   and
         constitutes it being unduly harsh to ask her to expose  herself  to
         any possible risk on that account".  The  Respondent  indicated  in
         the grounds, however, that this is not the correct  position.   The
         Appellant's wife was in fact granted indefinite leave to remain  by
         the Casework Resolution Directorate on 9 September 2008.   As  that
         letter makes clear, the grant was outside the Rules and because  of
         the strength of connections to the UK and had no link to the asylum
         claim (save that her case fell  under  the  "legacy  programme"  by
         reason of her initial asylum claim).   Mr  Kandola  submitted  that
         although the Home Office Presenting  Officer  had  perpetuated  the
         error by accepting that  the  Appellant's  wife  had  been  granted
         asylum, this was a mistake and not a concession and the  Respondent
         ought not to be bound by that mistake.

      6. Mr Ojo submitted that if this is an error (which clearly it is), it
         is not material.  He began his submissions on the basis  that  even
         if the grant was not one of refugee status, there had  not  been  a
         determination of the asylum claim made on her arrival in  2004  and
         the Judge did not err therefore in considering that she  could  not
         return to Nigeria due to  her  fear  on  return.   Mr  Kandola  was
         however able to assist the Tribunal in relation to the asylum claim
         by producing a decision of the First-Tier Tribunal dated  27  April
         2005 dismissing the Appellant's wife's asylum claim and finding her
         claim  not  to  be  credible.   Mr  Ojo  persisted  though  in  his
         submissions that  the  Appellant's  wife  still  feared  return  to
         Nigeria.  That will become relevant to  my  consideration  of  what
         course the appeal should take  hereafter,  if  I  accept  that  the
         mistake of fact led to a  material  error  of  law.   In  order  to
         consider the materiality of the error and whether  it  tainted  the
         findings in the Decision, it is necessary for me  to  consider  the
         remaining grounds.

    Ground Two

      7. In order to consider the remainder of the grounds, it is  necessary
         for me to say something about the offence of  which  the  Appellant
         was convicted.  That is  described  by  reference  to  the  Judge's
         sentencing remarks at [4] of the Decision.  In short,  the  offence
         was  an  extensive  fraud  involving  a  scam  based  on  a   bogus
         inheritance claim and directed at elderly victims who between  them
         lost over �300,000.  As noted at [5] of the Decision, the Appellant
         involved his wife in the fraud although she was not  prosecuted  in
         relation to it.

      8. The Respondent submits that, when considering the oral evidence  of
         the Appellant and his wife, the Judge has failed to give any weight
         to the fact that both were implicated in an offence  of  fraud  and
         deception.  Mr Kandola submitted that the Judge needed to  consider
         their deception before according their oral evidence "great weight"
         [35] and accepting it without qualification.  Mr Ojo submitted that
         the First-Tier Tribunal Judge is the finder  of  fact  and  that  I
         should not interfere with the findings on that evidence.

      9. The Judge's consideration of the evidence appears at [11]  to  [18]
         of the Decision.  The main import of the Appellant's and his wife's
         evidence is on the genuineness of their relationship, the impact of
         the Appellant's detention on the children and  what  they  consider
         would be the impact on the family if the Appellant  were  deported.
         That is clear from the main finding which the Judge makes  on  that
         evidence at [35] of the Decision:-

             "I also give considerable weight to the evidence of  both  the
             appellant and his wife.  In particular, as I  have  said,  the
             wife was an impressive and straightforward  witness  who  gave
             considerable detail in evidence.  Her evidence as to the  role
             the appellant takes  in  the  children's  lives  was  entirely
             consistent with the  appellant's  own  evidence  and  was  not
             seriously challenged in cross-examination"

     10. The genuineness of the family relationships is no longer at  issue.
         It is clear that  the  evidence  was  tested  by  the  Respondent's
         representative in cross-examination.  The Judge clearly had in mind
         that the offence was one of fraud.  She was not required  to  state
         in terms that this was considered  by  her  when  it  came  to  her
         assessment of the evidence.  She was entitled to reach the findings
         which she did on the evidence, having heard  the  witnesses.  As  I
         note, however, the relevance of that evidence is limited  in  light
         of the facts which are now accepted by the  Respondent  as  to  the
         genuineness of the relationships.

    Ground Three

     11. The Respondent's complaint concerning the Judge's treatment of  the
         public interest in deportation arises from [43]  of  the  Decision,
         where the Judge says this:-

             "However, I do bear in mind that the appellant  was  convicted
             of a very serious offence.  He was involved in a massive fraud
             which took substantial  sums  of  money  from  vulnerable  and
             elderly people in the United Kingdom.  However, against that I
             must also bear in mind his sentence.  The sentence as set  out
             in the sentencing remarks would never have been  greater  than
             four years.  It is argued by Ms McKenzie that I would have  to
             find compelling reasons to outweigh  the  public  interest  in
             deportation in such an offence.  However the Immigration Rules
             and the 2002 Act does not require such a test to be  fulfilled
             in a case where there is a sentence of under  four  years.   I
             refer specifically to paragraph 398 which makes it clear  that
             the very compelling circumstances required only  arises  where
             paragraph 399 does not apply.  In this case I have found  that
             on the face of it 399 does apply"

     12. That paragraph does not disclose any  error  of  law  read  in  the
         context in which it is found.  What the Judge there finds  is  that
         the Appellant does not need to show compelling  circumstances  over
         and above those found in paragraph 399 because the Judge has  found
         earlier in the Decision that the Appellant meets  the  requirements
         of paragraph 399.  As a statement of the law set out in the  Rules,
         that is unobjectionable.  Of course, if I accept that  the  mistake
         of fact made in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  wife's  status  is
         material and taints the remainder  of  the  Judge's  findings,  the
         finding that Appellant could meet paragraph 399  cannot  stand  and
         the public interest would need to be weighed in the  balance  again
         in the re-made decision.  Paragraph [43] does not  though  disclose
         any error of law in approach.

    Ground Four

     13. The Judge deals with the  best  interests  of  the  three  children
         starting at [38] of the Decision.  The Judge there notes  that  she
         considers both the best interests of the children and the behaviour
         and seriousness of the crime which the  Appellant  committed.   The
         consideration of the impact on the children is made in the  context
         of the Judge having accepted that the family could not relocate  to
         Nigeria.  Mr Ojo submitted that the mistake of fact  identified  at
         [6] above does not alter those findings.  The Appellant's wife  and
         three children are all British citizens and to that  extent  he  is
         right to submit that the effect of the Appellant's deportation  may
         lead to a separation of the family  if  the  Appellant's  wife  and
         children decided not to accompany him.  However, the main hurdle to
         that in the eyes of the Judge was that the Appellant's  wife  could
         not go to Nigeria because it was accepted  that  she  had  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution there.  That finding  cannot  stand  in
         light of the mistake of fact.  Mr Ojo pointed to  the  letter  from
         the children's headteacher concerning their  behaviour  whilst  the
         Appellant was detained and to the letter from the eldest child.  He
         submitted that, in  finding  that  the  children's  best  interests
         outweighed the public interest in deportation, the  Judge  did  not
         err and furthermore that the mistake  of  fact  already  identified
         would not alter that conclusion.  Mr  Kandola  accepted  that  this
         ground and ground three were peripheral  to  the  main  ground  but
         submitted that the outcome would be different if the Judge were  to
         consider the case on the basis that the Appellant's  wife  was  not
         precluded from returning to Nigeria  with  the  Appellant  and  the
         children.

     14. Having regard to [38] to [43], I am not satisfied  that  the  Judge
         can be said to have erred in her treatment of the  children's  best
         interests.  She has weighed the impact on the children against  the
         Appellant's behaviour both in terms of his immigration history  and
         his offending.  However, I am  quite  unable  to  accept  that  the
         mistake of fact identified at  [6]  above  has  no  impact  on  the
         outcome.  It is clear from [39] that the Judge finds that the  best
         interests of the children are served by being brought  up  by  both
         parents.  Although it is right to say and Mr Kandola accepted  that
         the Appellant's wife and children cannot be  forced  to  return  to
         Nigeria with him, the Judge proceeded on the basis that they had no
         choice but to stay in the UK without him because of her  perception
         as to the risk to the Appellant's  wife's  on  return  to  Nigeria.
         Once that is taken out of the equation, the finding that  it  would
         be unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife and children to  accompany
         him to Nigeria cannot stand. Whether they would do so may  also  be
         material to the finding that it would be unduly harsh for  them  to
         remain in the UK without him.

     15. I am satisfied that the Judge made an  error  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant's wife's status in the UK.  As noted at [5]  above,  that
         led the Judge to conclude without more  that  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for the Appellant's wife to return  to  Nigeria.   The  Judge
         thereafter considered at [32] the impact on  the  Appellant's  wife
         and children on the assumption that they would  remain  in  the  UK
         without the Appellant and at [37] on the basis  that  the  children
         would  accompany  the  Appellant  to  Nigeria  which  would  entail
         separation from their mother. Thereafter, as noted at  [14]  above,
         the Judge considers the best interests of the children on the basis
         that they should be brought up by both parents but in so doing, did
         not consider whether that could occur in Nigeria because the  Judge
         was constrained by the mistake of fact to find that the Appellant's
         wife could not go to Nigeria. It cannot sensibly be said  therefore
         that the mistake of  fact  makes  no  material  difference  to  the
         finding that it would be unduly harsh to deport the Appellant.  The
         finding that the Appellant's wife could not return to Nigeria is  a
         central  and  fundamental  part  of  all  aspects  of  the  Judge's
         reasoning on  this  issue.   Accordingly,  the  Judge  has  made  a
         material error of law.  The Judge's finding that the deportation of
         the  Appellant  would  be  unduly  harsh  must  be  set  aside  and
         revisited.

    Re-making of the Decision

     16. Mr Kandola submitted that if I accepted that the Decision contained
         a material error of law,  then  I  could  proceed  to  re-make  the
         Decision based on the evidence before me.  He submitted  that  this
         was so whether I found there to be only  the  error  identified  in
         ground one (as I have done) or on all grounds.  He did not  however
         oppose a remittal to the First-Tier Tribunal if I  considered  that
         to be the appropriate course.

     17. Mr Ojo submitted that I should remit the appeal to  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal if I were to find for the Respondent  only  on  the  first
         ground (on the assumption that the error is  material)  or  on  all
         grounds.  He submitted firstly that the  facts  of  the  case  have
         progressed as the Appellant's wife is now pregnant again  with  her
         fourth child and has medical  complications  associated  with  that
         pregnancy.  That pregnancy and the birth of the fourth  child  will
         exacerbate the problems of the wife caring for the  children  alone
         which the Judge identifies in  the  Decision.   He  also  submitted
         that, notwithstanding the First-Tier Tribunal's decision  that  the
         Appellant's wife's asylum claim was not credible, she  would  still
         wish to provide evidence that she is at risk on return to  Nigeria.



     18. I have considered whether I should resume a hearing  before  me  to
         take that further evidence or remit to the First-Tier Tribunal.   I
         have reached the conclusion that the  appeal  should  be  remitted.
         The mistake of fact which I have identified as the error of law  in
         the Decision is central to the assessment of whether it  is  unduly
         harsh for the Appellant to  be  deported  on  the  basis  that  the
         Appellant's family may be able to  accompany  him.   There  are  no
         findings by the First-Tier Tribunal in relation to that because the
         Judge accepted that the Appellant's wife could not  return.   There
         has been no testing of the evidence  in  relation  to  whether  she
         could and would accompany him or any consideration of the impact on
         her and the children if she were to do so or the proportionality of
         deportation if she were not to do  so  in  circumstances  where  it
         would be open to her to do so.

     19. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does
         involve the making of a material error of law.  Accordingly, I  set
         aside the Decision. I remit the appeal to the  First-Tier  Tribunal
         for the Decision to be re-made.  Neither party submitted  that  any
         of  the  previous  findings  should  stand  and  in  light  of  the
         fundamental nature of the mistake of fact which has led me to  find
         an error of law in the Decision, it would not  be  appropriate  for
         any of the findings to remain intact.   I  note  however  that  the
         Respondent did not challenge and no longer disputes the genuineness
         of the Appellant's relationship with his wife or parentage  of  the
         children.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
for re-hearing. No findings are preserved.

Signed      [pic]      Date 15 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
