

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01718/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 31 March 2015                     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ABDURAHAN MOHAMMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A E Miller, of Katani & Co., Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kempton, promulgated on 2 December  2014,  allowing  "on  human  rights
    grounds" the appellant's appeal against refusal to revoke a deportation
    order.

 3. Mrs O'Brien relied on  the  SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, which she described as detailed and thorough.  They should be
    read along with this determination.  She referred to  the  cases  cited
    therein -Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348, in particular at paragraph 27;
    SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550; LC (China) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1310; AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  634;  Masih  v  SSHD  [2012]  UKUT
    00046; and DS (India) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 544.  She  submitted  that
    the judge failed to grasp that the appeal was against refusal to revoke
    a deportation order, and failed  to  apply  the  legal  approach  well-
    established in a line of authority.  Although the judge at paragraph 29
    quoted the requirements of the Rules and the presumed public  interest,
    she did not go on to apply them to the case  before  her.   Rather,  at
    paragraph 30 she embarked on a loose Article  8  consideration  without
    regard to the Rules.  At paragraph 31 she said there were parts of Rule
    399 and 399A which the appellant met, but not all.   She  did  not  say
    which parts were met and which were not, although  such  findings  were
    crucial. It had to be explained which parts of the rules the  case  did
    not satisfy, and if so, why the appellant might  nevertheless  succeed.
    At paragraph 34 she said that the case presented "a fragile balance  to
    be  struck",  which  ignores  the  presumption   and   the   particular
    requirements of the Rules.  She failed to recognise that the provisions
    of the Immigration Rules relating to deportation have been held to form
    a complete code incorporating Article 8 considerations.   She  did  not
    explain why she approached the case  outwith  the  provisions  of  that
    code.  She showed no understanding of the weight which the courts  have
    emphasised should be given to the public  interest.   Those  were  such
    misdirections on the law as to require  the  determination  to  be  set
    aside.

 4. Miss Miller submitted that paragraph 31 in particular showed  that  the
    judge had the Rules clearly in mind.  Although the  judge  did  not  go
    through them step by step, she did in effect apply  them,  finding  the
    circumstances required by the Rules in matters such as the  country  of
    return being Somalia with all its difficulties, where  the  appellant's
    partner and child could not  be  expected  to  go.   The  determination
    should stand.

 5. I indicated that I was satisfied that the determination errs materially
    in law and could not stand.

 6. Although the judge stated the correct approach at paragraph 29, she had
    in advance minimised the appellant's offending at paragraph 28.  Having
    acknowledged the Rules, at paragraph 30 she embarked on  an  assessment
    outside them.  The Rules  in  deportation  cases  have  been  found  to
    constitute  a  code  which  incorporates   all   relevant   Article   8
    considerations.  The case was for decision by reference to  the  Rules,
    not as a free-ranging exercise.  At paragraph  31,  after  saying  that
    some unspecified parts of the Rules were not met, the  judge  went  on,
    "Accordingly, the matter has to be considered simply as a  stand  alone
    Article 8 case".  She unfortunately at that point strayed into material
    legal error.  The point is  reflected  in  the  outcome,  allowing  the
    appeal "on human rights grounds"; if the  case  succeeded,  it  did  so
    within not outside the Rules.

 7. Although Miss Miller pointed to the findings that it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the appellant's partner and child to leave the UK to live  in
    Somalia, that is uncontentious,  and  does  not  answer  the  questions
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the partner and child to remain in
    the UK without the appellant.  Nor are the other questions posed by the
    Rules answered.  The case  was  not  one  which  presented  "a  fragile
    balance".  It required the judge to answer the questions posed  by  the
    Rules bearing in mind the approach explained in the case law.

 8. Neither party suggested that there is any Scottish case  in  point.   A
    further recent case from the Court of Appeal  is AQ (Nigeria) &  others
    v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 250, which explains at paragraph 70:

         It follows that whenever the offender appeals against a deportation
         order on the ground that the public interest in his deportation  is
         outweighed by his private or family life in the  UK,  the  tribunal
         will need to examine the factors that would, under the Secretary of
         State's policy, outweigh the public interest  in  deportation.  The
         policy seeks to identify factors relating  to  private  and  family
         life of such cogency that they would be sufficient to outweigh  the
         public interest. Ultimately, the assessment of  proportionality  is
         for the tribunal or the court to make but national policy as to the
         strength of the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals is a fixed criterion  against  which  other  factors  and
         interests must be measured. When this court  in  MF  (Nigeria),  LC
         (China) and AJ (Angola)  spoke  of  the  requirement  to  view  the
         assessment of proportionality through the lens of the new rules,  I
         conclude that it had in mind the need for decision-makers  to  have
         close regard to the weight of factors that would be required  under
         the  rules  to  tip  the  balance  of  proportionality  away   from
         deportation. Accordingly, the starting point in a  case  where  the
         offender has been sentenced to 4 years imprisonment or more is that
         very compelling circumstances (over and above those  identified  in
         paragraphs 399 and 399A) would be required to outweigh  the  public
         interest in deportation.

 9. As to remaking the decision, Mrs O'Brien submitted that there could  be
    only one answer and that the  determination  should  be  reversed.   Ms
    Miller said that there was no change of circumstances and that a  fresh
    decision need not involve a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The determination is set aside.  No findings are to stand.  In spite of
    the indications from both parties, I  think  that  there  has  been  an
    absence  of  effective  judicial  decision-making  in  the   First-tier
    Tribunal, such that  under section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 it is appropriate for this decision to be remade
    there entirely afresh.  The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen
    to reconsider the case are not to include Judge Kempton.

11. The Tribunal remaking the decision should be careful to  approach  this
    in the light of the fact that it is an application for revocation of  a
    deportation order, paying attention to the framework  of  the  decision
    appealed against, the relevant paragraphs of the Immigration Rules, and
    the case law.



           [pic]


           31 March 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
