
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01178/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MAGALI OMANGA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Bartram, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Law
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant (hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of State) against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 16 January 2015, allowed the appeal of the
    Respondent  (hereinafter  called  "the  Claimant")  a  citizen  of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo, born on 17 September  1976,  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 5 June  2014  to  refuse  to
    revoke  her  deportation  order  by  virtue  of  Section  5(2)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

2.   The Claimant arrived in the UK in June 1991 and on  16  June  1992  was
    included as a dependant on an asylum claim.  On 11 March 1999  she  was
    granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK under the special measures
    introduced for clearing the asylum backlog and  this  was  a  grant  of
    leave exceptionally outside the Rules.

3.   On 19 June 2008 at Wood Green Crown Court, she was convicted  of  three
    counts of making false representations and making an article for use in
    fraud for which she was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

4.   On 4 November 2008  she  was  served  with  a  Liability  to  Automatic
    Deportation letter and a Deportation Order was signed against her on 19
    December 2008.

5.   The Claimant's appeal against that decision was dismissed on  20  April
    2009 and she became Appeal Rights Exhausted on 28 April 2009.

6.   The Claimant claimed asylum  on  23  July  2009.   She  refused  to  be
    interviewed regarding her asylum claim on 10  September  2009,  as  she
    wanted the interview to be tape recorded.  On 14 October 2009  she  was
    interviewed regarding her asylum claim. No decision was  made  on  this
    claim until 5 June 2014 nearly 5 years after interview.

7.   In the meantime, the Claimant gave birth  to  a  daughter  on  10  June
    2011.

8.   In March 2014, further consideration  was  given  to  deportation.  The
    Claimant was given the opportunity to  state  why  she  should  not  be
    removed from the UK including the opportunity to rebut the  presumption
    that she posed a danger to the security of the UK in a letter dated  14
    March 2014 to which she responded via her representatives on  14  April
    2014.

9.   On 14 March  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  notified  her  about  the
    intention to exclude her  from  Convention  protection  on  Section  72
    grounds and following consideration of her response by way of rebuttal,
    it was decided to refuse her claim by a letter dated 5  June  2014.  It
    was decided in light of her conviction to certify her claim in that the
    presumption under Section 72(2) applied to her, where it followed  that
    the effect of the certificate was that at any subsequent  appeal  under
    Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    which included the decision to refuse her client's  claim  for  asylum,
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   was   required   to   consider   the
    certification first and if he (or she) upheld that certificate then the
    asylum  aspect  of  the  appeal  would   be   dismissed   without   any
    consideration of the asylum claim.

10.  In the event at the outset of the hearing  of  the  Appellant's  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge at Hendon Magistrates' Court on 12
    December 2014, he recorded that the Appellant's representative and  the
    Appellant herself confirmed that she did not wish to proceed  with  her
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and Article  3  of  the  ECHR
    grounds, but would proceed  solely  in  relation  to  her  claim  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  It was further  recorded  that  the  Presenting
    Officer for the Respondent indicated that he would not  be  challenging
    any of the matters relating to the private and family life advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant and accepted that Article 8(1) of the ECHR  was
    engaged.

11.  At paragraph 15 of the determination, the Judge stated that as  Article
    8(1) of the ECHR had been engaged, the issue turned on the  application
    of the five-limb test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 as to whether  it  would
    be a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  Appellant's  right  to
    private and/or family life were she to  be  returned  to  the  DRC.  He
    recorded:

         "The parties accepted the test was whether there  were  exceptional
         factors about the  Appellant's  case  which  would  result  in  her
         deportation amounting to a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR."

12.  Under the subheading "My Findings" the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    this to say:

         "16. The respondent relied upon the fact  that  the  Appellant  had
             committed a relatively serious criminal offence  in  2008  for
             which  she  received  a   total   sentence   of   two   years'
             imprisonment.  The Sentencing Judge referred to  it  being  'a
             sophisticated  fraud  over  a  very  long  period  of   time'.
             Although the Appellant has other convictions, they  are  of  a
             relatively  unserious  nature  and  did  not  feature  in  the
             representations made on behalf of  the  respondent.   Although
             the Sentencing Judge made no recommendation  for  deportation,
             he indicated that that would no doubt  be  looked  at  by  the
             respondent and they are regarded as a neutral feature that  no
             such recommendation was made.

         17.  However the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since the
             age of 14.  She has  no  parents,  was  brought  up  with  her
             grandmother with whom she presently resides and looks after on
             a daily basis.   She has a daughter born in the United Kingdom
             and is pregnant with a second child  and  has  a  partner.   A
             significant period of over five years was unexplained  by  the
             respondent and occurred between the date  of  the  application
             and  its  refusal.   The  Appellant  has  committed  no  other
             criminal offences over a period of over some  six  years  now.
             She has no relatives remaining in the Democratic  Republic  of
             Congo.  She was lawfully in the United Kingdom  for  seventeen
             years before the decision was made to deport her and given the
             period she has spent in the United Kingdom, her commitment  to
             her grandmother who has effectively brought  her  up  since  a
             young child, the fact she has committed no offences since 2008
             and the long delay before a decision was reached during  which
             time she has had one child and is expecting a second child,  I
             find that there  are  exceptional  circumstances  taking  into
             account the respondent's legitimate  interest  in  immigration
             control and the seriousness  of  the  offences  to  which  the
             Appellant pleaded guilty and I find that  applying  the  five-
             stage  test  in  Razgar,  it  would  be   a   disproportionate
             interference with the Appellant's right to family and  private
             life were she to be deported to the DRC."

13.  The Claimant's appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  was  therefore
    allowed.

14.  In successfully obtaining  permission  to  appeal  that  decision,  the
    Secretary of State  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    approach to the evidence was marred by a misdirection in law such  that
    it be set aside, with the advent of the Immigration Rules which were  a
    complete code in deportation appeals in respect of  Article  8  rights.
    The Court of Appeal had  given  guidance  that  an  Appellants'  rights
    should be assessed by way of reference to those alone.  In that  regard
    reference was made to the decision in AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ  1636
    that indeed held that the new Rules, introduced by the  2012  amendment
    to the Immigration Rules, were intended to operate as  a  comprehensive
    code.  The assessment  of  claims  for  leave  to  remain  for  foreign
    criminals,  based  on  the  Convention  rights  for  themselves,  their
    partners, their relations or children should be carried out "under  the
    lens of the new Rules".

15.  Thus when the appeal came before us on 18 November 2015 our first  task
    was to determine whether the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge contained an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may
    materially have affected the outcome of the appeal.

The Legal Framework

16.  The decision in AJ (Angola) reflected  the  decision  in  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 that was authority for the  proposition  that  the
    amendments to the Immigration Rules introduced in July 2012 comprised a
    self-contained code regulating the expulsion of foreign  criminals  and
    that any claims of entitlement to remain on Convention grounds were  no
    longer to be considered separately from  the  application  of  the  new
    Rules.  It was important  to  ensure  uniformity  of  approach  between
    different officials and indeed the courts, and that decisions were made
    in a way that were properly informed by the considerable weight  to  be
    given to the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals as
    declared by Parliament in the UK Borders Act 2007 and reinforced by the
    Secretary of State so as to promote public confidence in that system.

17.  There has been an abundance of case  law  subsequent  to  MF  (Nigeria)
    that reinforce such guidance.  In Chege (S.117 -  Article  8  approach)
    [2015] UKUT 00165 it was held that a tribunal must ask  itself  whether
    there were "very compelling reasons" such as  to  outweigh  the  strong
    public interest in deportation.

18.  MA (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ 48 restated the guidance in MF  (Nigeria).
     It was pointed out that the scales were heavily weighted in favour  of
    deportation, in that something very compelling was required to outweigh
    the public interest in deportation.  Great weight had to be attached to
    the public interest.

19.  More recently in PF (Nigeria)  [2015]   EWCA  Civ  251,  the  Court  of
    Appeal  have  emphasised  the  supreme  importance  of   the   Tribunal
    identifying exceptional, or compelling, factors sufficient to  outweigh
    the public interest in deportation.

Assessment

20.  Having heard the  parties'  respective  submissions  we  were  able  to
    inform them that we were satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had erred in law and that as a consequence his decision should  be  set
    aside. We informed the parties of our decision with reasons to follow.

21.  We were satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge simply  failed  to
    have any regard to the relevant Immigration  Rules  and  the  statutory
    scheme, in his consideration of this appeal.  We  cannot  be  satisfied
    that the Judge would necessarily have reached the same  conclusion  had
    he adopted the correct approach to his assessment of the evidence.  For
    these reasons we have concluded that the determination  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, did disclose material errors on  a  point  of  law
    such that the determination should be set aside.

22   There remains a need to  consider whether consideration  of  the  facts
    of the case and applying  them  to  the  appropriate  legal  framework,
    demonstrates that  there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  in  the
    Claimant's case,  sufficient  to  justify  and  demonstrate  that  they
    outweigh the considerable weight to be given to the public interest  in
    this appeal.

23.  In that regard it is right to say that there are a  number  of  factors
    in  the  Claimant's  favour,  that  could  amount  to  very  compelling
    circumstances.  She arrived in the United Kingdom in June 1991  at  the
    age of 14 with her grandmother.  She has lived in the UK for  the  past
    24 years and  most  of  her  life.  She  continued  to  live  with  her
    grandmother in the UK who is a British national.  It  is  claimed  that
    her grandmother has eyesight and mobility problems.  The Claimant helps
    her on a daily basis.  Further, the Claimant's grandmother is extremely
    close to the Claimant's daughter, now aged  4.   A  particular  concern
    taken together with all the other facts is that it took the  respondent
    more than five years to determine the Claimant's asylum claim.

24.  We considered how the decision should be remade. After discussion  both
    parties submitted that the case ought to be heard afresh. We agree. The
    primary facts are not in dispute. We do not know a great deal about the
    Claimant's current domestic arrangements and  when  they  first  arose.
    What is in issue is whether on an holistic assessment of the  case  set
    against the background of the rules,  there  are  the  most  compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest.

25.  It was further agreed that having regard to the  error  of  law  found,
    the length of the hearing (estimated at three hours) there were  highly
    compelling reasons  falling  within  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement as to why the  decision  should  not  be
    remade by the Upper Tribunal.  It  was  clearly  in  the  interests  of
    justice that the appeal of the Claimant be heard afresh in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

26.  For the reasons that we have above given  and  by  agreement  with  the
    parties, we conclude therefore that the appeal should be remitted to  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judges  Metzer
    QC and T  R  Hollingsworth  (the  latter  of  whom  presided  over  the
    Claimant's grandmother's appeal), to determine  the  appeal  afresh  at
    Taylor House Hearing Centre  on  the  first  available  date.   We  are
    informed that for that purpose no interpreter will be required.

Decision

27.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside and none of their findings preserved.

28.  We allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the extent  that  we  remit
    the making of the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than the  Judges  to  whom  we
    have above referred.

No anonymity direction is made.

No fee was payable and no fee award is made.


Signed   Date 20 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

