
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01783/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2016                 |On 8th November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     XTD
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Knorr, instructed by Lawrence Lupin solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as  XTD.  This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. First-tier Tribunal judge Grant Hutchinson  granted  permission  to
         appeal on the grounds:

             "It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected himself (a)  by
             erroneously assuming the role of the  Competent  Authority  in
             coming to the view that the Appellant was trafficked to the UK
             before a fresh decision was issued by the Competent  Authority
             when it was agreed in a Judicial review by mutual  consent  in
             the week before the hearing that a  fresh  decision  would  be
             issued within a period not exceeding 6 months; (b) by  failing
             to take into account the two previous  determinations  as  his
             starting point according  to  the  Devaseelan  principle  with
             particular regard to Article 3 ECHR  on  the  basis  that  the
             trafficking issue with which the judge finds to be central  to
             this particular appeal was not a matter for  consideration  on
             the earlier occasions when he finds that the  Appellant  would
             not face risk of retrafficking on return  to  Vietnam  in  any
             event  and  (c)  in  the  weight  the  Judge  gives   in   the
             proportionality exercise to his finding that the Appellant has
             been trafficked when there has been no decision  made  by  the
             Competent Authority."

      2. The SSHD also sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to grant  an  adjournment  and
         erred in its consideration of  Article  8  by  failing  to  provide
         adequate reasons for his conclusions. The  SSHD  asserts  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal failed to identify anything over and above  the
         normal issues of separation that could be considered  unduly  harsh
         such  as  would  outweigh  the  presumption  in  favour  of   XTD's
         deportation.

      3.  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  Grant-Hutchinson   did   not   refuse
         permission on either of those grounds and I am satisfied  that  all
         grounds can be considered.

         Background

      4. XTD arrived in the UK on 25th September 2003 aged  15.  His  asylum
         claim was refused but he was granted discretionary leave to  remain
         until 10th May 2006, the day before his 18th birthday.  Before  his
         application for further leave to remain,  made  on  9th  May  2006,
         could be considered he was arrested and subsequently convicted  and
         sentenced  on  7th  February  2007   to   3   years'   imprisonment
         (subsequently reduced on appeal to 2 years) to charges relating  to
         the production of cannabis.

      5. On 22nd August 2007 he  was  served  with  a  decision  to  make  a
         deportation order. His appeal against that decision  was  dismissed
         on 28th November 2007 and a deportation order was  signed  on  16th
         April 2008. Representations made were treated as an application  to
         revoke the deportation order and refused. His appeal  against  that
         decision, dated 6th November 2012, was dismissed on  22nd  February
         2013.

      6. On 2nd December 2013 XTD made  further  a  further  application  to
         revoke the deportation order. After judicial review  proceedings  a
         decision was made on 28th April 2014 and it is the  appeal  against
         that decision that led to the First-tier Tribunal decision of  14th
         September 2016 allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules,  on
         asylum grounds and on human rights grounds.

      7. The Competent Authority had made a conclusive grounds  decision  on
         18th June 2014 that XTD was not a victim of  trafficking.  On  22nd
         December 2014 the judicial review proceedings were  compromised  on
         the basis that a fresh decision would be  taken  by  the  Competent
         Authority within 28 days. A new decision was  made  on  27th  April
         2015 and that was subject to judicial review and on  10th  December
         2015 a consent order was signed for a further fresh decision to  be
         made within 6 months. No further decision has yet been taken by the
         Competent Authority.

      8. First-tier Tribunal judge Dineen refused to adjourn the hearing, on
         the application of the SSHD that the statutory appeal should  await
         the  outcome  of  the  further  consideration  by   the   Competent
         Authority. Judge Dineen heard oral  evidence  from  XTD  and  XTD's
         partner and considered reports by Ms  Bedoe,  Professor  Bluth,  Ms
         Delap and a witness statement from Ms Zhang.

      9. Although the appeal was heard on  17th  December  2015,  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Dineen's decision was  not  promulgated  until  14th
         September 2016 but is dated as signed on  6th  September  2016.  He
         regretted the delay in the production of  the  decision  which,  he
         says, was due to "pressure of work and the listing of  appeals"  in
         the Tribunal. First-tier Tribunal judge Dineen:

          i) Finds XTD to be a consistent and truthful witness and that his
             evidence of being left alone in Vietnam  and  being  taken  by
             Dinh to be credible;

         ii) Finds that the evidence, in the context of the  report  by  Ms
             Bedoe points to XTD being trafficked;

        iii) Finds the fact of trafficking is central  to  XTD's  case  and
             circumstances and thus  the  two  previous  decisions  in  his
             appeals should not be taken as a starting point;

         iv) Finds his deportation  does  not  fulfil  the  test  of  being
             conducive to the public  good.  Nor  was  First-tier  Tribunal
             judge Dineen satisfied that he ought to  have  faced  criminal
             prosecution as he did.

          v)  Finds  XTD  rebuts  the  presumption  under  s72  Nationality
             Immigration and asylum Act 2002 because he has been trafficked
             and his offence occurred due to his being under the control of
             others; there is  no  evidence  to  suggest  he  would  commit
             offences in the future and he has not committed  any  offences
             since 2007.

         vi) Accepts the evidence of Professor  Bluth  that  XTD  would  be
             interrogated and mistreated by the Vietnamese authorities  due
             to his association with an opponent  of  the  Government;  his
             expert evidence being preferred to the evidence relied upon by
             the respondent which is not expert and is generic.

        vii) Finds XTD would not be  at  risk  of  further  trafficking  if
             removed.

       viii) Finds it would be unduly harsh for  the  two  British  citizen
             children (born May 2010 and August 2011) to remain in  the  UK
             without their father who has been involved over a long  period
             of time in their lives.

     10. Before me Mr Walker referred, but did not seek to amend the grounds
         of appeal, to the lengthy delay by Judge Dineen in the writing  and
         promulgation of the decision. In the absence of a formal request to
         amend the grounds I have  disregarded  the  delay  in  reaching  my
         decision.

         Adjournment issue

     11. Mr Walker submitted that the Competent Authority had not reached  a
         fresh decision because the hearing of the appeal before the  First-
         tier Tribunal proceeded. He submitted that the fact of  trafficking
         was important in terms of the deportation decision and  that  Judge
         Dineen had assumed the role of the Competent Authority when it  was
         for the Competent Authority to reach a decision on whether XTD  had
         been trafficked.

     12. There was no documentary evidence that the Competent Authority  had
         delayed reaching a decision in accordance with  the  consent  order
         signed in the High Court but whether  that  was  the  case  is  not
         actually relevant to the question of whether  Judge  Dineen  should
         have adjourned the hearing.

     13. The grounds relied upon by the SSHD do  not  take  issue  with  the
         findings of Judge Dineen that XTD  was  a  victim  of  trafficking.
         Judge Dineen considered the evidence before him, in particular  the
         expert evidence, the various witness evidence and oral evidence and
         reached a conclusion which has not been disputed, namely  that  XTD
         was trafficked.

     14. MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's powers  -  Article  4  ECHR)  Pakistan
         [2016] UKUT 00226 (IAC)  concluded  that  "Tribunals  may  well  be
         better equipped than the  Competent  Authority  to  make  pertinent
         findings  relating  to  trafficking"  (headnote  (vii)).  Ms  Knorr
         referred to many individuals not  entering  the  National  Referral
         Mechanism and thus not  being  subject  to  a  Competent  Authority
         decision on whether or not they had been trafficked. She  submitted
         it was not a pre-requisite to have a Competent  Authority  decision
         on whether an individual had been trafficked for  the  Tribunal  to
         make a finding, on the evidence before it, of whether an individual
         had in fact been trafficked.

     15. Ms Knorr submitted that in the absence  of  any  challenge  to  the
         finding of Judge Dineen that XTD was a victim of  trafficking,  and
         in the absence of any  challenge  to  the  evidence  he  took  into
         account or reference to evidence that he  should  have  taken  into
         account but did not, then the ground  that  an  adjournment  should
         have been granted simply falls away.

     16. I accept that, without a consequence of unfairness or  legal  error
         in the findings made, the refusal to grant an adjournment cannot be
         legitimately impugned. The SSHD does not identify any finding  that
         she disputes and does not dispute the trafficking  decision.  I  am
         satisfied that the  decision  by  judge  Dineen  not  to  grant  an
         adjournment was not an error of law such that the  decision  should
         be set aside to be remade.

         Devaseelan issue

     17. Judge Dineen states:

             "73. The fact  that  trafficking,  which  is  central  to  the
             appellant's case and circumstances, was not  a  matter  before
             the Tribunal on the occasions  of  the  two  previous  appeal,
             leads to the conclusion that the decisions  in  those  appeals
             should not be taken as  a  starting  point  on  this  occasion
             pursuant to Devaseelan.

             74.  In the light of my above finding as to trafficking, I  am
             not satisfied that the  appellant's  deportation  fulfils  the
             test of being conducive to the public good. I am not satisfied
             either that, as a trafficked person, he ought  to  have  faced
             criminal prosecution as he did."

         Mr Walker submits that Judge  Dineen  should  have  considered  the
         facts of XTD's case but with Devaseelan as the starting point, even
         if little weight was placed upon findings  made  in  those  earlier
         decisions because  of  the  subsequent  trafficking  decision.  The
         ground relied upon asserts that XTD's case remains as it was before
         the First-tier Tribunal in the earlier decisions and that the  fact
         of trafficking is not central to the appeal,  particularly  in  the
         light of the finding that XTD would not be at  risk  of  being  re-
         trafficked if removed to Vietnam.

     18. The earlier decisions are not models of clarity in their  findings.
         The decision of IJ Parker and lay member  Endersby  promulgated  on
         28th November 2007 (the appeal against the decision to deport  him)
         sets out the appellant's case and that the SSHD does not accept the
         case as put. The decision then goes on to state that  they  see  no
         reason to depart from the respondent's view of the appellant's case
         but that even if it were true, which they state they do not accept,
         the appellant would not be at risk of being persecuted if  returned
         to Vietnam.

     19. It is plain that the First-tier Tribunal in 2007 did  not  approach
         the appellant's evidence as evidence of a victim of trafficking and
         thus by its very  nature,  evidence  of  a  vulnerable  individual.
         Although Judge Dineen could have perhaps expressed his view better,
         it is clear that his reference to the centrality of the trafficking
         issue to the appellant's case and circumstances is that without him
         having been trafficked he would not have been prosecuted and  would
         thus not be subject to deportation. The finding by Judge Dineen  in
         [74]  makes  the  point  (unchallenged  by  the  SSHD)   that   his
         deportation was not conducive to the public good and  that  he  was
         not satisfied that XTD should have faced criminal proceedings.

     20. It is worthy of note that at the time of his  conviction  and  2007
         appeal, the Trafficking Convention was not  ratified;  it  did  not
         enter into force until 1 April 2009.

     21. The findings in the 2007 decision, such as they are, are related to
         risk on return. There is little or no  assessment  of  XTD's  claim
         other than recitation  and  rejection  on  the  basis  that  it  is
         'vague'. Whilst the findings, such as they are,  should  have  been
         considered by the Judge Dineen, it is of little doubt but  that  he
         would have placed very little weight  upon  them  given  they  were
         reached  in  the  context  of  a  lack  of  appreciation   of   the
         vulnerability of XTD as a victim of trafficking.  The  2013  First-
         tier Tribunal decision does not consider Article 3; asylum was  not
         pleaded.

     22. Judge Dineen found in no uncertain terms that XTD is a  witness  of
         truth. He considers the expert report and the  background  material
         before him in reaching his conclusions. He  takes  account  of  the
         harassment of  XTD.  The  SSHD  does  not  take  issue  with  these
         findings, the  weight  placed  upon  the  expert's  report  or  the
         conclusions reached. That XTD was  not  longer  at  risk  of  being
         trafficked was a finding open to the judge on  the  facts  as  they
         presented themselves and which formed no part of the assessment  of
         risk on return. Even had the judge considered  the  2007  and  2013
         decisions, their content would not have been of much assistance  to
         him given the context in which they were reached.

     23. Although the judge ought to have taken the earlier decisions  as  a
         starting point, the weight to  be  attached  to  them  because  the
         appellant was a victim of trafficking and  should,  at  the  least,
         have been treated as a vulnerable witness renders any weight to  be
         placed upon them very unlikely to have made any difference.

         Article 8

     24. The SSHD asserts that the First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen erred in
         his consideration of Article 8 having

             'failed to give adequate reasons for  his  conclusion.  It  Is
             asserted that  family  disruption  is  a  known  and  accepted
             consequence of deportation resulting from  foreign  national's
             criminal behaviour, the FTTJ has not identified anything  over
             and above the  normal  issues  of  separation  that  could  be
             considered an unduly harsh outcome that would d  outweigh  the
             presumption in favour of the appellant's removal  to  his  own
             country either alone or if the family chooses  with  his  wife
             and children'

         This ground was not expanded upon in submissions before me.

     25. Judge Dineen considered the correct Rule  and  properly  considered
         whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to  live  in
         Vietnam; he found it would be unduly harsh for  the  two  children,
         who are British  Citizens  for  them  to  go  to  Vietnam  even  if
         accompanied by their parents. There has been no  identification  by
         the respondent of any error of law in that finding.

     26. The judge considers and takes account of the lengthy  absence,  the
         prejudice to the spouse's business and that his absence would cover
         significant parts of their development. The reasons  given,  albeit
         sparse, when considered in the context of the findings  reached  by
         the judge overall, that it would be unduly harsh for  the  children
         to be separated from their father, were findings open to him.

     27. There is no error of law in  the  finding  that  removal  would  be
         disproportionate.

         Other matters

     28. The respondent does not dispute the reference in  paragraph  80  by
         the First-tier Tribunal that XTD's right to  claim  asylum  is  not
         precluded by s72, because he has been trafficked  and  his  offence
         occurred due to his being under the control  of  others.  The  SSHD
         does  not  dispute  the  finding  that  the  presumption  that   he
         constitutes a danger to the community is rebutted.

     29. The SSHD does not dispute  the  finding  that  the  judge  was  not
         satisfied he ought to have faced criminal prosecution  as  he  did.
         Nor does he dispute the finding that the  judge  is  not  satisfied
         that his deportation fulfils the test of  being  conducive  to  the
         public good. Save in both instances she relies upon  her  assertion
         that an adjournment should have been granted.

     30. The SSHD does not draw attention to any error in the finding by the
         judge that XTD is a victim of trafficking.

     31. The SSHD does not assert there is an error of law in the finding at
         [102] that the judge takes

             "into account the general principle contained in 117B(i)  that
             the maintenance  of  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
             interest. I also take  into  account  that,  as  noted  above,
             because of my finding that the appellant has been  trafficked,
             his deportation should not be classified as conducive  to  the
             public good. I am therefore  satisfied  that  Section  117B(i)
             does not require the appellant's removal."

         Conclusion

         The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of a material error on a point of law.

         I do not set aside the decision. The  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules, on asylum
         grounds and on human rights grounds stands.


     Date 7th November 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
