
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01307/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice                |Determination Sent         |
|on 9th September 2013                           |on 16th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     JKO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr E Fripp, counsel, instructed by Danielle Cohen
Immigration   Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 24th  March  1973.   His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent, made  on  26th  November
    2012 that section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied so  that  he
    was subject to automatic deportation, in the light of his conviction of
    conspiracy to fraudulently evade a prohibition on the importation of  a
    Class B drug,  namely  193.30  kilograms  of  cannabis,  for  which  he
    received a sentence of four years and  six  months'  imprisonment,  was
    dismissed after a hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  comprising
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott-Baker  and  Miss  V  Street,  in   a
    determination promulgated on 20th June 2013.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order under rule 45(4)(i)  of
    the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  we
    likewise make an order with  reference  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant, his wife or children.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two  grounds.   The  first
    was that the term "exceptional circumstances" in paragraph  398  of  HC
    395, as amended  (required  to  be  shown  as  outweighing  the  public
    interest in deportation) had to  be  given  its  natural  and  ordinary
    meaning.  The  Oxford  Outline  Dictionary  defined  "exceptional"   as
    "unusual; not typical" and the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to
    identify any basis upon which the facts  relating  to  the  appellant's
    family, including his strongly formed family life with a range of  four
    children at different ages of relative maturity, could be  said  to  be
    usual or typical and so not exceptional.  The First-tier  Tribunal  had
    found that there was nothing within  the  children's  circumstances  to
    lead to a finding of exceptionality.  It was said that that  conclusion
    was insufficient to justify discounting exceptionality without  further
    examination, particularly since the opinion of Dr Claridge was that  if
    the appellant were deported  his  children  would  become  increasingly
    distressed and, especially in the cases of the boys, less  directed  in
    their lives, potentially  becoming  despondent  and  anti-social  as  a
    direct result of the continued absence of their father.

 4. The second ground  was  that  in  relation  to  article  8,  separately
    considered from the rules, the First-tier Tribunal failed to  undertake
    a structured assessment of the question of proportionality, considering
    the facts against the relevant criteria.

 5.  On  10th  July  2013  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Carruthers  granted
    permission to appeal.  He said  that  in  summary  the  cruxes  of  the
    grounds on  which  the  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  were
    complaints that  (1)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  sufficiently
    explained its conclusion that the circumstances of the  case  were  not
    exceptional; (2) the First-tier Tribunal's article 8 assessment was not
    sufficiently  structured  and  (3)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    sufficiently factored in the appellant's lack of  previous  convictions
    and/or what was said in the report of the  chartered  psychologist,  Dr
    Claridge, as to the prospective harm to the appellant's  four  children
    by the  putative  destruction  of  "the  pre-existing  pattern  of  the
    children having very substantial time with their father in  the  family
    home in the United Kingdom".  He  said  he  suspected  that  there  was
    little substance in at least some of the complaints made in the grounds
    but it might be that the First-tier Tribunal did materially err in some
    of the ways alleged.  Overall there was sufficient in  the  grounds  to
    make a grant of permission appropriate.  He said the  appellant  should
    not take the grant of permission as an indication that his appeal would
    ultimately be successful.  Decided cases such as Lee  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    348 and  Richards  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  244  tended  to  go  against  the
    appellant.  In the last analysis it might be concluded that the grounds
    amounted to little more than a disagreement with conclusions  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was entitled to reach.

 6. Thus the appeal came before us.  By the time of the  hearing  Mr  Fripp
    had adopted an alternative argument, not mentioned in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, which was set out in his skeleton argument. This  was  that  in
    Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWHC 720, Sales J had considered  the  interpretation
    put upon the phrase "exceptional circumstances"  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in her instructions regarding  the  approach  to  be  applied  by
    officials in deciding whether to grant  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    rules in the exercise of the residual discretion she had to grant  such
    leave.  In paragraph 13 of his judgment he said the Secretary of  State
    required such leave to be granted in exceptional cases but in paragraph
    3.2.7d of the instructions she  had  amplified  the  guidance  for  the
    approach to be adopted in the terms that he set out.  In that  guidance
    it was said:

         "Exceptional"  does  not  mean  "unusual"  or  "unique"...  Instead
         "exceptional" means circumstances in which refusal would result  in
         unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  individual  such  that
         refusal of the application would not be  proportionate.    That  is
         likely to be the case only very rarely."

 7. Mr Fripp relied upon paragraph 14 of the judgment in which Sales J said
    that the definition of "exceptional circumstances" which was  given  in
    the guidance equated such circumstances with there being  unjustifiable
    hardship involved in removal such that it would be  disproportionate  -
    i.e. would involve a breach of article 8.

 8. Mr Fripp argued, in reliance upon Nagre, that exceptional circumstances
    meant  no  more  than  that  circumstances  had  to  be   shown   which
    demonstrated   that   removal   or   deportation   would   involve    a
    disproportionate  breach  of  the  article  8  rights  of  the   person
    concerned.  Therefore  it  was  unnecessary  to  adopt  the  two  stage
    approach said to be necessary by the Tribunal in MF (Article  8  -  new
    rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC).

 9. It is interesting to note that this was not how  Mr  Fripp  argued  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  There, as shown by paragraph 76
    of the determination, he stated that  under  the  rules  the  appellant
    would need to show exceptionality and if exceptional circumstances were
    found by the First-tier Tribunal the appeal would succeed.  If  not  it
    would be necessary to look at the freestanding article 8 situation.

10. Before us Mr Fripp pointed out that in paragraph  29  of  his  judgment
    Sales J said that the new rules did provide better explicit coverage of
    the factors identified in case-law as relevant to  analysis  of  claims
    under article 8 than was formerly the position, so that in  many  cases
    the main points for consideration in relation to  article  8  would  be
    addressed by decision-makers applying the new rules.  He  said  it  was
    only if, after doing that, there remained an arguable case  that  there
    may be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the  rules  by
    reference to article 8  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  article  8
    purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether   there   were   compelling
    circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  new  rules  to
    require the grant of such leave.

11. Mr Fripp did not accept that compelling circumstances required anything
    more than showing that a decision to deport would be disproportionate.

12. Ms Horsley did not seek to persuade us that the  Secretary  of  State's
    interpretation of "exceptional circumstances" in her guidance was other
    than that suggested by Sales J.   She  agreed  that  the  circumstances
    which had to be shown were such as to demonstrate that  deportation  or
    removal would be disproportionate.

13. In the determination of the Tribunal in Green (Article 8 -  new  rules)
    Jamaica [2013] UKUT 254 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal, presided over by its
    President, Blake J, found that Nagre endorsed the  two  stage  approach
    recommended by the Upper Tribunal in MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria
    [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC) and pointed out that Sales J  added  the  proviso
    that it would not always be necessary to move onto the second stage and
    consider article 8 proportionality apart from  the  provisions  of  the
    immigration rules where the rules and the learning on article 8 were in
    harmony unless  there  were  exceptional  circumstances.  The  Tribunal
    pointed out that the difference between the rules  and  the  Strasbourg
    principles was marginal in that case.  The Tribunal went on to say that
    further detailed consideration of the decision  was  not  necessary  or
    appropriate.

14. We are extremely surprised at the view taken by the respondent  of  the
    meaning of "exceptional circumstances".  In Huang v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11 the House of Lords decided  that
    there was no test of  exceptionality  involved  in  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.  If respondent  is  right  is  would  have  been  more
    appropriate to have just used the term disproportionate.

15. The explanatory memorandum to HC 194, which introduced  paragraphs  396
    to 400 into the immigration rules reads as follows:

         "Approach to ECHR Article 8

         7.2 The new Immigration Rules will reform the approach taken  as  a
         matter of public policy towards ECHR  Article  8  -  the  right  to
         respect for family and private life -  in  immigration  cases.  The
         Immigration Rules will fully reflect the factors  which  can  weigh
         for or against an Article 8 claim. The rules will set proportionate
         requirements that reflect the Government's and Parliament's view of
         how individuals' Article 8 rights should be qualified in the public
         interest  to  safeguard  the  economic  well-being  of  the  UK  by
         controlling immigration and to  protect  the  public  from  foreign
         criminals. This will mean that failure to meet the requirements  of
         the rules will normally mean failure  to  establish  an  Article  8
         claim to enter or remain in the UK, and no grant of leave  on  that
         basis. Outside exceptional cases, it will  be  proportionate  under
         Article 8 for an applicant who fails to meet  the  requirements  of
         the rules to be removed from the UK."

    It is difficult to  see  how  it  was  intended  that  the  meaning  of
    "exceptional circumstances" should be no more than disproportionate, in
    circumstances where the rules themselves were intended to indicate  the
    factors which would make deportation proportionate.

16. Moreover  in  paragraph45  of  its  judgement  in  Konstatinov  v.  The
    Netherlands - 16351/03 [2007] ECHR 336 the Court said:

         "The Court further reiterates that, moreover, Article  8  does  not
         entail a general obligation for  a  State  to  respect  immigrants'
         choice of the country of their residence and  to  authorise  family
         reunion in its territory. Nevertheless, in a  case  which  concerns
         family life as  well  as  immigration,  the  extent  of  a  State's
         obligations to admit to its territory relatives of persons residing
         there will vary according to the particular  circumstances  of  the
         persons involved and the general interest. Factors to be taken into
         account in this context are the extent  to  which  family  life  is
         effectively ruptured, the extent of the  ties  in  the  Contracting
         State, whether there are insurmountable obstacles in the way of the
         family living in the country of origin of one or more of  them  and
         whether there are factors of immigration control  (for  example,  a
         history of breaches of immigration law) or considerations of public
         order  weighing  in  favour   of   exclusion.   Another   important
         consideration will also be whether family life  was  created  at  a
         time when the persons involved  were  aware  that  the  immigration
         status of one of them was such that the persistence of that  family
         life within the host State would be precarious from the outset. The
         Court has previously held that where this is the case it is  likely
         only to be in the most exceptional circumstances that  the  removal
         of the non-national family member will constitute  a  violation  of
         Article 8 (see Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer v. the Netherlands,
         no. 50435/99, � 39, ECHR 2006 ..., with further references)."

    In Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  45  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal quoted a similar passage from Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer
    v Netherlands (2006) 4th Section [2006] ECHR 86 and Nunez v.  Norway  -
    55597/09 [2011] ECHR 1047 and after quoting the passage from Nunez then
    went on to say that this was not to adopt a general test of exceptional
    circumstances, but to identify the need for weighty factors in  favour
    of the claimant in this class of case.,  Notwithstanding this, however,
    we consider that  it  might  be  thought  that  in  paragraph  398  the
    respondent intended to introduce a test of exceptionality permitted  by
    the Strasbourg jurisprudence but not permitted by the House of Lords in
    relation to consideration of article 8 outside the immigration rules.

17.  We remind ourselves that in paragraph 10 of his determination in  Molla
    (established presence - date of application) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 161
    (IAC) Upper Tribunal judge Storey said:

         "Even though the Policy Guidance cannot be used  to  establish  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules,  Sedley  LJ  made  clear  in
         Pankina  that  it  can  nevertheless  give  rise  to  a  legitimate
         expectation that appellants should be able to benefit  from  Policy
         Guidance provisions that are more generous than the Rules:  see  HM
         and others (PBS -  legitimate  expectation  -  paragraph  245ZX(I))
         Malawi [2010] UKUT 446 (IAC)."

18.  Nevertheless we also take the view that it is not necessary to reach  a
    decision upon whether exceptional  circumstances  means  no  more  than
    circumstances  showing  that  deportation  would  be   disproportionate
    because the First-tier Tribunal clearly went on to consider whether the
    appellant's deportation would amount to a disproportionate interference
    with his article 8 rights outside  of  the  immigration  rules  and  so
    answered the question which Mr Fripp said it was obliged to  determine.



19.  It follows therefore that our consideration of  the  second  ground  of
    appeal will be determinative  of  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   When
    invited to say what factors  would  make  the  appellant's  deportation
    disproportionate Mr Fripp identified the solid family  life  which  the
    appellant had with his wife and children which the First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted and the fact  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  unlawfully
    present in the United Kingdom, having been granted indefinite leave  to
    remain.  He pointed out that there was a  good  family  background,  in
    that the appellant had spent time in South Africa in  order  to  supply
    the family's needs, in circumstances where  his  stay  there  had  been
    prolonged because of his previous removal.  There was the  factor  that
    notwithstanding that the offence  committed  by  the  appellant  was  a
    serious one, that event had to be seen in context, which was  that  the
    appellant was 40 years old, of previous good character, had no previous
    convictions in any of three countries and the fact that the appellant's
    claim was that he did not know what was in  the  container.   Mr  Fripp
    however had to concede that he could  not  go  beyond  the  appellant's
    conviction,  which  implicitly  involved  him  knowing  that   he   was
    conspiring to fraudulently evade the prohibition on the importation  of
    a Class B drug.

20.  Mr Fripp also suggested that although the First-tier Tribunal  had  set
    out in a structured way the background cases, so far as  the  facts  of
    the  appeal  were  concerned  although  they  were   present   in   the
    determination they were set out disparitively.  He  repeated  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to deal with the offence in its context,
    which was that the appellant was nearing 40 years of age, was a  family
    man of good character and no  other  criminal  offences  were  recorded
    against him in any country.  Mr Fripp referred to paragraph 10  of  his
    grounds of appeal which suggested that the First-tier Tribunal  focused
    on the seriousness of  the  offence  to  the  exclusion  of  any  wider
    examination  of  its  context,  including  his   good   and   sometimes
    potentially impressive behaviour.

21.  Mr Fripp also submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the
    evidence of family life and the  evidence  of  Dr  Claridge  concerning
    prospective harm to the children,  but  submitted,  however,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's reliance upon the fact that the appellant did not
    live permanently with his children was an  error  of  law  because  the
    First-tier Tribunal justified that consideration in giving less  weight
    to the effect that the appellant's  deportation  would  have  upon  the
    children.

22.  It seems  to  us  that  Mr  Fripp's  complaints  about  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment of the proportionality of the appellant's removal
    amounts to a criticism of the weight which the First-tier Tribunal gave
    to various competing factors, rather than identifying an error  of  law
    on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.

23.  The offence which the appellant committed  was  undoubtedly  a  serious
    one.  He pleaded  guilty  to  conspiracy  to  import  and  to  evade  a
    prohibition on the  importation  of  a  Class  B  drug,  namely  193.30
    kilograms of cannabis, for which he received a four  and  a  half  year
    term of imprisonment imposed at the Crown Court at Wood  Green  on  2nd
    March 2012.  The sentencing judge observed that  it  was  said  by  the
    Crown that  he  had  undertaken  a  leading  role,  while  his  counsel
    acknowledged that his role was at least significant.   The  judge  said
    that a leading role meant of course the supposition that he was leading
    others and the case was presented to the court, and the court accepted,
    that it was a sole trader enterprise, so it seemed to him that he  fell
    between a leading role and a significant role.

24.  As to the context in which the offence was committed, in  paragraph  79
    of its determination the First-tier Tribunal noted the submission by Mr
    Fripp that the appellant had not accepted his guilt but  it  was  plain
    that he accepted that the situation was not proper and  he  should  not
    have acted in the way that he had acted.  He pleaded  guilty.   It  was
    asked to note that the appellant was 38 at the time of  the  commission
    of the offence and was at the date of the hearing over 40.  This was  a
    first offence by a person close to the age of 40 which was unusual.

25.  In paragraph 8 of the First-tier Tribunal said that Mr Fripp  submitted
    that the appellant had shown a strong disinclination to avoid return to
    custody.  This demonstrates, in our view, that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had these factors in mind.

26.  In paragraph 84 of its determination the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    that there was a genuine, committed relationship between the  appellant
    and his wife.  They had met at university  and  they  started  to  live
    together shortly thereafter.  Even when the appellant had  to  move  to
    South Africa for business  opportunities,  the  relationship  continued
    with their meeting each  few  months.   It  noted  the  celebration  of
    marriage in 2003 and the appellant's wife's commitment to  her  husband
    when she travelled to live with him in South  Africa.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal also went on to carefully examine the evidence relating to the
    decision to settle in the United Kingdom and noted the decision made by
    the couple that the appellant would continue to carry out his  economic
    activities in South Africa as he had been successful and he was able to
    support  his  developing  family  with  the  profits.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal also noted his desire for the betterment  of  the  family,  in
    that although his wife had been granted a council flat tenancy, he  was
    able to raise a mortgage to buy their own home in the  United  Kingdom.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that from about  2005  it  had  been  the
    family's intention that the appellant  would  relocate  to  the  United
    Kingdom and he sought to do so by developing his business here  of  the
    importing and exporting cars to Nigeria.  The First-tier Tribunal noted
    that during this time he was visiting the United Kingdom on  the  basis
    of visit visas which was  not  in  breach  of  the  immigration  rules,
    although it noted that he did overstay in 2008, at which  time  he  was
    forcibly removed from the United Kingdom to  Nigeria.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal said it was indeed unfortunate  that  that  occurred  as  this
    seems to have been the catalyst to the  unravelling  of  his  financial
    affairs.

27.  The First-tier Tribunal went on to find that the  arrangements  by  the
    couple meant that they did not live as a  traditional  nuclear  family,
    but the appellant spent a considerable proportion of his  time  working
    in South Africa trading and as a result, on his evidence, he  spent  no
    more than six months in any year up to the time of his  arrest  in  the
    United Kingdom.  As a result of this the family had  prolonged  periods
    of  separation   when   contact   was   maintained   by   e-mails   and
    correspondence.  The First-tier Tribunal noted the  appellant  accepted
    responsibility for the crime that he had committed but asserted he  was
    not aware of the contents of the  consignment  and  therefore  did  not
    knowingly import the prohibited drugs.  He had, however, at the date of
    the hearing made no formal appeal nor did he produce any evidence  that
    he had indeed been in communication with solicitors to this effect.

28.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant's four  children  were
    British citizens and that their lives were centred primarily  on  their
    mother who was their main carer and that they were fully integrated  in
    the United Kingdom.  It  accepted,  however,  that  the  appellant  was
    involved in the lives of his children, but the family choice  had  been
    to live separate and  apart  for  a  substantial  period  of  time  for
    financial purposes.  It noted both  the  appellant  and  his  wife  had
    parents and siblings still residing in Nigeria.

29.  In paragraph 91 of its  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the appellant did enjoy family life in the United Kingdom as  well
    as a private life and that it would be an interference with his  family
    and private life if he were to be deported  to  Nigeria.   It  accepted
    that it would not be reasonable to expect his  British  born  wife  and
    children to relocate to Nigeria.

30.  In paragraph 93 of its determination the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    that the issue, as Mr Fripp identified, turned on proportionality.  The
    First-tier Tribunal reminded itself of the  criteria  set  out  in  the
    decision in Uner v the Netherlands No. 46410/99  [2006]  ECHR  873  and
    Maslov v Austria No. 1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546.   In  paragraph  102  the
    First-tier Tribunal said it was accepted on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    that he had committed a serious offence relating to  drugs.   This  had
    been accepted by the appellant  although  it  noted  in  part  that  he
    claimed that he  was  not  aware  that  there  were  drugs  within  the
    consignment.   In  paragraph  103  it  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    indefinite leave to remain at the time of  the  offence,  he  had  been
    involved in a much longer relationship with his wife  and  was  married
    with four  children  and  that  his  wife  and  children  were  British
    citizens.  In assessing  the  appellant's  conduct  it  noted  that  he
    remained in custody and he attempted to  use  his  time  constructively
    with further studies.  It noted the appellant's  family  situation  and
    observed that the children were British citizens and  that  they  would
    not be required to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for them to do so.

31.   In  paragraph  104  the  First-tier  Tribunal  said  that  in  dealing
    specifically  with  section  55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 the removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom would have an impact on the children.  They would wish to  live
    with their father and to be able to see (him) when the family wished to
    do so.  It went on to say, however,  that  the  circumstances  of  this
    family were such that they decided that the father would work overseas,
    although it accepted he did spend  half  of  his  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom and his deportation would of course mean that he would  not  be
    able to do that.  However, this was not a situation where the  children
    had not had unfettered access to their father at all times and they had
    become used to their father being absent in part.  It went  on  to  say
    that it had carefully considered all of the evidence  and  accepted  Dr
    Claridge's report and found that there would be an  adverse  effect  on
    the  children.   It  reminded  itself,  however,  that  the  children's
    interests  were  a  primary  consideration  and   not   the   paramount
    consideration.

32.   In  paragraph  107  the  First-tier  Tribunal  repeated  that  it  had
    considered all of the factors  relating  to  the  appellant's  and  his
    wife's and children's lives in the United Kingdom and apart  from  this
    offence he had a clean record and had  been  working  to  maintain  his
    family.  In paragraph 108 it said it had to balance the competing views
    of the parties and had paid especial regard to  the  interests  of  the
    children.  It found on the evidence before it that the balance fell  in
    favour of the Secretary of State's requirement to  protect  the  public
    interest.

33.  In our view it is plain that the First-tier Tribunal took into  account
    all of the factors relevant to the assessment of the proportionality of
    the appellant's deportation.  We do not share Mr Fripp's view that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  in  some  way  discounted  the  effect  that  the
    appellant's deportation would  have  upon  his  relationship  with  his
    children; rather the First-tier Tribunal set out the context  in  which
    the appellant's deportation would take effect.  The First-tier Tribunal
    clearly had regard to the appellant's good character and general family
    background in taking account of the seriousness  of  the  offence.   We
    find that Mr Fripp's criticisms of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  not
    warranted.

34.  In view of the weight which has to be given to the public  interest  in
    the deportation of foreign criminals in the light of  the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550 the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose
    an error of law in relation to the  question  of  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's deportation would amount to a disproportionate interference
    with his right to respect for his private and family life under article
    8 of the ECHR.

35.  In these circumstances the Tribunal was entitled  to  find  that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances for the purposes of paragraph 398  of
    HC 395 and we are of the view  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in
    relation to the assessment of the appellant's article 8 rights as  seen
    through the prism of the immigration rules.  This is the  case  whether
    exceptional circumstances had to be shown in the  sense  argued  by  Mr
    Fripp before the First-tier Tribunal or it merely had to be shown  that
    the appellant's deportation would not be disproportionate.

36.  Accordingly the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
    the appeal shall stand.


Signed                              Dated



P A Spencer Judge of the Upper Tribunal
