
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01280/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd August 2015                   |On 10th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                              Mr Somwe Kongolo
                 (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE OR ASKED FOR)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kevin Smyth, Solicitor instructed by  Kesar  &  Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Eldridge) who, in a determination promulgated  on  13th
    April 2015 dismissed his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State to make a deportation order against him by virtue  of  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The Appellant is  a  national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    (hereinafter referred to as the "DRC") and was born on  11th  September
    1982.  His immigration history can be briefly summarised.   He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 7th February 2008 at the age of  25,  using  a
    false passport from the Republic of South Africa.  He claimed asylum on
    arrival at the  port  and  was  granted  temporary  admission  and  was
    required to report.  However he did not do so  and  was  listed  as  an
    absconder.

 3. On 15th January 2011 his claim for asylum was refused and on 11th March
    2011 his appeal against that decision was dismissed by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Griffiths).  He became appeal rights exhausted on  28th
    March 2011.

 4. The Appellant is a subject of a deportation order as a  result  of  his
    conviction and sentence on 10th March 2014 at Wood  Green  Crown  Court
    for possession of a controlled drug with intent to supply, namely class
    B, nine  counts  of  possession  of  articles  for  use  in  fraud  and
    possession with intent to supply  class  A  drugs  (cocaine).   He  was
    sentenced to a period  of  three  years'  imprisonment  for  the  drugs
    offence relating to the supply of  cocaine  and  for  the  other  drugs
    offences, he received a concurrent sentence of twelve months.  For  the
    offences involving counterfeit driving licence  and  credit  cards  and
    chequebooks he was sentenced  to  twelve  months'  imprisonment  to  be
    served consecutive to the other sentences, making a total  sentence  of
    four years.

 5. The Appellant relies upon the exception to be found in  Section  33  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 that his removal pursuant  to  the  deportation
    order would breach  his  rights  under  Article  3  or  on  grounds  of
    humanitarian protection and Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 31st March 2015.  The
    judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant and also from his  brother
    and in a determination promulgated on 13th  April  2014  dismissed  his
    appeal on all grounds.  This  was  a  case  in  which  the  Appellant's
    representatives advanced a number of legal issues, firstly  that  as  a
    failed asylum seeker he would be at risk of persecution or serious harm
    contrary to Article 3 or in the alternative, relying upon the  decision
    of Phillips J in the Administrative Court in R (on the  application  of
    P) (DRC) v the SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879 that as a  criminal  deportee,  he
    would similarly be at risk of Article 3 serious harm.  This  was  based
    on the decision and the evidence before Mr Justice Phillips relating to
    the issue of criminal deportees facing detention upon return, that such
    conditions of detention breached Article 3 and that there  was  a  real
    risk that his status as a criminal deportee  would  be  revealed.   The
    case was also advanced on the basis of humanitarian protection  grounds
    on the basis of the country conditions of the Appellant's home area  in
    the North Kivu province.

 7.  As to the issues relating to Article  8,  it  was  asserted  that  his
    removal to the DRC would be a disproportionate  breach  of  Article  8.
    However it is not in dispute that  by  reason  of  his  conviction  and
    sentence of four years, this Appellant fell within paragraph 398(b) and
    therefore  the  public  interest  in  his  deportation  would  only  be
    outweighed in Article 8 terms "by other factors where  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and  399A".   In  that  regard,  at  [40]  the  judge  reached  the
    conclusion that on the issues of private and family life, under 399  he
    did not have a child  in  the  UK  and  did  not  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner.  Furthermore he could not avail
    himself of paragraph 399A in  respect  of  his  private  life  for  the
    reasons given at [40] therefore at [41-48] when considering whether the
    Appellant  could  show  "very  compelling  reasons"  he   reached   the
    conclusion after a careful balance that he had  not  demonstrated  that
    there were such very compelling reasons.

 8. Consequently the judge dismissed his appeal.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and on 11th May
    2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Martin (sitting as a judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal) granted permission.

10.   The grounds upon which permission was granted were as follows:-

         "It is arguable, as asserted in the grounds that the judge ought to
         have considered the risks to the Appellant on return as a convicted
         criminal following the decision of the High  Court  in  R  (on  the
         application of P) (DRC) v the SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin)."

11. The grant of permission only dealt with  Ground  1  being  advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant there  being  three  grounds  in  total   being
    advanced on his behalf.  Grounds  2  and  3  related  to  the  asserted
    failure to determine whether the Appellant was at risk of serious  harm
    in his home area and Ground 3 which was linked  to  Ground  2  was  the
    failure to apply  the  correct  legal  test  for  internal  relocation.
    However it was common ground before this  Tribunal  by  both  advocates
    that in light of the decision of the Tribunal in Ferrer that whilst the
    grant of permission did not deal with the other  grounds  as  set  out,
    this did not mean that permission had not been granted or that  it  was
    not open to Mr Smyth to put any arguments forward in respect  of  those
    grounds.  Consequently I heard submissions based on Grounds 2 and 3.

12.  It was conceded on behalf of the Appellant that Ground 1, which  dealt
    with the risk of  return  to  foreign  national  offenders,  could  not
    succeed in the light of the decision of  BM  and  Others  (returnees  -
    criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC).

13. In relation to Ground 1 it was  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    engage with the argument advanced relating to the issue of humanitarian
    protection and in particular by reference to his home area in the North
    Kivu province.  He referred the Tribunal to the UNHCR position document
    within the bundle dated September 2014 and the updated information from
    the UNHCR which had not changed the position.  In  particular  he  made
    reference to the human rights abuses relating to civilians within  that
    area, issues relating to displacement and the UNHCR's conclusion  based
    on  that  evidence.   He  submitted  that  whilst  the  judge  at  [38]
    acknowledged UNHCR report, there was no engagement with the evidence as
    a whole as to the issue of humanitarian protection or any  analysis  of
    whether this Appellant would be at serious harm if returned to his home
    area.  He submitted it was incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  make  clear
    findings upon the risk in his home area and that paragraph [38] did not
    make such findings.  Nor did the judge explicitly say that he  accepted
    that the Appellant would be at any risk of harm in his home area.

14. In this respect he submitted that it was material to Ground 3  and  the
    failure to consider internal relocation.  The judge,  in  essence  made
    reference to the UNHCR report but considered that he did  not  see  any
    evidence to suggest that the Appellant could not remain  in  or  around
    the capital or relocate to an area  other  than  the  Kivus.   Thus  he
    submitted that that failed to consider the legal test of reasonableness
    of return or whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  to
    relocate to an area other than that of his  home  area  and  that  such
    issues  should  be   considered   against   the   particular   personal
    circumstances of this Appellant.

15.   In this regard, he referred to the medical evidence in which  it  was
    undisputed that this Appellant had a psychotic  illness  for  which  he
    continued to receive treatment [26].  The fact that he had a  psychotic
    illness was not in dispute although the severity of it  was  [24].   It
    also should be considered in the light of  the  finding  at  [25]  that
    there were no relatives or other people to whom he could  turn  to  for
    support were he to be removed to the DRC.  There was some  evidence  in
    the bundle relating to  medical  health  provision  in  Kinshasa  [COIR
    Report] but there was  no  consideration  of  those  legal  tests  when
    considering the particular circumstances of this Appellant.

16. Mr Wilding  by  way  of  a  reply  submitted  that  the  reliance  upon
    humanitarian protection was set out in the skeleton argument that there
    did not appear to be any submissions made as to the "sliding scale"  or
    any reference to the decision of Elgafaji of the CJEU and that  it  was
    insufficient to rely upon the UNHCR  report  in  any  event.   He  made
    reference  to  the  two  factors  identified;  including  his   medical
    condition and the lack of family in the DRC and  whilst  there  was  no
    challenge in the Appellant's grounds to the assessment of  the  medical
    evidence, the finding at [25] was that he had  no  such  relatives  but
    that did not deal with the witness statement of the Appellant in  which
    he made reference to having two brothers and a sister and that  he  was
    in contact with someone who travelled to and from  the  Congo  who  had
    given him that information.  Thus he submitted that he would  not  have
    succeeded to show that there was any risk in his home area to justify a
    grant of subsidiary protection. He further submitted that the thrust of
    the case before the First-tier  Tribunal  related  to  the  risk  as  a
    foreign national offender  and  not  upon  the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection. Furthermore, there was evidence that his mother  was  still
    in the DRC at the screening interview for his original  claim  he  said
    his mother and siblings are still alive and therefore  the  finding  at
    [26] only considered his uncle and aunt and was not  inconsistent  with
    any finding made by the First-tier Tribunal.  He however accepted  that
    there was no determination before the Tribunal  which  related  to  the
    dismissal of the Appellant's previous claim and thus it was  not  known
    on what basis it was either dismissed or what  findings  of  fact  were
    made in relation to the Appellant and his family circumstances.

17. Dealing with the third ground, at paragraph 38 he submitted there was a
    strong finding that there was no evidence that he could not relocate to
    Kinshasa.  The medical evidence  was  unchallenged  and  there  was  no
    reason why he could not relocate to Kinshasa and that  the  finding  at
    [38] was sufficient to discharge the legal test in that respect.

18. Mr Smyth by way of response submitted that the  finding  as  to  family
    relatives did not simply include his uncle and aunt  but  at  [25]  the
    judge accepted that there were no relatives or other people to whom  he
    would turn for support were he to be removed.   He  conceded  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal that originally made  findings
    of fact upon the Appellant's asylum claim had not been provided to  the
    judge although reference to it had been made in the skeleton  argument,
    that was a clear finding made and was relevant to  both  the  issue  of
    humanitarian  protection  and  in  the  alternative  to  the  issue  of
    relocation. Furthermore, paragraph 38 could not  possibly  be  said  to
    deal with the issue of reasonableness of return in the context of  this
    Appellant's particular circumstances and his mental health.  There  was
    no reference to page 280 (of the COIR  Report)  for  DRC  dealing  with
    mental health provision.

19. Having heard the arguments of the parties I am satisfied that the judge
    erred in law in the ways addressed to me by Mr Smyth on behalf  of  the
    Appellant and as set out in the grounds.   The  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection based on a return  to  his  home  area  was  raised  in  the
    skeleton argument at paragraphs 20-26 and are set out in paragraph 339C
    of the Rules and Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.   Whilst
    paragraph 339(c) of the  Immigration  Rules  (iv)  makes  reference  to
    exclusion from the grant of humanitarian protection, I observe that the
    issue of exclusion was not raised by the Secretary of  State  based  on
    his  criminal  conviction  however  this  is  because  the   issue   of
    humanitarian protection was not originally raised before the  Secretary
    of State but was first raised before the  Tribunal.   Serious  harm  in
    this case  relied  upon  "(iv)  serious  and  individual  threat  to  a
    civilian's life or person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    situations of international or internal armed conflict." (see paragraph
    21 of the skeleton argument).   In  this  context  there  was  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal comprising of the current UNHCR position
    in relation to returns to North Kivu (the area from which the Appellant
    is from) dated September 2014  and  also  updated.   The  report  urges
    states not to forcibly return to the DRC persons originating from those
    areas without the security and human rights situation  having  improved
    considerably.  The report makes  reference  to  the  violence  and  the
    extensive displacement.  The evidence in the  Appellant's  bundle  from
    pages 178-191 provided further country information relating to the  DRC
    and in particular to the killings and human rights  violations  against
    civilians and the effects of displacement upon them.  The report of the
    UNHCR made reference to the effect upon civilians by the armed conflict
    and made reference to the widespread and serious human rights abuses.

20.  At [37] the judge, having considered the background evidence  at  178-
    191 reached the conclusion that the evidence in the bundle did  nothing
    to address specific concerns regarding returning foreign criminals  and
    whilst the judge did not have the advantage  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in BM and Others [as cited] his  conclusions  reached  on  the
    evidence at paragraphs 31 to 37 were conclusions that was entirely open
    to him and subsequently confirmed in BM (and others).

21.  However  the  relevant  paragraph  identified  by  both  advocates  is
    paragraph [38] in which the judge dealt with the issue of  humanitarian
    protection and purported to deal with the  issue  of  relocation.   The
    judge said this:-

         "38. The Appellant also seeks to rely on a claim  for  humanitarian
             protection on the basis of his demographic  profile  and  home
             area.  He says he is from North Kivu.  He would be returned to
             Kinshasa, a  considerable  distance  from  the  main  conflict
             areas.  I have read  the  UNHCR  report  relied  upon  by  the
             Appellant (pages 184-188).  I  do  not  see  any  evidence  to
             suggest that the Appellant may not remain  in  or  around  the
             capital or relocate to an area other than the Kivus."

    However, there was no analysis of the country materials  or  the  legal
    test relevant  to  humanitarian  protection  or  any  consideration  of
    Article 15(c) as to whether there was no consideration of  serious  and
    individual  threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or  person  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or  internal
    armed conflict.  Whilst Mr Wilding submits that the  evidence  did  not
    support a finding of internal armed conflict, the concept of threat  is
    broad enough  to  capture  any  situation  of  indiscriminate  violence
    whether caused by one or more armed  factions  or  by  a  state,  which
    reached the level described by the CJEU in Elgafaji and that the  armed
    conflict need not be exceptional but that there must be an intensity of
    indiscriminate violence great enough to  meet  the  test  in  Elgafaji.
    Article 15(c) requires the threat to be serious  and  that  the  threat
    must result from indiscriminate acts of violence and that the existence
    of such acts affecting the individual civilians must be a reality.  The
    Tribunal in HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] considered the
    law in this respect and that what lay behind Article 15(c) was the need
    to enable those who are  likely  to  be  caught  up  in  indiscriminate
    violence so as  to  suffer  death  or  injury  to  be  able  to  obtain
    subsidiary protection (at [38] the decision makes reference to Elgafaji
    and that the more the applicant is able to show that he is specifically
    affected by reason of factors particular to his personal circumstances,
    the lower the level of indiscriminate violence required for him  to  be
    eligible for subsidiary protection).

    Mr Smyth submits that the Appellant's mental health condition and  lack
    of family support in the area are relevant personal characteristics  of
    this Appellant.

    There is no analysis of the material relating to the  Appellant's  home
    area and all that is said at [38] is that the evidence did not  suggest
    that the Appellant may not remain in or around the capital or  relocate
    to an area other than the Kivus.  Whilst the judge  made  reference  to
    having considered the UNHCR report,  there  was  no  analysis  of  that
    report or the other material in the context of the position of the home
    area.  The only conclusion drawn is that the country materials did  not
    say that he would not be able to relocate to another  area  other  than
    the Kivus.

22. Even if it could  be  said  that  on  a  reading  of  paragraph  38  by
    implication the judge was  stating  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at
    serious harm in his home area, the judge  would  then  be  required  to
    consider the issue of relocation and the reasonableness  of  return  to
    another area.  In this respect there is no proper consideration of  the
    issue of internal relocation at paragraph 38 or from the  determination
    when read as a  whole.  If, it is legitimate to infer from [38] that he
    considered the Appellant could not return to his home area,  the  judge
    was required to apply the provisions of Article 8 of the  Qualification
    Directive and paragraph 399(O)(i) and (ii).  In making that  assessment
    he was required to have regard to the general circumstances  prevailing
    in this part of the country and to the personal  circumstances  of  the
    person concerned (see Januzi [2006] UKHL 5).   In  that  case  Baroness
    Hale drew on a UNHCR document which considered  that  the  task  was  a
    holistic one looking at the  circumstances  of  the  particular  person
    involved including psychological  health  conditions,  the  family  and
    social situations and survival  capacities.   Paragraph  38  could  not
    properly be said to engage with any analysis upon either the  issue  of
    relocation as reasonable  or  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  by
    reference to the Appellant's personal characteristics and the  evidence
    and in particular in the light of the judge's findings at [25] that  he
    had no relatives or others that he could return to for support.

23. I have therefore reached the conclusion that the decision cannot  stand
    and it should be set aside.  Both parties have submitted before me that
    in the event of an error of law being found on both  Grounds  2  and  3
    that the appropriate course would be for the appeal to be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal as further oral evidence will be required  from
    the Appellant upon these issues and that in the light  of  his  medical
    condition an updated medical report will be required.  Whilst it is not
    the ordinary practice to remit cases to the First-tier Tribunal, I have
    considered that this is a course that should be  adopted  having  heard
    the submissions of both advocates and having considered  the  evidence.
    I observe that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  have  a  copy  of  the
    determination setting out the findings of fact made by Judge  Griffiths
    relating to the Appellant's original asylum claim in 2011 and that such
    a determination was a relevant document and  should  be  provided  when
    this matter is heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  determination
    should be provided by either  the  Appellant's  solicitors  or  by  the
    Secretary of State or in default by the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision is to be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
a hearing in accordance with Section 12(2)(b) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act and  the  Practice  Statement  of  10th  February  2010  (as
amended).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 4th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

