
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01092/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th January 2014                            |On 6th February 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                    B C N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)
    born on 9th February  1974.   The  Appellant  has  a  long  immigration
    history.  He claims to have arrived in the UK  on  12th  June  2002  in
    possession  of  a  false  passport  when  he  claimed   asylum.    That
    application  was  refused  on  31st  July  2002,  and  ultimately   the
    Appellant's appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed.   On  that
    occasion  the  Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was  based   upon   his
    relationship  with  his  brother-in-law.   The  appeal  was   dismissed
    following an adverse credibility finding.  Leave to appeal to the  then
    IAT was refused in August 2003.  The Appellant did not leave the UK but
    made a fresh claim for asylum on the basis of his  brother's  political
    activities in March 2008.  That application was not refused until April
    2013.  In the meantime and in  December  2009,  the  Appellant  pleaded
    guilty to an offence of possessing a false identity  document  and  was
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of twelve months. A  recommendation
    was made for deportation.  On 10th May 2013 the Respondent decided that
    the Appellant was subject to the provisions of Section 32(5) of the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 and made a deportation order against him.

 2. The Appellant appealed both the deportation order and  the  refusal  of
    asylum.  His appeal was heard by a Panel chaired by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Ievins (the  Panel)  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  17th
    October 2013.  The Panel allowed the appeal on asylum grounds  for  the
    reasons given in its  Determination  dated  14th  November  2013.   The
    Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision  and  on  5th  December
    2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the Panel made an error on a  point  of  law  so
    that its decision should be set aside.

 4. The Panel allowed the appeal because  it  found  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his witness KN to  be  credible  and  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been active within an  organisation  situate  in  the  UK
    known as the Congo Support Group (CSG) which was opposed to the  regime
    of President Kabila.  The  Appellant  had  attended  demonstrations  in
    Downing Street in 2011 and 2013.  The Panel  considered  the  objective
    evidence and the  current  country  guidance  case  of  BK  (Democratic
    Republic of Congo) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 1322 and concluded  that  the
    Appellant would be at a real risk if  he  returned  to  the  DRC.   The
    authorities in the DRC maintained an active interest  in  its  citizens
    involved in anti-regime activities abroad, particularly in the UK which
    was seen as a centre of anti-Kabila opposition.   The  Appellant  would
    therefore return to the DRC as a failed asylum seeker  and  as  a  low-
    level opposition political activist.  Agents of the  regime  active  in
    the UK kept a close surveillance on the  Congolese  community  and  fed
    back to the authorities in the DRC information of interest.   Therefore
    despite the Appellant's  modest  profile  as  an  opposition  political
    activist, this would be  known  to  the  authorities  in  the  DRC  and
    therefore there was a real risk that on return the Appellant  would  be
    identified, detained, and persecuted.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Tufan referred to the  grounds  of  application  and
    argued that the Panel had erred in law in coming  to  this  conclusion.
    In particular, the Panel had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  its
    finding that the account upon which the  Appellant  based  his  present
    claim for asylum was credible, bearing in  mind  the  previous  finding
    that  the  Appellant  was  not  credible.   There  was  a   significant
    discrepancy in the Appellant's evidence, and insufficient  evidence  of
    his involvement with the CSG.  Further, and  even  if  the  Appellant's
    account was credible, the Panel had erred in law  in  interpreting  the
    background evidence to indicate that someone politically active to only
    an extremely limited degree would be at risk on return to the DRC.

 6. In response, Mr Bellara argued that there had been  no  error  of  law.
    The Panel had taken account of  the  previous  finding  of  a  lack  of
    credibility and had distinguished that from  the  present  claim.   The
    Panel had carefully  assessed  the  evidence,  including  that  of  the
    witness and the documents contained in the Appellant's bundle  and  had
    made detailed reasoned findings.   Further,  the  Panel  had  carefully
    considered the objective evidence and fully explained its decision that
    the Appellant was at risk on return.

 7. I find myself in agreement with the submissions of  Mr  Bellara  and  I
    find no error of law in the decision of the Panel which I  do  not  set
    aside.  The Panel carried  out  a  careful  analysis  of  the  relevant
    evidence and came to a conclusion that the Appellant was credible which
    was a conclusion open to it on the evidence  before  it  and  which  it
    fully explained.  The Panel found no reason to doubt the  corroborative
    evidence of the Appellant's witness KN and decided that the CSG  was  a
    group which did exist and was active in the  UK  opposing  the  present
    regime in the DRC.  The Panel had doubts concerning the  motivation  of
    the Appellant in associating with that group, but  was  satisfied  from
    photographic   evidence   that   the   Appellant   had   attended   two
    demonstrations.  The Panel took account of the previous  finding  of  a
    lack of credibility against the Appellant, but the Panel  followed  the
    decision in Devaseelan and considered the subsequent evidence which put
    the Appellant's claim for asylum on an entirely different  basis  being
    his sur  place  activities  in  the  UK.   The  Panel  dealt  with  the
    discrepancy as to when the Appellant joined the CSG in paragraph 53  of
    the Determination.

 8. Having found that the Appellant was a low-level political  activist  in
    the UK, I find no error of law in the Panel's subsequent decision  that
    such activities placed the Appellant at risk on return to the DRC.  The
    Panel carefully analysed the objective evidence at paragraphs 54 to  58
    inclusive of the Determination.  That objective evidence, including the
    UKBA Policy Bulletin 1 of 2012,  supports  the  Panel's  findings  that
    agents of the DRC regime operating in the UK take an interest  in  even
    low-level political activists in the UK and report those activities  to
    the authorities in the DRC.  This decision is in  accordance  with  the
    current country guidance case of BK.

Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

10. I do not set aside that decision.



Anonymity

11. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  continue
    that order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
