
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01015/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Strand      |signed:   24 March 2014      |
|on  6 February and 17 March  2014             |sent out: on 01 April 2014   |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

    President of the Upper Tribunal, Mr Justice McCLOSKEY (on 6 February)
                     Upper Tribunal Judge  John FREEMAN
              Upper Tribunal Judge Mark O'CONNOR (on 17 March)

                                   Between

                             AMARJIT SINGH GILL
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     James Collins, counsel instructed by TA Capron & Co,
Grays, solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble (on 6 February); Mr Steven Walker
(on 17 March)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
INTRODUCTION
What follows is the decision of the Tribunal, written by and dealing with
the following:
paragraphs 1 - 29: McCloskey J, setting aside the decision of the first-
tier panel for error of law;
paragraphs 30 - 73: Judge Freeman, giving our reasons for re-making it as
appears below.
Though the first-tier panel made a direction for  anonymity,  there  was  no
application before us for that to be continued, and, if there had  been,  we
should have refused it. There are  no  children  involved,  except  for  the
grandchildren, whose interests are taken care of by the  initials  used  for
them, to be followed by anyone else who  refers  to  them.  The  appellant's
article 2/3 case, on  which  the  original  application  for  anonymity  was
based, was withdrawn before us.
1.   This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary  of  State")
    on 13th May 2013, determining to deport the Appellant from  the  United
    Kingdom.   The Appellant appealed.  By its determination promulgated on
    23rd October 2013, the First-Tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  allowed  his
    appeal on human rights grounds, giving effect to Article 8  ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

BACKGROUND AND CHRONOLOGY

2.   The  basic  facts  are  uncontentious.   The  Appellant  is  of  Indian
    nationality and is now aged 58 years, having been born on 3rd  December
    1955. The stand out fact in the appeal matrix is that he  murdered  his
    wife on 27th January 1999.  On 31st January 2000, he was  convicted  of
    this murder and sentenced to life imprisonment.  A tariff of  14  years
    was determined.  This expired on  1st  February  2013.   The  Appellant
    continues  to  be  detained  in  closed   conditions.    The   evidence
    establishes that he had become depressed and had begun drinking heavily
    for some time prior to  the  murder.    During  the  22  years  of  the
    marriage there were several incidents of domestic violence,  with  some
    associated police  interventions.   The  violence  perpetrated  by  the
    Appellant  against  his  wife  became  progressively  worse,  featuring
    physical injuries and medical treatment.

3.   At the time of the murder,  the  Appellant's  spouse  had  expressed  a
    request for a divorce and her intention to  leave.   She  began  making
    appropriate preparations.  Three days later, during  the  morning,  the
    Appellant purchased alcohol from a local retail outlet.  Shortly before
    2pm, he informed his neighbours that his wife was dead.  The  cause  of
    death was a single stab wound to the  neck.   The  victim  also  had  a
    number of deep and substantial cuts, mainly to  her  left  forearm  and
    hand, consistent with defensive  injuries  inflicted  by  a  knife.   A
    receipt confirming the purchase of a lock-knife by the  Appellant  some
    weeks previously was found.  The Appellant stated that he had  consumed
    half a bottle of vodka, while denying having  killed  his  wife.   This
    followed a trial during which the Appellant's defence had been that  he
    was too drunk to form the  requisite  murderous  intent.   He  admitted
    manslaughter, pleading the defences of  diminished  responsibility  and
    provocation to the murder charge.  He alleged that his wife had taunted
    him with an affair, giving rise to morbid jealousy.  He  was  convicted
    unanimously after the jury had deliberated for less than one hour.  The
    sentencing Judge stated:

         "Amarjit Singh Gill, last year, armed with  a  knife,  when,  I  am
         quite satisfied, you had been drinking but were not so  drunk  that
         you did not know what you were doing, you took  the  life  of  your
         wife who had led a wholly blameless life looking after you and your
         family and you drove that knife  through  her  neck  and  took  her
         life."

4.   In the trial Judge's report, it was recorded that the Appellant was  an
    alcoholic.  The expert evidence upon which he sought to  rely  provided
    no substance to his claim  of  diminished  responsibility.   The  trial
    Judge commented:
         "The Defendant was regularly violent and bullying towards his wife.
          It did appear that his drunken behaviour had deteriorated after  a
         short spell in prison for  driving  with  excess  alcohol.    Prior
         thereto he was of good character but he had lost his  job  and  had
         become depressed."

     The Judge recommended a tariff of 14 years with which  the  Lord  Chief
    Justice concurred.

5.   As regards the history, the following  additional  material  facts  are
    either proved or admitted:

       i)  Having entered the United Kingdom on  27th  February  1977  with
          limited leave, the Appellant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
          remain on 17th April 1989.

      ii) He married his wife in April 1977 and there are three children of
          the marriage who are now aged 35, 32 and 24  years  respectively.



     iii) The Appellant worked as a clothing trader in  London  until  1996
          when he was sentenced to three months  imprisonment  for  driving
          with excessive alcohol.

      iv) This was followed by a failed business venture and  a  conviction
          for common assault on his brother.

       v)  Complaints to the police of assaults upon his  wife  dated  from
          January 1997.

THE CURRENT FAMILY CIRCUMSTANCES

6.   None of the children is married.  The oldest, a son,  is  single.   His
    visits to his father in prison  were  irregular  and  infrequent.   His
    level of telephone contact with his father is unclear.   In  1999/2000,
    this son brought his mother's ashes to India.  Paragraph 30 of the  FtT
    determination records the following:

         "....  His cousin approached him.  This was his mother's nephew; he
         said it was tragic and he felt sorry for him but his  side  of  the
         family had been talking about it and were looking for revenge."

    In his witness statement, he said something rather different:


         "I do however have a genuine fear that if my father is returned  to
         India he is very likely to be killed in retaliation of my  mother's
         death by her family who have expressed their intention to harm  him
         should he return to India."

    He suggested that it would be difficult for his father to  relocate  to
    another area of India on account of his vulnerability and severed ties.
     He confirmed that most of his mother's  family  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.
7.   The second of the two sons is in a  stable  relationship  within  which
    three children have been  born.  He  claimed  that  his  maternal  aunt
    continues to reside in the village from where  his  father  originated.
    This aunt has male and female siblings.  In his statement he  suggested
    that they "... would be intent on  revenge  for  the  honour  of  their
    family ....."  The third of the children, the only daughter, was aged 9
    years when the murder occurred.  She attested to the previous violence.
     She has graduated and is training to be a forensic psychiatrist.   She
    too expressed concerns about a revenge family killing.  In common  with
    her brothers, she has maintained telephone contact with her  father  in
    prison.  All three children have forgiven the  Appellant  and  plan  to
    provide him with a home following his release from prison.

8.   On behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  there  was  no  challenge  of
    substance to  the  evidence  rehearsed  in  the  immediately  preceding
    paragraphs.  We make findings of fact accordingly.   Any  discrepancies
    in the evidence of the three children,  for  example  in  the  form  of
    inconsistencies between their written statements and their testimony to
    the FtT, were of minor dimensions and  Mr  Bramble  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State did not seek to magnify them.

9.   Turning to the evidence relating  specifically  to  the  Appellant,  we
    make the following findings:

      a) He is truly remorseful and repentant.


      b) He has solemnly resolved to renounce alcohol for the  remainder  of
         his life.  His ability to give effect to  this  resolution  is  not
         entirely clear.

      c) The  Appellant's  limited  command  of  the  English  language  has
         hindered his progress in prison.  In  particular,  offence  focused
         work - which would include victim awareness and  alcohol  awareness
         courses - has been hampered and delayed.

      d) In its most recent  report,  dated  July  2013,  the  Parole  Board
         declined to either direct the Appellant's release or recommend  his
         transfer to open prison  conditions.   It  recorded  his  behaviour
         throughout his sentence as "excellent".   He  was  assessed  as  "a
         model prisoner".   He  had  been  working  well  in  the  tailoring
         workshop.  Offence focused and avoidance of  reoffending  measures,
         in particular substance misuse avoidance, remained outstanding.

      e) The risk of the Appellant reoffending is low.  Similarly, the  risk
         of him inflicting serious harm on the public is low.  In  contrast,
         the risk of him inflicting serious harm on  a  known  adult,  being
         anyone in a close relationship with him, is assessed as high.

      f) In the words of the Parole Board, "..... with core  offending  risk
         factors still unaddressed, it is not possible to evaluate any  risk
         management plan and none has yet been prepared .....  You have  not
         made  sufficient  progress  in  reducing  your  risk  to  a   level
         consistent with protecting the public from harm".

10.  We make certain further findings based on  the  report  prepared  by  a
    forensic psychologist, Ms Durrant, in October 2012.  This forms part of
    the material considered by the Parole Board subsequently, in July 2013.
     Based on his performance in the working memory  and  processing  speed
    tests, Ms Durrant opined  that  the  Appellant  may  have  a  "Learning
    Disability". This would account for  the  limited  development  of  his
    reading and writing skills.  A suitable referral "will be made" to  the
    appropriate agency.  His limited command of the English  language  will
    be a continuing challenge.  The  report  contains  advice  and  various
    recommendations to the professionals with whom the Appellant  would  be
    engaging subsequently.  It is an admirably balanced, professional piece
    of work.  Its clear tenor was that there is real scope  for  successful
    professional interventions vis-�-vis  the  Appellant.   Its  concluding
    message to the Appellant was the following:

         "You are likely to find it too difficult  to  complete  group  work
         programmes. It is possible that you have a learning  disability  (a
         learning disability affects the way a person  learns  new  things).
         It can be mild, moderate or  severe.   Psychological  Services  are
         going to tell In-Reach the result of this assessment  and  seek  to
         find support for you and to work out the best way to work with  you
         to reduce your risk."


    It appears, however, that, for whatever reason, there has been no  real
    subsequent progress.

THE DEPORTATION OF FOREIGN CRIMINALS: LEGAL FRAMEWORK

The Decision in MF (Nigeria)

11.  The starting point  is  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, namely paragraphs 398, 399  and  399A.   The  legal  status  and
    effect of these provisions have been determined by the Court of  Appeal
    in MF (Nigeria) - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192, which post-dated the first instance Determination.   The
    Court of Appeal held, firstly, that in cases where it is  necessary  to
    decide whether the deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  would  breach
    rights under Article 8 ECHR, great weight should be given to the public
    interest where the offender is unable to satisfy any of the  provisions
    of paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A. The Master of the Rolls continued:


         "[40]     ......  It  is  only  exceptionally  that  such   foreign
             criminals will succeed in  showing  that  their  rights  under
             Article 8(1) trump the public interest  in  their  deportation
             ....


         [42] ..... In approaching the question  of  whether  removal  is  a
             proportionate interference  with  an  individual's  Article  8
             rights,  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in   favour   of
             deportation and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
             'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest  in
             removal .....


         [43] The word 'exceptional' is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule.  The general rule in the present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paragraphs
             399 and 399A do not apply, very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.
             These compelling reasons are the 'exceptional' circumstances."



     The Court held, secondly, that the new  Rules  constitute  "a  complete
    code".  In the balancing exercise to be performed, the Tribunal applies
    a proportionality test as required  by  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.
    The words "other  factors"  refer  to  "all  other  factors  which  are
    relevant to proportionality": paragraph [39].  To summarise:

     a) If a claimant's case  falls  within  paragraph  399  or  399A,  the
        exercise for the Tribunal involves a single stage only.


     b) If  a  claimant's  case  does  not  fall  within  either  of  these
        provisions, it is necessary to  consider,  and  determine,  whether
        there are exceptional circumstances outweighing the public interest
        in deportation:  this introduces a second stage in the exercise.


The decision in SS (Nigeria)

12.  In order to properly appreciate the potency of the public  interest  in
    play, it is necessary for Tribunals  to  be  alert  in  every  case  to
    another recent decision of the Court of Appeal,  SS  (Nigeria)  -  v  -
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ  550.   The
    central theme of this decision is the powerful weight to be  attributed
    to the Parliamentary intervention in this field.

13.  By section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007, a "foreign criminal"  is  any
    person who has received a sentence of at least 12  months  imprisonment
    after 1st August 2008 or was in custody pursuant to such a sentence  on
    that date and had not been served with a Notice of Deportation.  It  is
    appropriate to interpose here section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971:



         "(5) A person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation
             from the United Kingdom if -


               a) the Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                  conducive to the public good; or


               b) another person to whose family he belongs is or has  been
                  ordered to be deported."

    Section 32 of the 2007 Act continues:


      "(4)    For the purpose of section  3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act
          1971, the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive   to  the
          public good.


             c) The Secretary of State must make  a  deportation  order  in
                respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."


     Section 33 provides:

          "(1) Section 32(4) and (5) -

                 (a)  Do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
             applies (subject to subsection (7) below) .....

             (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the  foreign  criminal  in
           pursuance of the deportation order would breach -

               a)  A person's Convention Rights, or


               b)  The  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   Refugee
                  Convention."

     The remainder of Section 33 is not central  to  the  present  exercise.
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  is
    another important element in the primary legislation framework:


              "(1)    The Secretary of State  must  make  arrangements  for
    ensuring that -


              (a) The functions mentioned in subsection (2) are  discharged
                  having regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                  welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom ...

           2) The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -

               a) Any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;


               b) any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an immigration officer .....


           (3)     A person exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
             considering the function, have regard to any guidance given to
             the person by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  purpose  of
             subsection (1)."

14.  Delivering the main judgment of the Court in SS, Laws LJ, referring  to
    the deportation of foreign criminals under the 2007 Act, stated:

         "[48]    ... Where such  potential  deportees  have  raised  claims
             under Article 8, seeking to resist deportation by  relying  on
             the  interests  of  a  child  or   children   having   British
             citizenship, I think with respect that insufficient  attention
             has been paid to the weight to be attached, in virtue  of  its
             origin in primary legislation,  to  the  policy  of  deporting
             foreign criminals ......
         [49] The policy's source, however, is as we have seen  one  of  the
             drivers of the breadth  of  the  decision  maker's  margin  of
             discretion when the proportionality of its application in  the
             particular case is being considered."

     Summarising, Laws LJ stated:

         "[55]    .... Proportionality, the absence of  an  'exceptionality'
             rule and the meaning of 'a  primary  consideration'  are  all,
             when properly understood,  consonant  with  the  force  to  be
             attached in cases of the present kind to the  two  drivers  of
             the decision maker's margin of discretion: the policy's source
             and the policy's nature and in particular to the great  weight
             which the 2007 Act attributes to the  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals."

                  [Emphasis added.]

     And in a later passage, Laws  LJ  refers  to  "the  extremely  pressing
    public interest in the Appellant's deportation": paragraph [58].

15.  It is  appropriate  at  this  juncture  to  highlight  the  distinctive
    functions of the First-Tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  Where  an
    appeal against an order deporting a foreign criminal is pursued, it  is
    incumbent on the First-Tier Tribunal to consider all relevant evidence,
    to make appropriate findings of fact and, finally, to make its decision
    in accordance with MF (Nigeria) and SS (Nigeria), together with all  of
    the other legal rules and principles in play in  the  particular  case.
    These include the guidance  provided  by  the  highest  courts  on  the
    correct approach to Article 8 ECHR  and  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Acts 2009. The Upper Tribunal, however, has
    a different function.  Where a further appeal is brought in this forum,
    permission having been granted, such appeal is,  pursued,  per  section
    11(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 -

              ".... on any point of law arising from a decision made by  the
             First-Tier Tribunal   ...."


     Thus the question to be determined by the  Upper  Tribunal  is  whether
    the First-Tier Tribunal has erred in law in making  its  decision.   In
    thus deciding, the Upper Tribunal does not  conduct  an  open  -  ended
    enquiry into or review of the first instance  decision.   Rather,  both
    the  appeal  and  the  ensuing  appellate   tribunal's   decision   are
    circumscribed by the terms in  which  permission  to  appeal  has  been
    granted. In determining such appeals, the  Upper  Tribunal,  in  common
    with the First-Tier Tribunal, must give full effect to all of the legal
    rules and principles in play, in every case.  The decisions in  MF  and
    SS  will frequently have a significant influence  in  deciding  whether
    the First-Tier Tribunal has erred in law in any of the respects falling
    within the permitted grounds of appeal.  In conducting  this  exercise,
    the Upper Tribunal will  scrupulously  examine  the  substance  of  the
    decision of the First-Tier Tribunal.

ARTICLE 8 ECHR AND SECTION 55 OF THE BORDERS,  CITIZENSHIP  AND  IMMIGRATION
ACT 2009

16.  While Article 8 ECHR and section 55  of  the  2009  Act  have  separate
    juridical identities, they  are  clearly  associated.  Thus  where  the
    Article 8  family  life  equation  involves  children,  section  55  is
    immediately engaged. In ZH (Tanzania) [2012]  UKHL  ......  ,  Baroness
    Hale emphasised that the best interests of the child must be considered
    first - see paragraph [26] - while Lord Kerr stated:

         "[46]    ........   A primacy of importance must be accorded to his
             or her best interests.  This is not, it is agreed, a factor of
             limitless importance in the sense that it  will  prevail  over
             all other considerations.  It is a factor, however, that  must
             rank  higher  than  any  other.   It   is   not   merely   one
             consideration that  weighs  in  the  balance  alongside  other
             competing factors. Where  the  best  interests  of  the  child
             clearly  favour  a  certain  course,  that  course  should  be
             followed unless countervailing reasons of  considerable  force
             displace them."

    As was recognised in Mansoor - v - Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin), the onward march of the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence has involved the  progressive  development  of  the  best
    interests of the child principle under Article 8.


17.  Most recently, in Zoumbas -  v  -  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] 1 WLR 3690, the  Supreme  Court  has  considered  the
    interplay between the best interests of the child and Article  8  ECHR,
    rehearsing what might be termed a code comprising seven principles:
        (1)  The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
              proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
        (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
              be a primary consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
              primary consideration; and the child's best interests do  not
              of themselves have the status of a paramount consideration;
        (3)  Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
              the cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
              consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;
        (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
              interests of a child in different ways, it  is  important  to
              ask oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order
              to avoid the risk that the best interests of a child might be
              undervalued when other important considerations were in play;
        (5)    It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a   child's
              circumstances and of what is  in  a  child's  best  interests
              before  one  asks  oneself  whether   those   interests   are
              outweighed by the force of other considerations;
        (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
              of all relevant factors when the interests  of  a  child  are
              involved in an article 8 assessment; and
        (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
              not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.
     As Lord Hodge observed, the genesis of these  principles  is  found  in
    the United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child  1989,
    particularly Article 3(1) which, in turn, influences the interpretation
    of Article 8 ECHR.

18.  Expanding on the seven principles set out above, Lord Hodge  continued:



         "[13]    We would seek to add to the seven principles the following
             comments. First, the decision-maker is required to assess  the
             proportionality of the interference with  private  and  family
             life in the particular circumstances in which the decision  is
             made. The evaluative exercise in assessing the proportionality
             of a measure under article 8 ECHR excludes any "hard-edged  or
             bright-line rule to be applied to the generality of cases": EB
             (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department [2009]
             AC 1159, per Lord Bingham at para 12. Secondly, as Lord Mance
             pointed out in H(H) (at para  98)  the  decision-maker  must
             evaluate the child's best interests and in some cases they may
             point only marginally in one, rather than another,  direction.
             Thirdly,  as  the  case  of H(H) shows  in  the  context  of
             extradition, there may be circumstances in which the weight of
             another primary consideration can tip the balance and make the
             interference proportionate  even  where  it  has  very  severe
             consequences for children."

    Previously, in the  case  of  H(H),  the  Supreme  Court  held,  in  an
    extradition context, that the  United  Kingdom's  international  treaty
    obligations prevailed over  the  best  interests  of  the  children  in
    question.  Lord Hodge continued:


         "The third principle in para 10 above is subject to the  first  and
         second qualifications and may, depending on the  circumstances,  be
         subject to the third. But in our view, it  is  not  likely  that  a
         court would reach in the context of an  immigration  decision  what
         Lord Wilson described in H(H) (at para 172) as the "firm if bleak"
         conclusion in that case, which separated young children from  their
         parents."

    One of the obvious merits of the opinion of Lord Hodge  in  Zoumbas  is
    that it consolidates in  a  single,  accessible  source  -  though  not
    exhaustively - the principles which must be applied in  cases  of  this
    nature.  We would add that where, as in the present case,  the  context
    is one of deportation, it is incumbent on Tribunals to give full effect
    to the decisions in MF (Nigeria) and SS (Nigeria): see paragraphs [5] -
    [9] supra.

19.  We are mindful of the staged approach espoused by the  House  of  Lords
    in Razgar - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] 2  AC
    368, per Lord Bingham at paragraph [17], which has the great  merit  of
    minimising the risk of a tribunal falling into error in the  generality
    of cases involving Article 8 ECHR.  In the present case - as agreed  by
    both parties - the relevant question is the fifth and final one, namely
    whether the anticipated interference with the right to respect for  the
    family life under scrutiny is proportionate to  the  legitimate  public
    end sought to be achieved.  We recall the observation of Lord  Bingham,
    in the same case, that the fifth question is: "more  judgemental"  than
    the others: paragraph [24].

20.  In Huang - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  2  AC
    167, Lord Bingham, referring to the task of the  appellate  immigration
    authority in determining Article 8(2) issues, stated:

         "[16]    .....  The authority will wish to consider and  weigh  all
             that tells  in  favour  of  the  refusal  of  leave  which  is
             challenged, with particular reference to  justification  under
             article 8(2). There will,  in  almost  any  case,  be  certain
             general  considerations  to  bear   in   mind:   the   general
             administrative desirability  of  applying  known  rules  if  a
             system of immigration control is to be workable,  predictable,
             consistent and fair as between one applicant and another;  the
             damage to good  administration  and  effective  control  if  a
             system is perceived by applicants internationally to be unduly
             porous, unpredictable or perfunctory; the need  to  discourage
             non-nationals  admitted  to  the  country   temporarily   from
             believing that they can  commit  serious  crimes  and  yet  be
             allowed to remain; the need to discourage fraud, deception and
             deliberate breaches of the law; and so on. In some cases  much
             more particular reasons will be relied on to justify  refusal,
             as  in Samaroo  v  Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department [2001]  EWCA  Civ  1139, [2002]  INLR  55 where
             attention was paid to the Secretary of State's  judgment  that
             deportation was a valuable deterrent to actual or  prospective
             drug traffickers, or R (Farrakhan) v Secretary of  State  for
             the Home Department[2002] EWCA Civ 606, [2002]  QB  1391,  an
             article  10  case,  in  which  note  was  taken  of  the  Home
             Secretary's judgment that the  applicant  posed  a  threat  to
             community relations between Muslims and Jews and  a  potential
             threat to public order for that reason. The giving  of  weight
             to factors such  as  these  is  not,  in  our  opinion,  aptly
             described as deference: it  is  performance  of  the  ordinary
             judicial task of weighing up the competing  considerations  on
             each side and according appropriate weight to the judgment  of
             a person with responsibility for a given  subject  matter  and
             access to special sources of knowledge and advice. That is how
             any rational judicial decision-maker is likely to proceed.  It
             is to be noted that both Samaroo and Farrakhan (cases on which
             the Secretary of State seeks to  place  especial  reliance  as
             examples of the court attaching very  considerable  weight  to
             decisions of his taken in an  immigration  context)  were  not
             merely challenges  by  way  of  judicial  review  rather  than
             appeals but cases where Parliament had  specifically  excluded
             any right of appeal."


    We have reproduced this passage in full as it invariably repays careful
    reading.


21.  As appears above, we are alert to the more recent developments in  the
    jurisprudence in this field, in particular the decisions of  the  Court
    of Appeal in  SS  (Nigeria)  and  MF  (Nigeria).   The  most  important
    consideration is that in cases involving  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals, such as this Appellant, the public interest in  play  is  an
    especially powerful one.  This, in turn, will inevitably influence  the
    primacy of importance which tribunals must accord to the best interests
    of any affected children.  Statements such as that of Lord  Bingham  in
    EB (Kosovo) [2009] 1 AC 1159, paragraph [12],  must  be  considered  in
    their full juridical context, as this has evolved.  Furthermore,  in  a
    succession  of  decisions,  the  higher  courts  have  emphasised   the
    intensely fact sensitive nature of every case:  see, for  example,  EB,
    paragraph [9], per Lord Bingham. We also bear in mind the  guidance  to
    be derived from Huang, paragraph [18]:


         "Human beings are social animals.  They  depend  on  others.  Their
         family, or extended family, is the group on which many people  most
         heavily depend, socially, emotionally and often financially.  There
         comes a  point  at  which,  for  some,  prolonged  and  unavoidable
         separation from this group seriously inhibits their ability to live
         full and fulfilling lives. Matters such  as  the  age,  health  and
         vulnerability of the applicant, the closeness and previous  history
         of the family, the applicant's  dependence  on  the  financial  and
         emotional support of the family, the prevailing cultural  tradition
         and conditions in the country of origin and many other factors  may
         all be relevant. The Strasbourg court has repeatedly recognised the
         general right of states to control the entry and residence of  non-
         nationals, and repeatedly acknowledged that the Convention  confers
         no right on individuals or families to choose where they prefer  to
         live. In most cases where the applicants complain of a violation of
         their article 8 rights, in a case where the  impugned  decision  is
         authorised by law for a legitimate object and the interference  (or
         lack of  respect)  is  of  sufficient  seriousness  to  engage  the
         operation of article 8,  the  crucial  question  is  likely  to  be
         whether the interference (or lack  of  respect)  complained  of  is
         proportionate to the legitimate end sought to be achieved."

    Furthermore, we remind  ourselves  that  there  is  no  legal  test  of
    exceptionality: Huang, paragraph  [20]  and  MF  (Nigeria),  paragraphs
    [40], [42] and [43], which we have set out  at  [11]  above.   Finally,
    there is no hard-edged or  bright  line  rule  to  be  applied  in  the
    evaluative exercise which Article 8 invariably  requires  EB  (Kosovo),
    paragraph [12].

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSION

22.  At this juncture, it is necessary to focus on the grant  of  permission
    to appeal, which is couched in terms that it is arguable that  the  FtT
    failed to give adequate reasons for the following three matters:

     a) Its acceptance of the claim that the Appellant's life would  be  at
        risk if deported to India.


     b) Why it considered that the  Appellant  could  not  relocate  within
        India simply on account of his low IQ and poor working memory.

     c) It's finding that the three children "...have all put their life on
        hold to a large extent".

    We remind ourselves that the question for  this  Tribunal  is  whether,
    within the confines of the permitted  grounds  of  appeal,  a  material
    error of law is demonstrated.  In conducting this exercise, we construe
    the determination of the FtT as allowing the Appellant's appeal on  the
    grounds of both Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR.  This  interpretation  of
    the first instance decision was not disputed on behalf of the Secretary
    of State.

23.  In the relevant passages of its determination, paragraphs [71] -  [80],
    the FtT nowhere articulated the case which it  was  addressing,  namely
    the contention that the deportation of the  Appellant  to  India  would
    infringe his rights under Article 3 ECHR.  Secondly, the  FtT  did  not
    formulate the legal test to be applied.  Thirdly, the FtT made no clear
    conclusion  about  this  aspect  of  the  appeal.   This  approach  was
    erroneous in law.  In Soering - v - United Kingdom [1989] 11 EHRR  439,
    the test devised by the ECTHR was whether the  removal  of  the  person
    concerned to a foreign state would result in him being "...   subjected
    or be likely to be subjected to torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment ..": paragraph [88].  The threshold is one of -



         "..... substantial grounds [having] been shown for  believing  that
         the person concerned, if extradited, faces a  real  risk  of  being
         subjected to torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
         punishment in the requesting country."

     See paragraph [91].

     This test was repeated by the Court in Cruz Varas - v -  Sweden  [1992]
    14 EHRR 1, paragraphs [69] - [70]. Later, in its  seminal  decision  in
    Chahal - v - United Kingdom [1997] 23 EHRR 413,  the  Strasbourg  Court
    formulated the test in these terms:

         "[86]    .....  As far as the Applicant's complaint under Article 3
             is concerned, the crucial question  is  whether  it  has  been
             substantiated that there is a real risk  that  Mr  Chahal,  if
             expelled, would be subjected to treatment prohibited  by  that
             Article.  Since he has not yet  been  deported,  the  material
             point in time must be that of the Court's consideration of the
             case."

     The FtT failed to pose, or address, this test in its determination.

24.  The FtT found that credible "threats"  (plural,  erroneously  so))  had
    been made against the Appellant and that he would be at  real  risk  of
    death or serious harm at the hands of his deceased wife's family if  he
    returned to his home village,  which  is  close  to  where  his  wife's
    siblings live.  It acknowledged that he would probably have the support
    of his stepmother and stepbrothers.  It found that this would  probably
    provide him with insufficient protection.  The FtT also found that  the
    authorities "would be  unable  or  unwilling  to  offer  him  effective
    protection".  It appears to have  based  this  latter  finding  on  the
    report of the United Nations Special Rapporteur (26 April  2013).   The
    difficulty with this finding is that  the  particular  passage  invoked
    describes killings perpetrated by the security forces and armed groups.
     There is no  mention  of  revenge  killings  or  anything  comparable.
    Furthermore, the FtT's determination  contains  no  acknowledgement  or
    analysis of the isolated  nature  of  the  relevant  conversation,  the
    vintage thereof or the absence of any repetition or  reignition  during
    the 13/14 years which had elapsed subsequently.  In adddition, applying
    a test belonging to  a  quite  different  juridical  context,  that  of
    refugee law, enunciated by the House of Lords in Januzi - v - Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, viz: "... whether it is
    reasonable to expect the Claimant to relocate or whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect him to do so ....." (per Lord Bingham, paragraph
    [21]),  the FtT:

    (a)  found, by implication, that the Appellant could relocate from  the
         very narrowly delimited area where he would be exposed to the  risk
         in question; and


    (b)  failed to make satisfactory findings about why internal relocation
         would entail "undue hardship" for the Appellant.

    In this latter respect, we consider that the rehearsal - in  paragraphs
    [79] and [80] - of his childrens'  subjective  description  of  him  as
    vulnerable and the pure speculation in which the Tribunal then  engaged
    about  the  Appellant's  migration  history,  all  of  which  neglected
    entirely the facts and factors on the other side of  the  equation,  is
    insufficient.  Simultaneously, the Tribunal failed to engage  with  the
    fact that the Appellant had spent over one third of  his  life  in  the
    country of his  birth,  has  existing  family  members  there  and  has
    business experience.


25.   We  are  alert  that  the  test  to  be  applied  -  in  its  several,
    interrelated formulations - is whether there is sufficient evidence  to
    support the Tribunal's findings in this respect or whether the evidence
    is inconsistent with and contradictory of such findings or whether  the
    only true and reasonable conclusion contradicts them:  Edwards  -  v  -
    Bairstow [1956] AC 14, per Lord Radcliffe.   While  acknowledging  that
    the threshold engaged is not lightly  overcome,  we  conclude,  on  the
    assessment  elaborated  above,  that   this   aspect   of   the   FtT's
    determination is infected by error of law.  In thus concluding, we have
    addressed the first and second elements of the grant of  permission  to
    appeal together, given their close inter-relationship.

26.  The third, and final, element of the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal
    focuses on the FtT's assessment and determination  of  the  Appellant's
    case under Article 8 ECHR.  In this respect, the relevant  passages  of
    the determination are contained in  paragraphs  [81]  -  [105].   As  a
    perusal of these passages demonstrates, the FtT:

    (a)  Failed to acknowledge  the  manifestly  limited  and  impoverished
         nature of the family life of the protagonists  concerned  during  a
         period of some 14 years duration.

    (b)  Erroneously took into account section  55  of  the  2009  Act,  in
         circumstances where all of the children are adults.


    (c)   Failed  to  properly  explore  the  adult  children's  claims  of
         emotional dependency on their long imprisoned father.

    (d)  Contains the frankly bizarre finding that the three children "....
         have all put their life on hold to a large extent until  such  time
         as they could be reunited with their  father"  -  in  circumstances
         where there is  an  abundance  of  evidence  that  they  have  made
         substantial advances in their personal, business  and  professional
         lives.


    (e)  Fails to explain the assessment that all of these adult  children:
         ".... rely heavily on the prospect of [their  father's]  return  to
         the family home at an indeterminate point" - [paragraph 95].

27.  Having regard to the legal principles to  be  applied,  each  of  these
    aspects of the FtT's determination must  be  closely  scrutinised.   We
    conclude that they simply do not withstand  analysis.   They  lack  the
    necessary quality of sufficient and  persuasive  reasoning.  These  are
    critical ingredients of an omnibus  conclusion  under  Article  8  ECHR
    which no reasonable Tribunal, properly directing itself on the law  and
    the facts, could  have  made.   There  is  an  associated  demonstrable
    failure to properly appreciate and give effect to the  powerful  public
    interest in favour of deportation of this Appellant.  We conclude  that
    this ground of appeal must, therefore, succeed.

DECISION ON HOME OFFICE APPEAL

28.  Cases of the present kind  frequently  throw  up  complex  and  acutely
    challenging questions for tribunals.  Their determination requires  the
    most careful judicial scrutiny and  consideration.   Easy  answers  and
    solutions are a rare species.  The arduous nature of the judicial  task
    in this sphere must never be underestimated.    Having  said  that,  we
    consider that the application of the legal  framework  to  the  present
    matrix points to a clear outcome.

29. We allow the appeal to the extent that the decision of the FtT  is  set
    aside.  Having regard to the nature of the errors of law which we  have
    found, the appropriate forum for remaking the  decision  is  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The parties will have an opportunity to address argument  on
    the question of preserved findings.

RE-HEARING

30. This came before the present panel (McCloskey J  having  expressly  not
    reserved it to the previous one) on 17 March, when  the  appellant  and
    his sons Hardip and Sukhjinder Singh Gill, and his  daughter  Kulvinder
    Kaur Gill all gave oral  evidence  before  us,  in  addition  to  their
    commendably short statements, the effect of  which  we  shall  set  out
    below. There was no controversy about the first-tier  panel's  findings
    of primary fact; but, as all those involved were  clear,  questions  of
    judgment and evaluation were for us to consider, in the  light  of  the
    evidence and argument before us.



31. The previous  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  was  held,  with  Mr  Collins's
    consent, in the absence of the appellant, who  through  reasons  beyond
    our control had not been brought. In those  circumstances,  nothing  in
    the previous Upper Tribunal panel's decision was intended  as  a  final
    finding of fact, and we were prepared to make up our own minds  on  any
    primary or secondary question of fact before us. To make this  entirely
    clear, we have re-visited both the evidence and the  authorities  where
    this seemed appropriate.

APPELLANT

32. The appellant is now 57, and has been in prison for the murder  of  his
    wife since 1999: he says in his statement that  he  very  much  regrets
    that crime. Since then, he says he has had almost  daily  contact  with
    his children, though he has not wished to distress them by seeing their
    father in prison, and wants to make amends for the wrong he  did  their
    mother. He would have nowhere to live in India, as one of his  brothers
    has  emigrated  to  Canada,  and  another  to  Essex,  near  where  the
    appellant's children live. The appellant expresses fears  for  his  own
    safety, if  he  returned  to  India;  but  Mr  Collins  expressly,  and
    realistically disclaimed in his skeleton argument any reliance  on  the
    article 2/3  case  previously  put  forward.  The  appellant  says  the
    statement has been read over to him in Hindi, as his English  is  poor;
    but, as one would expect with a Sikh from  the  Punjab,  he  gave  oral
    evidence before us in Punjabi.

33. Giving details of his contact with the children, the appellant told  us
    he used to  ask  after  their  welfare,  and  whether  they  had  eaten
    properly. If released, he would never marry again, but would  live  for
    them, and for his grandchildren. He had never taken drink or  drugs  in
    prison, as he realized that it was through his abuse of drink  that  he
    had lost his wife, and his children their mother: if he  went  back  to
    it, they would abandon him. It would be hard for them to visit him,  if
    he were returned to India, as they had their own children: so far  this
    only concerned Sukhjinder, who was waiting on his release to marry,  so
    he could give him his blessing.  It  had  been  hard  for  any  of  his
    children to get on with their lives while he was  in  prison:  although
    they had been outwardly successful, they couldn't help comparing  their
    own situation with that of others who still had both parents.

34. On the appellant's prospects of release, if allowed  to  stay  in  this
    country, Mr Collins referred us to a  letter  from  the  Parole  Board,
    following a hearing on 16 July 2013. The appellant's representative had
    made it clear that he was not seeking release at this stage, but only a
    progressive move to open conditions. This too however had been  refused
    by the panel. After reviewing the appellant's history, they  said  this
    (under s. 4 'Risk factors'):

         It appeared to the Panel that you minimised your violent behaviour,
         blamed your wife for boasting about an affair,  suggested  she  was
         happier than she clearly was and put  all  of  the  blame  for  the
         offence upon depression-fuelled alcoholism.



35. The panel went on to say (at 5 'Evidence of progress during  sentence')
    that the appellant's behaviour had been excellent throughout,  with  no
    disciplinary adjudications or positive drug tests. He was described  as
    polite, and a 'model prisoner',  and  had  been  working  well  in  the
    tailoring shop for some time. However there had been little progress in
    addressing his offending behaviour, because his  English  was  limited,
    and he had made little effort to improve it since he  arrived  here  in
    1977. He had only been able to do a couple of courses, one in 2004, and
    one in 2009, thanks to a Punjabi-speaking friend who had  gone  through
    the material with him.  This  was  the  aspect  which  concerned  those
    responsible for him; but he had been assessed  as  unsuitable  for  the
    Healthy  Relationships  Programme,  which  should  have  been  the  way
    forward. There was a reference to a report by a  trainee  psychologist,
    Sharon Durrant, who had mentioned the appellant's "...  early  learning
    problems ... current difficulties in  processing  and  remembering  new
    information, and the need for educational and risk  reduction  work  to
    proceed on an individual level. It is most unfortunate that only now is
    action to be taken in this area."

36. We have Miss Durrant's report in  the  appellant's  bundle,  though  Mr
    Collins did not refer us to anything specific in it, beyond the general
    assessment of his (the appellant's) 'Full Scale' IQ as 'extremely low'.
    We note however at her paragraph 8.1 that she takes the view that  this
    "... cannot be meaningfully interpreted due [sic]  to  the  differences
    between his Verbal Comprehension Index score, which  falls  within  the
    Extremely Low range, and his Perceptual Reasoning  Index  score,  which
    falls between the Borderline to Average range. The  four  index  scores
    are the most helpful  and  meaningful  measures  of  [the  appellant's]
    intelligence, however his Verbal Comprehension Index  Score  should  be
    viewed with extreme caution due to his difficulties  with  the  English
    language". The other indices seem to be Working Memory  (Extremely  Low
    to Borderline) and Processing Speed (Extremely Low to  Borderline).  We
    shall give our own views on the evidence about the  appellant's  mental
    state, so far as it is relevant for our purposes, when  discussing  our
    conclusions.

37. Giving (at 6 - 8), the panel's own assessment of  the  continuing  risk
    posed by the appellant, they confirmed the  OASys  assessment  of  2012
    that it was low, so far as re-offending was concerned; but, if that did
    happen, then the risk of serious harm to a known adult was high.  There
    was no risk of absconding; "However with core  offending  risk  factors
    still unaddressed it is not possible to evaluate  any  risk  management
    plan and none has yet been prepared." The appellant's decision  not  to
    apply for release had been realistic, as he hadn't made  the  necessary
    progress to a point where this  would  be  safe  for  the  public,  and
    "further tailor-made work" would be required  before  he  was  able  to
    understand why this was so, and  to  address  the  problems  he  posed.
    Despite the support from two of his children, the panel were unable  to
    recommend his transfer to open conditions.







HARDIP

38. Hardip is 35: he was born on 30 June 1978, so was already 20  when  the
    appellant murdered his mother on 27 January 1999. In his  statement  he
    says he has spoken to the appellant almost every day in  prison  since,
    and visited him from time to time. He  has  set  up  his  own  cleaning
    company; but he doesn't want to  get  married,  though  he  has  no-one
    special in mind at present, till the appellant is released and able  to
    come to his wedding and give his blessing. He would like the  appellant
    to stay here, so he and his siblings and any family he  might  have  of
    his own could all enjoy life together in this country.

39. In oral evidence Hardip told us he hadn't been able to see  his  father
    in prison to start  with:  he  had  been  too  young  at  the  time  to
    understand why, but the police hadn't let any of them  visit  him  till
    the trial was over. As the eldest, he had had to look after the  family
    home (in  Grays,  Essex),  and  his  siblings,  especially  his  sister
    Kulvinder,  who  was  only  nine  at  the  time,  with  help  from  the
    appellant's brother and sister-in-law and  his  sisters.  However  they
    were a  strong  family,  and  "pulled  together":  they  stood  by  the
    appellant, though it had been "very  raw"  and  "a  roller-coaster"  to
    start with, and Hardip now had a good relationship with him again.

40. Hardip said it had been in 2008 that he first heard of the  possibility
    that the appellant could  be  deported:  we  have  seen  correspondence
    between his solicitors and the Home Office,  dating  from  2007,  which
    mentions that possibility, but there is nothing to show that any notice
    of intention to deport had been served at that time.  It  follows  that
    the notice of liability to automatic deportation of  16  November  2008
    was the first live shot in this campaign.

41. Hardip said they had all thought the appellant  would  simply  have  to
    serve the 14-year tariff period, and then would be able to come home to
    them: finding out that this was not necessarily so was "a bit of a kick
    in the teeth" for them, and like going back to the bad days of 1999. As
    for "putting his life on hold", in the words of the  first-tier  panel,
    he had felt unable to get married or  move  on  in  his  personal  life
    without his  father  there.  So  far  as  visiting  him  in  India  was
    concerned, Hardip had only been there twice in his life, once in  1991,
    and then again in 1999 or 2000 to scatter his mother's ashes. He didn't
    believe the appellant would return to drink, and took the view that  he
    had genuinely changed, and would stay that way, with his own  help  and
    that of the family as a whole.

42. Cross-examined, Hardip said he had gone out to work,  where  he  didn't
    remember, shortly after the appellant went to  prison:  Sukhjinder  was
    studying, and Kulvinder still at  school,  so  he  had  been  the  main
    breadwinner, with some help from his uncle at first. Re-examined  about
    why he shouldn't be able to visit the appellant in India,  Hardip  said
    he wouldn't be able to afford it, and there would  be  "nothing  there"
    for his father. Dealing with his own attitude to the country,  he  said
    this, though recognizing that he would need to go there if  his  father
    were sent back:

         I couldn't adapt to it:  I  know  people  who've  come  from  there
         themselves, and find it very hard to adapt when they go back.
         It's  the  environment,  a  dusty,  dirty,  busy  big  place,   not
         comfortable, not safe to go out on your own,  a  different  way  of
         living


SUKHJINDER

43. Sukhjinder, now just 33 (born 9 March 1981), unlike his siblings, is no
    longer living all the time at the family home, but  splits  it  between
    them and his own family at his baby-mother Gurmit's in north London. He
    works as a transport manager, and they have two daughters, S1,  now  12
    (born 9 November 2001), and S2, only just five  (14  March  2009),  but
    have delayed getting married, so as to have the appellant's blessing in
    person. Sukhjinder recounts the appellant telling him to save his money
    for his family, rather than spend it on coming to see  him  in  prison.
    They went to see him about three or four times a year, with Gurmit  and
    S2; but they didn't take S1, as the prison  environment  would  be  too
    upsetting at her age.

44. While Sukhjinder didn't condone what the appellant had  done,  he  took
    the view that he had already been punished by the law, and  keeping  in
    touch with him was what he needed to stabilize  his  life  emotionally:
    returning the appellant to India would be like a  prison  sentence  for
    the rest of the family; but if he stayed here,  then  Sukhjinder  hoped
    for "inner peace, a bit of closure". His children too were anxious  for
    a normal relationship with their grandfather. Nothing could  replace  a
    blood tie, and the appellant was anxious for them all to avoid his  bad
    example.

45. Cross-examined, Sukhjinder said he had only been to India  once,  on  a
    family holiday in  1990;  but  of  course  he  would  go  and  see  the
    appellant, if he were returned there. That would be a  major  financial
    burden, and he couldn't do it every time he had a  holiday  from  work.
    Sukhjinder said England was his country, and having to go to India  and
    see his father would be "asking me to step out of my comfort zone".

46. Sukhjinder had been at college when the murder happened, and "it ruined
    my education": he had had to go out and do agency work to help pay  the
    bills. His uncles had provided a safety-net, but  they  had  their  own
    families to look after. There had been arrears on the mortgage  on  the
    family home; but Hardip had taken charge and dealt  with  them.  Though
    the two of them had had their difficulties from time to time, they  had
    relied on each other.

KULVINDER

47. Kulvinder (now 24, born 15 June 1989) was only  9  when  the  appellant
    murdered her mother: at that age, her brothers and extended family  did
    their best to shield her from what had happened, by not  talking  about
    it in front of her. She is now training to be a forensic  psychologist,
    building  up  her  practical  experience  before  starting  a  two-year
    training course; but she would also  like  to  get  married  some  day,
    preferably  with  her  father's  personal  blessing:   a   professional
    qualification and appointment were one thing, but there  was  also  the
    emotional side of life. Kulvinder told us about the happy  relationship
    she had had with her father before the murder: he had always been there
    for her when she got back from school. She too described the  shock  of
    hearing he was liable to deportation.

48. Cross-examined, Kulvinder agreed she had been aware of that possibility
    since 2008; but before that she had thought her father  might  be  able
    just to come home. She would visit him in India, though she didn't know
    how often she would be able to afford it. she had been away  from  home
    at university, and in the early days had stayed with her uncle  Ranjit;
    but the appellant had always offered her as much support  as  he  could
    with her studies over the phone,  bearing  in  mind  his  own  lack  of
    education.

LAW

49. The ground-rules for cases of this kind are by now so well known as not
    to  require  any  extensive  discussion.  Since  Mr  Collins  cited  it
    extensively himself, the writer makes no apology for referring  to  the
    judicial head-note in Masih [2012] UKUT (IAC) 46:

    (a)      In a case of automatic deportation, full account must be taken
        of  the  strong  public  interest  in  removing  foreign   citizens
        convicted  of  serious  offences,  which  lies  not  only  in   the
        prevention of further  offences  on  the  part  of  the  individual
        concerned, but in deterring others  from  committing  them  in  the
        first place.
    (b)     Deportation  of   foreign   criminals   expresses   society's
        condemnation of  serious  criminal  activity  and  promotes  public
        confidence in the treatment of foreign citizens who have  committed
        them.
    (c)      The starting-point for assessing the facts of the offence  of
        which an individual has been committed, and their effect on others,
        and on the public as a  whole,  must  be  the  view  taken  by  the
        sentencing judge.
    (d)     The appeal has to be dealt with on the basis of the  situation
        at the date of the hearing.
    (e)      Full account should also be taken of any  developments  since
        sentence was passed, for example the  result  of  any  disciplinary
        adjudications in prison or  detention,  or  any  OASys  or  licence
        report.

50. A more recent  pronouncement  by  the  Court  of  Appeal   came  in  SS
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550, inevitably by way of a  re-statement  of
    principle, rather than any startling new aper�u: while it may  be  news
    to some  that  the  principle  involved  in  automatic  deportation  is
    Parliament's will, and not the Secretary of State's, that  should  have
    been clear enough since the 2007 Act.  Also  well-established  are  the
    principles where children are  concerned:  as  Lady  Hale  said  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, their best interests are  neither  paramount,
    nor the primary, but a  primary consideration. If explanation  of  that
    were required, at paragraph 44 in SS (Nigeria) it is given  as  meaning
    'a consideration of substantial importance'.







51. The Court of  Appeal's  summary  of  general  considerations  comes  at
    paragraph 47 of SS (Nigeria):

    (1)   The  principle  of  minimal  interference  is  the   essence   of
        proportionality: it ensures that the  ECHR  right  in  question  is
        never treated as a token or  a  ritual,  and  thus  guarantees  its
        force.
    (2)  In a child case the right in question (the child's best interests)
        is always a consideration of substantial importance.
    (3)  Article 8 contains no  rule  of  "exceptionality",  but  the  more
        pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or  deportation,  the
        stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is to prevail.
    (4)  Upon the question whether the principle of minimal interference is
        fulfilled, the primary decision-maker enjoys a variable  margin  of
        discretion, at its broadest  where  the  decision  applies  general
        policy created by primary legislation.

    In plain English, 'minimal interference' means that  article  8  rights
    should be interfered with as little  as  is  necessary  to  fulfil  the
    public purpose in hand.

52. The Court of Appeal had already referred  specifically  to  deportation
    cases at 46; what was said there is repeated, with added  emphasis,  at
    55:

        ... while the authorities demonstrate that  there  is  no  rule  of
        exceptionality for Article 8, they also clearly show that the  more
        pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or  deportation,  the
        stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is to prevail. The
        pressing nature of the public interest here is vividly informed  by
        the fact  that  by  Parliament's  express  declaration  the  public
        interest is injured if the criminal's deportation is not  effected.
        Such a result could in my judgment only  be  justified  by  a  very
        strong claim indeed.

53. These authorities now have to be read in  the  light  of  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192: as Mr Collins conceded in his skeleton  argument,
    this appellant does not fall within paragraphs 399 or 399A of the  'new
    Rules' (in force from 9 July 2012), which made it necessary  for  cases
    which did not satisfy them to  present  'exceptional'  or  'compelling'
    circumstances which required unfettered consideration of article 8, for
    that to be undertaken. It follows that this is the first,  and  may  be
    the only point for us to consider.

CONCLUSIONS

(a)  Appellant

54. As deportation appeals go, this is certainly an unusual  one,  both  in
    terms of the gravity of the crime involved, and the degree  of  support
    offered by those who may be considered continuing victims  of  it.  The
    appellant brutally murdered his wife, the mother of his three children,
    of whom their daughter Kulvinder was only nine at the  time.  He  still
    puts that down to drink: no doubt human nature requires some excuse for
    so serious a crime.

55. Clearly the appellant did have a drink problem: after nearly  20  years
    living in this country, during which he worked as a clothing trader and
    he and his wife brought up both his sons, it  became  evident  when  in
    1996 he was sent to prison for three months for driving a motor vehicle
    with excess alcohol. Either his record or the amount involved must have
    been worse than usual for such a sentence to be passed. Then in 1997 he
    was convicted of common assault, following a business dispute with  his
    brother (with whom it seems he is now reconciled). From  the  beginning
    of that year till September 1998 the appellant's wife made a number  of
    complaints of assault against him, and finally on 27  January  1999  he
    lost control and murdered her; but not, as Moses J made  clear  in  his
    sentencing remarks, when so drunk as not to know what he was doing.

56. We note the view of the Parole Board that there is  a  good  deal  more
    work to be done before this appellant could safely be released,  if  he
    were to be allowed to stay in this country. Just as we  must  take  the
    sentencing judge's remarks as the starting-point for the view  we  take
    of the gravity of the appellant's crime, so we have to take the  Parole
    Board's decision as the starting-point for our view of what  continuing
    risk he poses to the public. We are prepared to accept that he has  not
    drunk strong liquor during his last 15 years in prison,  and,  provided
    he never touched a drop again, would be unlikely to  take  to  drinking
    too much again if released. We also accept that, at 58  and  with  what
    may euphemistically be called his unfortunate history, he is likely  to
    content himself in future with family life as a father and grandfather,
    and not seek matrimony, or any equivalent relationship again.

57. However we share the Parole  Board's  reservations  as  to  what  might
    happen if  the  appellant  did  form  another  matrimonial,  or  quasi-
    matrimonial relationship. The reason is that he has never so  far  been
    able to work through what they describe,  adopting  the  words  of  his
    'offender manager' and 'offender supervisor' (see their s. 5), as  "the
    underlying attitudes and beliefs that led to [his] violence  and  abuse
    within marriage". The main reason has been his lack of English; but, as
    the panel also point out there, he had made little attempt  to  improve
    that over all the years since his arrival in this country.

58. While this appellant has certainly  been  a  model  prisoner  in  other
    respects, and ready enough to comply with what has been required of him
    in the restricted environment of the gaols where he has been  confined,
    it is hard to avoid the conclusion that he has never  really  committed
    himself to life in this country. His failure to seek citizenship at any
    time during the period of  nearly  20  years  before  he  acquired  any
    criminal conviction that might have prevented it goes together with his
    failure to take any opportunity to learn English.

59. Mr Collins's answer to that on the appellant's behalf lies in  what  is
    said to be his low intelligence. While of course  we  do  not  seek  to
    replace Miss Durrant's conclusions (see 35 -  36  above)  with  any  we
    might be tempted to form ourselves, we note what  she  says  about  the
    difficulty of interpreting any overall figure,  in  the  light  of  her
    (clearly correct) opinion  that "his Verbal Comprehension  Index  Score
    should be viewed with extreme caution due to his difficulties with  the
    English language". Inevitably intelligence tests are language-based  to
    a considerable extent, and the  lack  of  any  useful  common  language
    between tester and subject is bound considerably to reduce their value,
    as Miss Durrant points out herself.

60.  We  have  to  take  an  overall  view  of  the  appellant's  practical
    capabilities, without restricting ourselves to the IQ assessment before
    us. He arrived in a strange country at the age of 21,  and  for  nearly
    the next 20 years supported himself, a wife and three children, as well
    as getting them on the road to buying a house. No doubt his wife played
    a considerable part in all that; but at the same time, we cannot accept
    that the appellant is by nature so practically incapable as Mr  Collins
    sought to present him. We do accept of  course  that  his  capabilities
    will not have been improved by 15 years in prison; but we do not  think
    he is incapable of learning, or of adjusting to the realities  of  life
    outside, either in this country or, if it came to it, in India.

61. The result of our consideration of the evidence involving the appellant
    himself is that, while we do not think he is likely to present  a  risk
    to the general public here in any circumstances under which the  Parole
    Board might decide to release him, his continuing lack of insight  into
    his own actions makes any such possibility less than immediate.  It  is
    not our business to punish him,  which  the  sentencing  judge  did  by
    imposing a term whose custodial period has now expired, but which  will
    continue in force till he can safely be released.

62. On the other hand, the appellant's own interests are of limited weight,
    following his very grave crime: no doubt it would not be easy  for  him
    to re-adjust to life in India, but he has never  adjusted  to  speaking
    English in the first place, and Punjabi presents no  problem  for  him.
    While we accept that his two  brothers  have  now  emigrated  from  the
    Punjab, one to Canada and one to this country, we  were  not  asked  to
    accept, and should have had difficulty doing so if we  had  been,  that
    none of his own extended family are left there.

63. Whatever difficulties there might have been with his wife's family,  it
    is now recognized on his behalf that they could not reasonably lead  to
    his successfully resisting deportation on the basis of any article  2/3
    risk, and we do not consider that there is anything in them which could
    make his removal  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  purpose  of  .
    Looking at the case for the moment simply on the evidence involving the
    appellant, we do not see anything in it which could lead to our finding
    circumstances so 'exceptional' or 'compelling' as to justify  an  open-
    ended consideration of proportionality.

(b)  Family life

64. We do not see any useful purpose in  abstract  legal  analysis  of  the
    quality of the appellant's family life, actual or  aspired  to.  It  is
    quite clear from Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  Nepal
    [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC), approved without  comment  in  Gurung  &  others
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8, that any actual or prospective family  life  between
    grown-up people needs to be taken into account for article 8  purposes,
    and the proportionality of removal assessed in the light of findings of
    fact on the situation in the individual case.

65. The questions posed in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 are too well known to need
    setting out for anything but ease of reference, which we shall now do:

      (1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
      with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his  private
      or (as the case may be) family life?
      (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
      potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
      (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
      (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
      the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-
      being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
      protection of health or morals, or for the protection  of  the  rights
      and freedoms of others?
      (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
      end sought to be achieved?

66. As usual, the short answer to questions (1), (2) and (3) is yes. As for
    (4), it is well recognized that deportation of non-citizens  guilty  of
    serious crimes is a necessary part  of  a  government's  responsibility
    towards its own people: the real question, again as usual,  is  whether
    it would be proportionate in the individual case  in  hand.  We  cannot
    however go on to  an  open-ended  discussion  of  that,  without  first
    finding some exceptional or compelling features which would justify it.



67. The clearly exceptional positive feature  of  this  case,  as  we  have
    already noted at 53, is the extent to which  the  appellant's  children
    have not only forgiven him for murdering their mother, but are prepared
    to support him in future. We accept that the views they have  expressed
    are entirely genuine, and we are full of admiration for the love  which
    has inspired them. If this case had involved only the appellant and his
    family, then that might have been enough for us to find  the  necessary
    'exceptional' or 'compelling' circumstances for us to go on to an open-
    ended  consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  his  removal;   but
    unfortunately for them, that is far from being so.

68. Any serious crime of violence, and particularly  the  ultimate  one  of
    murder, is a subject of the strongest possible public  interest.  While
    the main victims of this appellant's crime were his wife  herself,  and
    their children, it was not something which could be expiated  by  their
    forgiveness alone. Society as a whole has both the right and  the  duty
    (see Masih, cited at 49) not only to prevent further  offences  on  the
    part of the individual concerned, but to deter others  from  committing
    them in the first place, to  condemn  serious  crime,  and  to  promote
    public confidence that foreigners guilty of it will not be  allowed  to
    stay, unless there is some exceptionally good reason  in  the  case  in
    hand for that to happen.

69. In this case, there are no children involved, except  for  Sukhjinder's
    two daughters. We accept that it would be preferable for them to have a
    paternal grandfather living in this country, even one who had  murdered
    their grandmother. However,  S1  does  not  see  him  at  present,  for
    entirely understandable family reasons; and S2 is only five, and  could
    undoubtedly adjust to his being in another  continent.  Even  accepting
    that their best interests would on  the  whole  be  in  favour  of  the
    appellant's being allowed to stay, we do not see that they  could  have
    any decisive weight on this appeal.

70. As for the appellant's own children, now grown-up, while we accept that
    they are still traditionally-minded enough for them not to want to  get
    married in his absence if they can help it, they have not gone  so  far
    as (in the perhaps over-graphic phrase of  the  first-tier  panel:  see
    their paragraph 92) to "all put their life on hold to  a  large  extent
    until such time as they could be reunited with their father".

71. While Hardip has reached 35 without forming any permanent  relationship
    with a woman, and, in accordance with custom, is still  living  in  the
    family home, he has been  able,  despite  the  difficulties  caused  by
    having to take charge after the murder, and very much to his credit, to
    start his own cleaning business. Sukhjinder, now 33, may not have  felt
    able to go through any ceremony of marriage; but he has,  at  least  in
    part, moved out of the family house, and begotten children now  12  and
    five. He also has, again to his credit, a highly responsible job  as  a
    transport manager. Kulvinder is still only  24,  and  preparing  for  a
    significant course of  training  as  a  forensic  psychologist,  having
    already been away to university: it is hard to see  that  her  father's
    absence has caused any significant hiatus in her life so far,  or  that
    she could not adjust to it in the future.

72. So far as visiting the appellant in India is concerned,  of  course  it
    would cost his children money, though it might well be  less  expensive
    for them to support him there than here. We have  no  doubt  that  they
    would make the effort to go and see him whenever they could, though  of
    course this would not be  the  same  as  having  him  here  with  them.
    Probably the expense would be less significant for them than  the  fact
    that visiting their father in an Indian village environment where  they
    have no close relations would represent, as both Hardip and  Sukhjinder
    put it, a step outside their comfort zone. The reason for that is  that
    they and Kulvinder, unlike the appellant himself, have fully identified
    themselves with this country as British citizens. While the country  is
    certainly all the better for that, it is no more our business to reward
    them (or Gurmit, who has loyally stood by  Sukhjinder  when  they  have
    visited the appellant in prison with S2) for being good  citizens  than
    to punish the appellant for murdering his wife.

73.  The  result  is  that  we  cannot  find  any  such  'exceptional'   or
    'compelling' circumstances in this case, either involving the appellant
    himself or his family as a whole or individually, as would in our  view
    justify us in going on to an  open-ended  consideration  of  article  8
    proportionality. However, if we were entitled to do that, then for  the
    reasons we have given, we should regard  this  appellant's  removal  as
    proportionate to the legitimate purposes of  and prevention of crime.

Home Office appeal allowed: decision re-made
Appellant's appeal dismissed
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)



