
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01567/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 01 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR PELERIS TREIJS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Palmer, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.  There  are
    two sections to this determination.  The first section is in respect of
    an oral application for permission to appeal brought by  the  Secretary
    of  State  against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Trevaskis  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  appellant  under   the   EEA
    Regulations.

2.   The second section deals with the determination of  the  error  of  law
    issue.

Permission to appeal

3.   Confusion arose in this case as a result of  two  decisions  issued  by
    FtTJ Trevaskis.  The first decision was promulgated on 12 February 2015
    and the second decision on 4 March 2015.  Both  decisions  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision made on 23
    July 2014 to deport  him  in  accordance  with  Regulation  21  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

4.   FtTJ Parkes refused the Secretary of State  permission  to  appeal  the
    first decision. The Secretary of State was however  granted  permission
    by FtTJ  Grant-Hutchinson  on  26  March  2015  to  appeal  the  second
    decision.

5.   The appeal came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Frances  on  25  November
    2015.  She found that there was no application to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    for permission to appeal.

6.   In a memorandum and directions issued by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins
    on 18 December 2015, he remarked that Judge Frances  thought  that  the
    Secretary of State  had  somehow  managed  to  renew  her  unsuccessful
    application, inappropriately to the First-tier Tribunal rather than  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  However it had now become apparent  that  although
    permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes,
    the Secretary of State correctly renewed the application for permission
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The  Upper  Tribunal  had  a  print-out  of  an
    application sent by email on 24 March 2015.  That application  remained
    outstanding.  Given the history of this appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins decided unusually to list the Secretary of  State's  permission
    application for an oral hearing  to  be  followed  immediately  by  the
    hearing of the appeal if permission is granted.

7.   It would appear that there was some confusion by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins in thinking that the Secretary  of  State  had  an  application
    pending before the Upper Tribunal.  This was not the case.

8.   I found that the first decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Trevaskis
    was void because it  was  incomplete.    The  determination  which  was
    promulgated on 4 March 2015 was the valid decision.  The  Secretary  of
    State's permission application which was made on 16 March 2015  against
    that decision was  granted  by  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  on  26  March.
    Consequently, there was no permission application to the Upper Tribunal
    for me to decide.

Determination of Error of Law issue

9.   The appellant is a citizen of Latvia born on  20  September  1977.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent to make  a  deportation
    order against him by virtue of Section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.  The decision to make a deportation order was  made  on  23  July
    2014 in accordance with Regulation  21  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's
    removal is justified on the imperative grounds of public  security  and
    follows the appellant's conviction for communicating false  information
    about a bomb hoax for which  he  received  a  sentence  of  18  months'
    imprisonment on 30 May 2013.

10.  The appellant claimed to have first arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on
    29 March 1996, before Latvia became a member of the  European  Economic
    Area.  On 10 April 1996 he claimed  asylum  which  was  refused  on  30
    November 2000; his appeal was dismissed on 20 January 2004,  and  on  4
    February 2004 he exhausted his appeal rights.  On 12  January  2004  he
    was granted leave to remain as a spouse until 12 January 2006.   On  11
    October 2005 he  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  but  was
    considered to be ineligible because he failed to return the  qualifying
    questionnaire before the date specified without an explanation.

11.  The appellant has two convictions.  The first was on 7 March 2011  when
    he was convicted of driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol and  of
    failing to surrender to custody.  He was fined for these offences,  and
    disqualified from driving for twelve months.

12.  The second conviction was on 30 May 2013 when he was sentenced  in  his
    absence  to  eighteen  months'  imprisonment  for  communicating  false
    information about a bomb hoax.  He  was  subsequently  sentenced  to  a
    consecutive term of three months' imprisonment for  failing  to  answer
    bail, making a total sentence of 21 months' imprisonment.

13.  The judge recorded that the respondent accepted that the appellant  has
    acquired a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom and  that
    he has resided in the United Kingdom  for  at  least  ten  years.   She
    concluded that, taking into  account  all  the  relevant  factors,  the
    appellant could only  be  deported  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security.   Although  no  NOMS1  assessment  was   available   to   the
    respondent,  she  concluded  that  the  appellant's   criminal   record
    indicated a propensity to  re-offend,  and  the  nature  of  the  index
    offence was such as to  create  feelings  of  fear  and  insecurity  in
    communities, and to divert and waste the  time  and  resources  of  the
    emergency services, as well as interfering with the  administration  of
    justice.  The continued offending by the appellant demonstrated a  lack
    of regard for the law, a lack of remorse for his  offending  behaviour,
    and a lack of understanding of the negative  impact  of  his  offending
    behaviour on others, and represented an escalation in  the  seriousness
    of offences.  The respondent therefore  concluded  that  the  appellant
    represented a risk of serious harm,  and  found  insufficient  evidence
    that he had adequately addressed all  the  reasons  for  his  offending
    behaviour.

14.  At the hearing  before  the  judge  the  appellant  explained  that  in
    December 2010 he was arrested for drink driving; he pleaded not  guilty
    to the charge but failed to attend the adjourned hearing, instead going
    to Spain for a week.  On his return he went to the police  station  and
    was arrested.  He was convicted and  fined  for  the  offence.   On  14
    December 2010, the day when he was due to appear  in  the  Magistrates'
    Court, he made a telephone call to the court, stating there was a  bomb
    in the building.  He did this because he  did  not  wish  to  lose  his
    driving licence.  He had attended further interim court  hearings,  but
    on 12 December 2011 he again  went  to  Spain,  where  he  stayed  with
    friends, returned to the United Kingdom on 9 November  2012.   He  went
    back to live with his parents and got a job  parking  cars  at  Gatwick
    Airport.  On 23 October 2013 he was  arrested  at  work  and  taken  to
    court.  He had been convicted in his absence of the offence relating to
    the hoax bomb threat, for which he was sentenced  to  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment, and he received a further three months'  consecutive  for
    failing to attend court.  He has served the custodial element of  those
    sentences and was on licence until 6 July 2015.

15.  The judge stated at paragraph 47 that a  submission  was  made  by  the
    respondent's representative that he did not accept that  the  appellant
    fulfilled the  criteria  for  protection  from  deportation  except  on
    imperative  grounds  of  public  security,  which  he  found   somewhat
    surprising, given the contents of paragraphs 9 to 16 of the deportation
    decision letter.  The judge said the submission had not been  based  on
    any new facts which were not known to the original decision maker.  The
    judge stated that the case of MG (prison - Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens
    Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC) was heard on 25  May  2014,
    two months before the respondent made her  decision.   The  judge  said
    that MG did not decide that a period of imprisonment within a period of
    ten years' continuous residence would be fatal to a claim  of  enhanced
    protection against deportation, although it would be  a  factor  to  be
    considered when  assessing  the  extent  to  which  the  appellant  had
    integrated successfully into the United Kingdom society.   He  said  no
    evidence had been presented before him to show that  the  make  of  the
    original decision was wrong, and, given the detailed analysis  set  out
    in the decision letter, he was satisfied that the original decision was
    correct.

16.  The judge relied on LG and CC (EEA Regs; imprisonment;  removal)  Italy
    [2009] UKAIT 00024 which undertook a detailed  analysis  of  the  three
    levels of protection from deportation contained in the EEA Regulations.

17.  The judge found at paragraph 49 that the appellant  has  been  resident
    in the UK since 1996 when he was aged 19, apart from a  period  of  one
    year which he spent in Spain in 2011  to  2012;  the  reason  for  that
    absence was to  abscond  from  court.   The  appellant  has  spent  the
    custodial element of sentences  totalling  21  months  in  prison;  his
    family connections in the United Kingdom consist of his parents.  There
    was no evidence that he retained any links with Latvia, to which he has
    not returned in eighteen years.  Applying the  criteria  identified  in
    Tsakouridis, the judge found that the appellant has integrated  himself
    into the United Kingdom society, albeit not  as  a  wholly  law-abiding
    member of society, and therefore qualified for the  enhanced  level  of
    protection from deportation.

18.  The judge stated at paragraph 50 that neither party  had  provided  the
    relevant sentencing remarks  nor  made  any  submissions  thereon,  and
    accordingly, he  had  not  considered  those  remarks  in  making  this
    decision.

19.  The judge held at paragraph 51 that the index offence  of  perpetrating
    a bomb hoax contrary to Section 51(2) of the Criminal Law Act  1977  is
    one which, on conviction on indictment, carries a maximum  sentence  of
    seven years' imprisonment.  The appellant committed the offence  on  14
    December 2010, when he was already on bail from the Magistrates' Court,
    pleaded not guilty and was convicted after a trial in his absence.   He
    received a sentence of eighteen months' imprisonment  for  the  offence
    and the sentencing judge would have been aware that he was convicted on
    7 March 2011 of driving a motor vehicle  with  excess  alcohol  and  of
    failing to surrender to custody.  He will therefore receive  no  credit
    for a plea of guilty, and the seriousness of  the  offence  would  have
    been aggravated by its commission whilst on court bail and the  failure
    of the appellant to attend his trial.  Given these factors,  and  based
    upon his own experience of presiding over trials in a Crown Court,  the
    judge took judicial notice of the fact that the sentence passed on  the
    appellant was a relatively  short  sentence;  the  offence  involved  a
    single telephone call.

20.  The judge noted that the appellant has  not  engaged  in  any  form  of
    rehabilitation in the United Kingdom, nor was there any  evidence  that
    he intends to do so.  He was satisfied however that  this  was  not  an
    overriding consideration in this case.

21.  With regard to the assessment of risk of  re-offending,  there  was  no
    NOMS Report but the OASys Report assessed all the risk factors as  low.
    The judge said he had seen no evidence which would lead him to disagree
    with that assessment.  The commission  of  the  index  offence  clearly
    displayed bizarre thought processes and a complete lack of perspective,
    but he could not accept the  submission  that  it  represented  clearer
    evidence of a degree of escalation in the seriousness of  offending  by
    the appellant which meant that any  future  offence  committed  by  him
    would be so much more serious as to make his deportation imperative  in
    order to preserve the safety and security of persons  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom.

22.  In considering the assessment of the threat  posed  by  the  appellant,
    the judge considered the principles set out in Regulation 21(5) of  the
    EEA Regulations.  Whilst the judge  was  satisfied  that  the  personal
    conduct  of  the  appellant  represented   a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, namely protection against crime, he was not satisfied  that
    the degree of threat which the appellant's conduct represented was  one
    which was sufficiently high to amount to an imperative ground of public
    security.  The offence, whilst causing disruption and  alarm,  was  not
    one of the most serious class of offences, and the  appellant  did  not
    receive  the  maximum  available  sentence  for  the  offence,  despite
    pleading not guilty and absconding from his trial.  The judge said that
    it would be straining the definition of  "imperative  public  security"
    beyond reason to apply it to the index offence in this case.

23.  The Secretary of State was  granted  to  permission  to  challenge  the
    judge's decision on the basis that it is arguable that  the  judge  (a)
    misdirected himself  by  taking  judicial  notice  of  the  aggravating
    factors relevant to the index offence and the sentencing  judge's  view
    of it based on his own experience presiding over trials  in  the  Crown
    Court and (b) by failing to consider that the appellant has  not  lived
    in the UK for 10 when he lived in Spain between 2001  and  202  and  as
    such misdirected himself in relying on the case of  MG  (prison-Article
    28(3) of Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC).

24.  Mr. Whitwell relied on paragraphs 9 and 10 of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Warsame [2016] EWCA Civ 16, wherein  Longmore  LJ  accepted
    the submission made by Mr  Greatorex,  Counsel  for  the  Secretary  of
    State, that "any sentence of imprisonment in the ten years  before  the
    deportation order must in principle prevent an applicant from  accruing
    10 years' residence...  There is a "maybe" category of cases  under  MG
    (Portugal) where a person has resided in the host state during the  ten
    years prior to imprisonment, depending  on  an  overall  assessment  of
    whether integrating links have been broken, and that in such  cases  it
    might be relevant to determine,  by  way  of  overall  assessment,  the
    degree of integration in the host member state or the extent  to  which
    links with the original Member State have been broken."

25.  Mr Whitwell,  referring  to  paragraph  49  of  the  judge's  decision,
    submitted that the appellant was in Spain from 2011 to  2012.   He  was
    then in prison for 21 months.  These are two significant  breaks.   The
    question therefore is whether  the  appellant's  integration  has  been
    broken by these two significant breaks.  He submitted that the  judge's
    approach was applying a forward facing test  when  he  found  that  the
    appellant has integrated  himself  into  the  United  Kingdom  society,
    albeit not as a wholly abiding member of society.  The  judge  did  not
    consider whether or not the appellant's significant  breaks  broke  the
    level of protection afforded him by the EEA Regulations.

26.  Mr Whitwell further argued that the judge erred in law  in  relying  on
    his own experience to  hold  that  the  appellant's  sentence  for  the
    offence of perpetrating a bomb hoax was a  relatively  short  sentence.
    He submitted a document entitled "Communicating a Bomb Hoax" issued  by
    the Crown Prosecution Service on 24 August 2007.  It  stated  that  the
    sentencing  range  from  12  months  to  two  years'  imprisonment   on
    indictment have generally been approved by the  Court  of  Appeal.   Mr
    Whitwell submitted that the judge  erred  in  law  by  suggesting  that
    eighteen months' sentence given to the appellant was  not  at  the  far
    end.  He also submitted that the judge should have taken  the  entirety
    of the sentencing into account.

27.  Mr Whitwell took issue with the judge's findings at paragraph  47.   He
    submitted that the appellant's  visit  to  Spain  was  not  before  the
    Secretary of State when she  made  her  original  decision.   It  first
    appeared at pages 11 to 12 of the appellant's witness statement.   That
    would explain the contrary view that  was  taken  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer below.

28.  In response Mr Palmer questioned whether there was any  material  error
    of law in the judge's decision.  He submitted that whether the level of
    protection was on imperative grounds or serious grounds, the  test  was
    the same.  At paragraph 54 the judge said that  the  risk  factors  had
    been assessed as low.

29.  With regard to the  submission  made  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer below, Mr Palmer  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    support the Home Office Presenting Officer's  approach.   If  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer thought that the original decision was  taken
    in error, he should have withdrawn it and the decision re-made on facts
    that had become known to the  Secretary  of  State.   Consequently  the
    judge did not err in reaching his conclusion at paragraph 47.

30.  Mr Palmer submitted that the grounds at paragraph  15  were  misleading
    because the ten year residence is not the test.  Warsame reiterates the
    principle that one has  to  look  back  ten  years  from  the  date  of
    expulsion.  It also reiterates the principle that one has  to  look  at
    everything in the round, including the breaks in the residence and  the
    integration into the UK society.  The  appellant  was  in  the  UK  for
    sixteen years before he committed the index offence.   The  judge  said
    that his integration was not broken by his offending behaviour nor  the
    breaks in his residence.   Mr  Palmer  submitted  that  permission  was
    granted on grounds that were arguably  misleading  and  which  did  not
    disclose why the error was material.

Findings

31.  I was persuaded by the submissions made by Mr. Palmer and  reached  the
    conclusion that the judge's decision disclosed no  error  of  law.  The
    expulsion decision was made on 23 July 2014. At  paragraph  15  of  the
    respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter, the respondent accepted on the
    basis of the evidence set out at paragraphs 9 to 14 that the  appellant
    has obtained a permanent right to reside by virtue of a 5  year  period
    of continuous residence in accordance with the EEA Regulations  between
    2002 and 2013.  Although it was also accepted that he  had  resided  in
    the United Kingdom for at least 10 years, the respondent took the  view
    that the appellant did not automatically qualify for the protection  of
    imperative grounds of public  security.   The  respondent  applied  the
    "integration test" set out at recitals 23 and 24 of the  Directive  and
    in the CJEU case of Tsakouridis and found that the  appellant  met  the
    "integration criteria".  As a result it was necessary to establish that
    his deportation was warranted on imperative grounds of public security.



32.  In light of the above, I find that the judge did not err  at  paragraph
    47 in expressing surprise at the submission made by the HOPO below.   I
    accept Mr. Palmer's submission that Mr. Whitwell was  speculating  that
    the HOPO's submission was a result of evidence that the  appellant  had
    been in Spain for a year, which had come to light  after  the  original
    decision was made.

33.  The judge found the appellant has been resident in the  United  Kingdom
    since 1996 when aged 19, apart from a period of one year which he spent
    in Spain from 2011-2012.  He also said that  the  appellant  spent  the
    custodial element of sentences totally 21 months in prison.  The  judge
    stated that the  case  of   MG  (prison-Article  28(3)(a)  of  Citizens
    Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC) which was heard on  25  May
    2014, 2 months before the respondent's decision of 23 July 2014 in this
    case, did not decide that a period of imprisonment within a  period  of
    10 continuous residence would be fatal to a claim of enhance protection
    against deportation, although it would be a  factor  to  be  considered
    when assessing  the  extent  to  which  the  appellant  had  integrated
    successfully into the United Kingdom.

34.  I find that the judge's  decision  satisfactorily  answers  the  points
    raised by Mr. Whitwell.  The judge  noted  that  within  the  10  years
    preceding the respondent's decision, the appellant was in Spain  for  a
    year and had spent the custodial element of the sentences in prison.  I
    therefore disagree with the argument that  the  judge  was  applying  a
    forward facing test when he found that  the  appellant  had  integrated
    himself  into  the  United  Kingdom.   Indeed  the  respondent  herself
    accepted  following  application  and  assessment  of  the  factors  in
    Tsakouridis that the appellant met the integration criteria.

35.  I also reject Mr. Whitwell's argument that the judge did  not  consider
    whether  the  two  significant  breaks  in  the  appellant's  residence
    preceding the expulsion decision broke the level of protection afforded
    him by the EEA Regulations.  The judge considered this at paragraph  49
    and found for the reasons given that the appellant  qualified  for  the
    enhanced level of protection from deportation.  I do not find that  the
    judge's decision falls foul of Warsame.

36.  With regard to the judge taking judicial notice of the sentence  passed
    on the appellant as a result of his own experience  of  presiding  over
    trials in the Crown Court, I have looked at Annex L which  Mr  Whitwell
    said was the sentencing judge's  remarks.  I  find  that  it  does  not
    contain the reasons relied on by the judge  for  passing  the  eighteen
    months sentence on the appellant.  The document from the CPS  does  say
    that the statutory sentence is a maximum of seven years; so if this was
    the sentence the judge was looking at then the appellant's sentence  of
    18 months was relatively short; but if the judge  was  looking  at  the
    statutory range, then eighteen months was at the  higher  end  of  that
    sentence  range.   Nevertheless,  I  find  this  does  not   materially
    undermine the judge's decision because of his finding at  paragraph  55
    that whilst the bomb hoax caused disruption and alarm, it was  not  one
    of the most serious class of offences, and that it would  be  straining
    the definition of "imperative public security" beyond reason  to  apply
    it to the index offence in this case.  I find that this was  a  finding
    open to the judge in the light of his professional experience.

37.  I find that the judge's decision discloses no error of law.

Notice of Decision

36.  The judge's decision allowing Mr. Treijs' appeal shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

