


                                     [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01156/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 22 December 2015                      |              On 2 February 2016      |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR MIKULAS GECZI


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1, The respondent (hereafter "the claimant") is a citizen  of  Slovakia  and
thus an EEA national aged 37 who came to  the  UK  in  2005.  Following  the
decision of the appellant (hereafter the Secretary of  State  or  SSHD")  to
deport him dated 4 June 2014 he appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  On  23
December 2015 a panel comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chana  and  Non-
Legal Member, Mrs V Street, allowed his appeal.  The  reason  why  the  SSHD
moved to deport the claimant was that since he first  came  to  the  adverse
attention of the police in October 2005 he had developed into  a  persistent
offender:. He had chalked up 33 convictions  for  68  offences  (3  offences
against property, 6  fraud  and  kindred  offences,  16  theft  and  kindred
offences, 6 public order offences, 28 offences  relating  to  police/courts.
Prisons, 2 drugs offences and 7 miscellaneous offences). On 15 October  2010
he had taken possession of his partner's car  keys  and  without  permission
and when  under  the  influence  of  alcohol  had  stolen  her  vehicle  and
proceeded to hit a stationary transit van, a pedestrian on a footpath and  a
brick wall before walking away from the scene only to  be  arrested  by  the
police shortly after. For this he was sentenced to 12 months'  imprisonment.
On 26 January 2011 he had been sent a warning letter from  the  Home  Office
stating that should he again come to their adverse attention,  consideration
would be given to his deportation. He had  then  re-offended  and  had  most
recently done so on 19 October 2013 when he was  convicted  of  breaking  an
anti-social behaviour order for which he was sentenced on  7  November  2013
to 26 weeks. He had also breached the conditions of his bail  several  times
in 2014. In her reasons for refusal letter the SSHD said she considered  him
a persistent offender and did not accept he had shown  remorse.  The  letter
concluded: "All the available evidence indicates that you have a  propensity
to re-offend and that you represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
serious threat to the public to  justify  your  deportation  on  grounds  of
public policy".

2. The SSHD was successful in obtaining a grant  of  permission  to  appeal.
Her grounds were essentially that the panel had failed to  provide  adequate
reasons for its finding that the claimant was not  a  genuine,  present  and
sufficiently serious threat. This failure was said  to  be  demonstrated  by
(i) its recognition that there were continuing risk factors indicating  that
he had a propensity to re-offend; and (ii)  its  failure  to  deal  properly
with the evidence relating to his prospects of rehabilitation.


3. Mr Staunton developed these grounds, urging me to  find  that  the  panel
had attached too much weight to the role of  alcoholism  in  the  claimant's
offending history.

4. Mr Haywood submitted that, as  illustrated  by  the  terms  in  which  Mr
Stauntaon sought to develop the grounds (viz. his  reference  to  "too  much
weight") the SSHD's grounds were essentially a mere  disagreement  with  the
panel's findings of fact. If there was an alternative view as  to  causation
of the claimant's offending  (other  than  alcoholism),  the  SSHD  had  not
stated what it was.

5. I raised three matters  with  the  representatives:  first,  whether  the
panel's treatment of the issue of rehabilitation  was  consistent  with  the
guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department v Dumliauskas &  Ors  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  145  and  by  the  Upper
Tribunal in MC (Essa  principles  recast)  [2015]  UKUT  520  (IAC);  second
whether when considering the claimant's history of offending the  panel  had
had regard to their cumulative effect; and  third,  whether  the  panel  was
entitled  to  place  such  reliance  on  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had
demonstrated a significant improvement in his rehabilitation over  a  period
as short as 3 weeks. Mr Staunton said he considered the panel had failed  to
address these three matters correctly. Mr  Haywood  submitted  that  in  the
first place none of these  matters  had  been  raised  in  the  grounds  and
further that in any event the panel's treatment of the rehabilitation  issue
was consistent with Daumliaskas and  MC,  it  had  considered  his  criminal
offending cumulatively and it was entitled to attach significant  weight  to
the latest progress made by the claimant since getting more  -involved  with
Alcoholics Anonymous.


Discussion

6. I am not persuaded that the panel materially erred  in  law.  Whilst  its
decision can be described as a generous one, it was one that was open to  it
on the evidence. I can only interfere in the findings of fact  of  a  First-
tier Tribunal if they are vitiated by legal error. It may be,  in  light  of
what I  note  in  the  final  paragraph,  that  the  claimant's  success  in
resisting deportation (through success in his  appeal)  proves  short-lived,
but it remains that the SSHD's grounds are not made out.

7. First it must be observed that the grounds are limited in  scope  and  do
not challenge the panel's primary findings of fact. In this regard  it  must
be borne in mind that the  panel  saw  and  heard  from  the  claimant,  his
partner and two other witnesses.  It  accepted  his  evidence  as  credible,
found his partner to be a very credible witness whose evidence was  unshaken
by  robust  cross-examination  and  also  found  Mr  Harding,  who  is   the
claimant's mentor at Alcoholics Anonymous,  to  be  "very  credible".  As  a
corollary it must also be observed  that  based  on  the  written  and  oral
evidence it was one of the findings of the  panel  that  the  cause  of  the
claimant's offending was his alcoholism: see e.g. [52}.  Mr  Harding,  whose
evidence the panel found to  be  very  credible,  also  confirmed  that  the
[claimant's] offending had been due to his heavy drinking. (I  note  further
that  in  her  refusal  decision  the  SSHD  also  regarded  the  claimant's
offending as due to his alcoholism.) The panel also found  as  a  fact  that
(i) although the claimant had a pattern  of  offending,  more  recently  his
offending had "decreased"[71,  see  also  [41]];  (ii)  that  the  issue  of
whether he would reoffend turned on whether he would continue his  addiction
to alcohol ([73]; that he had shown remorse [[74]; that  he  had  not  drunk
since September 2014 and was now taking the AA meetings  seriously  and  "he
is committed to  give  up  drinking"  [66]);  that  he  in  the  process  of
rehabilitation and working towards becoming a  reformed  individual  ([75]);
that he is in a stable relationship with his  partner  who  had  decided  to
give him one last chance [65]); that she is  a  British  citizen  whose  own
family includes an elderly and frail mother ([36]);  and that he now  has  a
steady job ([74]). As a result of these and other considerations  the  panel
concluded he did not have a propensity  to  re-offend,  notwithstanding  the
NOMS assessment that he was a medium risk of re-offending [73]).

8. Second, it is clear that the panel correctly addressed itself as  to  the
applicable law and properly based its assessment on the principles  set  out
in leading cases such as Bouchereau [1981] 2 All ER  924;  Joined  Cases  C-
482/01 and C-493/01, Orfanopoulos and Oliveri; and Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department v FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA Civ 1199. The  panel  correctly
found that the  claimant  could  not  benefit  from  the  higher  levels  of
protection set out in regulation 21 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006 because his period of residence had been  interrupted
by periods of imprisonment: see [55]. This principle now has binding  effect
through the Court of Justice judgment in Onuekwere v Secretary of State  for
the Home Department, Case C-378/12, It is true that the panel  was  somewhat
ambivalent about whether its decision to allow the appeal was based  on  its
conclusion that the claimant  did  not  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
sufficiently serious threat to the  fundamental  interests  of  society  [as
stated  at  [78]  or  because  it  considered  that  his   deportation   was
disproportionate [as  stated  in  [79].  However,  leaving  aside  that  its
ambivalence regarding this was not a point taken in the SSHD's  grounds,  it
is sufficiently clear that the panel considered the  claimant  succeeded  on
both counts and that when  considering  each  they  took  into  account  all
relevant factors specified in regulation 21 including the  claimant's  quite
appalling history of offending and  the  fact  that  he  had  been  given  a
warning [72]). There is no reason to suppose  it  ignored  the  considerable
expense his offending had caused the UK justice system, or the harm  he  had
caused others.

9. Third, in finding that the claimant did not  have  a  propensity  to  re-
offend it cannot be said that  it  failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
matters. In particular, it took into account that the  NOMS  assessment  had
assessed him as at a medium risk of re-offending and that  the  Home  Office
had warned him in 2011 that if he offended again he would face  deportation,
yet he had offended again. In this regard I shall address  a  matter  raised
by me during the hearing when I posed the question whether the  panel  could
be said to have considered the claimant's history of offending  cumulatively
as  well  as  individually  (at  [71]  it  described  his   convictions   as
"relatively minor ones other than the drink-driving offence". I raised  this
matter on the premise that for the purposes  of  conducting  the  assessment
required by regulation 21 it would be  erroneous  for  a  decision-maker  to
assess  the  seriousness  of  the  offending  only  by  reference  to   each
individual offence. Regulation 21 clearly requires  a  holistic  assessment.
What it requires is a decision on the conduct of a  person  in  relation  to
whether that poses a sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  requirements  of
public policy. Albeit the panel made several comments relating to  the  fact
that claimant's offences, taken individually, were  relatively  minor,  save
for the 2011 offence involving knocking  down  a  pedestrian,  it  also  had
proper regard to the claimant's overall pattern of offending: see e.g.  [71]
(which stated that  the  panel  took  a  very  dim  view  of  his  "repeated
offending"; [63] (which stated that  his  crimes  were  "prolific");  and  ;
Indeed its conclusion that  he  did  not  have  a  propensity  to  re-offend
stemmed from  its  finding  that  his  offences  were  decreasing  and  were
tapering off in terms of seriousness [[71]).

10. Fourth, even if a different panel may have  assessed  the  prospects  of
rehabilitation differently, the panel's assessment was reached having  taken
into account all of the relevant evidence. It clearly  attached  significant
weight to the factors pointing on the one hand to the  claimant  being  most
likely to rehabilitate by staying in the UK and on  the  other  hand  facing
negative influences (all of his family there were alcoholics: see [69])  and
lack of support services in Slovakia. In  this  regard,  I  have  considered
whether the panel's approach was  consistent  with  the  guidance  given  in
Daumliaskas and MC. One of the principal points decided in  these  cases  is
that for a person who is only entitled to the baseline level  of  protection
(and has not acquired permanent  residence)  substantial  weight  cannot  be
given to prospects of rehabilitation. Although this was not a matter  raised
in the grounds, the SSHD when drafting her grounds had not had  the  benefit
of the guidance given in these two cases. If the  panel's  decision  was  at
odds with the Court of Appeal guidance  I  would  have  found  its  decision
vitiated by legal error. However, I am  satisfied  its  assessment  was  not
contrary to such guidance. In particular, there is nothing to indicate  that
the panel  attached  substantial  weight  to  the  claimant's  prospects  of
rehabilitation. It did attach significant weight to it, as can be seen  from
[68] but no more than that and what weight it did attach  was  closely  tied
in with its weighing up of factors going to the  issue  of  proportionality,
rather than the issue of re-offending.

11. For the above reasons the First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in  law  and
its decision to allow the claimant's appeal must stand.

12. I end with the following observation.  At  the  hearing  before  me  the
claimant did not attend, nor did his partner. This was in  contrast  to  the
position before the  First-tier  Tribunal  when  he,  his  partner  and  two
witnesses attended. Directions sent to the claimant made clear that  if  the
Upper Tribunal decided to set aside the decision of the First tier  Tribunal
it could go on in the same hearing and re-make  the  decision.  I  asked  Mr
Haywood if he knew why the claimant had not attended- or his wife.  He  said
he had been  informed  that  the  claimant  was  in  detention  but  had  no
instructions as to the whys or wherefores or as to why his wife was  not  in
attendance. Given that my decision was confined to  deciding  whether  there
was an error of law in a  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  made  in  December
2014, I am not entitled to have  regard  to  evidence  regarding  subsequent
developments and it is fair to say that in any event  the  mere  information
furnished by Mr Hayward, although of concern, is not sufficient to draw  any
inferences. At the same  time,  if  it  turns  out  that  the  claimant  has
offended again, then he must be aware (i) that he himself said  in  evidence
before the First tier Tribunal that "if it happens again I will throw up  my
hands and will buy a ticket myself and  return  to  Slovakia"  [46],  [66]);
(ii) his partner gave evidence that if the claimant drinks  again  she  will
not take him back ([48], [65]); and (iii) that  the  panel  found  that  the
claimant "understands that this is his  last  chance  to  give  up  alcohol"
([49]). Independently of whether in  such  a  scenario  the  claimant  would
honour his word, the Secretary of State would have strong cause  to  make  a
further  deportation  decision,  knowing  this  time  that  the   cycle   of
alcoholism and re-offending has been shown to endure.



                               Signed:
                                             [pic]


                               Date: 31 December 2015




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
