
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01307/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 26 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     TGM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
                    MacKay, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant appeals against a determination by a panel  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal comprising Judge D'Ambrosio and Mr Eames, promulgated on  2
   September 2013, dismissing his appeal against  deportation  to  Zimbabwe.
   An anonymity order remains in place.



The Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

2) The grounds go only to the Refugee Convention aspect of  the  case.   The
   material parts of the grounds are these:

    ... Discussion of the appellant's Refugee Convention submission ...  is
    contained between paragraphs 73-82 of the decision ...  It  held  inter
    alia that the appellant would not be at  risk  on  return  because  the
    recent election victory of Zanu-PF meant that  the  ruling  authorities
    would have no interest in persecuting these perceived as their  enemies
    (paragraph 80) ... The panel erred because:-


    ... the panel accepts that before the  recent  election  the  appellant
    would have been at risk (first sentence, paragraph  80).   It  must  be
    assumed ... that it accepted that he would be returned to a rural  area
    and falls into the category  described  in  headnote  3(2)  of  ...  CM
    Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC) ...


    The effect ... is that (i) the panel may have sustained this ground  of
    appeal had it not been for the result of recent elections and  (ii)  it
    contradicts CG.  There has been no CG case on  Zimbabwe  following  the
    recent election.  It what it was doing was seeking to establish CG  ...
    it erred in law.  It had no authority to do so.  In  any  event,  there
    was no evidence on the  basis  of  which  adequate  findings  would  be
    reached.  The conclusion (paragraph 80) is entirely  inconsistent  with
    the finding/observation ... that had it not been for the results of the
    election, the panel would have found that there  was  a  real  risk  on
    return.


    ... The appeal should be allowed because the panel found  that  had  it
    not been for the election result, there would have been a real risk  on
    return.

The Country Guidance

3) CM held as follows:

        (1)  There is no general duty of disclosure  on  the  Secretary  of
        State in asylum appeals generally  or  Country  Guidance  cases  in
        particular. The extent of the Secretary of  State's  obligation  is
        set out in R v SSHD ex p Kerrouche No  1  [1997]  Imm  AR  610,  as
        explained in R (ota Cindo) v IAT [2002] EWHC 246  (Admin);  namely,
        that she must not knowingly mislead a court or tribunal by omission
        of material that was known or ought to have been known to her.


        (2)  The Country Guidance given by the Tribunal in  EM  and  Others
        (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC)  on  the  position  in
        Zimbabwe as at the end of January 2011  was  not  vitiated  in  any
        respect by the use made of anonymous evidence from certain  sources
        in the Secretary of State's Fact Finding Mission  report  of  2010.
        The Tribunal was entitled to find that there  had  been  a  durable
        change since RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00083.  The
        Country Guidance in EM does not require to be amended,  as  regards
        the position at that time, in the light of-


         (a) the disclosure by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  any  of  the
        materials subsequently disclosed in response to the orders  of  the
        Court of Appeal and related  directions  of  the  Tribunal  in  the
        current proceedings; or


         (b) any fresh material adduced by the parties in those proceedings
        that might have a bearing on the position at that time.


        (3)  The only  change  to  the  EM  Country  Guidance  that  it  is
        necessary to make as regards the position as at the end of  January
        2011 arises from the judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38. The
        EM Country Guidance is, accordingly, re-stated as follows (with the
        change underlined in paragraph (5) below):


    (1)     As a general matter, there is  significantly  less  politically
        motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
        considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
        show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
        seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
        would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
        demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


    (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of a
        person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
        Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
        other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
        may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
        serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
        they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
        to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
        harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
        not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
        international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
        whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
        (Zimbabwe)).


    (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas  and
        there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
        sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
        preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
        evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
        structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.


    (4)    In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
        Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
        significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
        security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
        A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
        area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
        or the like.


    (5)     A returnee to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
        difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
        Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
        challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
        not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
        unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
        him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
        or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
        the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
        engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
        adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


    (6)     A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer  the  adverse
        attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
        she has a significant MDC profile.


    (7)     The issue of what is  a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
        internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
        necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
        from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
        matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
        viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
        Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
        may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


    (8)     Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or (subject  to
        what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in  general,  more  realistic;
        but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
        reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
        order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
        to expect them to relocate.


    (9)     The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved since the  period
        considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
        US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
        hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
        has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
        Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
        with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
        been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
        2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
        traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
        circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.


    (10)    As was the position in RN, those who are or have been  teachers
        require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
        places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
        significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
        basis.


    (11)  In certain cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously  lacking  in
        credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
        show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
        regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
        would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
        with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
        ... and remains valid.


        (4) In the course of deciding CM's appeal, the present Tribunal has
        made an assessment of certain general matters regarding Zimbabwe as
        at October 2012. As a result, the following country information may
        be of assistance to decision-makers and judges. It is, however, not
        Country Guidance within the scope of Practice Direction 12  and  is
        based on evidence which neither party claimed to be comprehensive:


     a) The picture presented by the  fresh  evidence  as  to  the  general
        position of  politically  motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe  as  at
        October 2012 does not differ  in  any  material  respect  from  the
        Country Guidance in EM.


     b)  Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it is unclear when.


     c)  In  the  light  of  the  evidence  regarding  the  activities   of
        Chipangano, judicial-fact finders may need to pay particular regard
        to whether a person, who is reasonably likely to go to Mbare  or  a
        neighbouring high density area of Harare, will come to the  adverse
        attention of that group; in particular, if he or she is  reasonably
        likely to have to find employment of a kind that  Chipangano  seeks
        to  control  or  otherwise  exploit  for  economic,   rather   than
        political, reasons.


        The fresh evidence regarding the position at the  point  of  return
        does not indicate any increase in risk since the  Country  Guidance
        was given in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT
        00094. On the contrary, the available evidence as to the  treatment
        of those who have been returned to Harare Airport  since  2007  and
        the absence of any reliable evidence of risk there means that there
        is no justification  for  extending  the  scope  of  who  might  be
        regarded by the CIO as an MDC activist.

The Findings in the First-tier Tribunal

4) At paragraphs  73-76,  under  the  heading  of  "the  Refugee  Convention
   Political Persecution Claims", the panel rejected as incredible any  real
   risk based on an alleged connection to the  appellant's  father  and  the
   appellant's uncle.  Under the heading "The Refugee Convention  Particular
   Social Group claims", the panel continued:

       77. It is claimed that the Zimbabwe authorities will  persecute  the
           appellant as a member of a PSG because for the past ten years he
           has been living in the UK.   The  implication  is  that  Zanu-PF
           authorities and their supporters would consider members of  that
           PSG to be political opponents.


       78. The appellant's solicitor relied on CM  and  EM:  being  CM  (EM
           Country Guidance: disclosure_  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059
           (IAC) and EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011]  UKUT  98
           (IAC).  He submitted those determination give  guidance  to  the
           effect that there is a real risk that appellant will be asked to
           show that he was loyal to and would vote for the Zanu-PF regime;
           that such questions are more likely to occur in rural areas.  He
           submitted that since the appellant's home area is a rural  area,
           there is a real risk that he would find it  difficult  to  avoid
           adverse attention amounting to serious ill-treatment from  Zanu-
           PF authority figures and those they control.

       79. But we find that there is not a real  risk  that  the  appellant
           will suffer persecution by reason of such PSG.  We so  find  for
           the following reasons.

       80. We accept that before the  recent  Presidential  election  there
           would have been a real risk that the appellant would  have  been
           asked to show that he was loyal to and would vote for the  Zanu-
           PF regime.  But we find that there is no longer such a risk  for
           the following reasons. The  purpose  of  the  Zanu-PF  supporter
           questions to strangers was to threaten them with  harm  if  they
           would not vote for Mr Mugabe and his party.   But  there  is  no
           longer the need for any such threat (or related questions).   Mr
           Mugabe won (by a very comfortable majority  of 61 per cent)  the
           very recent Presidential election.  Whatever the  views  of  the
           other nations, the African nations surrounding Zimbabwe have not
           criticised the presidential  voting  system  and  procedures  as
           being unfair.  The Zimbabwe Constitutional Court  dismissed  the
           MDC petition which sought to challenge  that  election  outcome.
           Zanu-PF supporters in Zimbabwe have good reason to  feel  strong
           and confident.  They probably now see MDC supporters as a  spent
           force whom they need  not  fear.   Therefore  (compared  to  the
           past), it is not likely that they  will  randomly  question  the
           appellant or other strangers about their political loyalties.


       81. In any event, it would  not  seriously  offend  the  appellant's
           conscience or his core beliefs to tell Zanu-PF  supporters  that
           he would be loyal to a Zanu-PF government if he were asked to do
           so.   His  father  was  employed  by  an  education   department
           controlled by a Zanu-PF government .  And by his  own  evidence,
           the appellant has no interest in politics, whether in the UK  or
           in Zimbabwe.  It is a matter of indifference to him whether Zanu-
           PF or MDC wield political power in Zimbabwe.

       82. For the foregoing reasons and from the evidence in the round  we
           find that the appellant has failed to  prove   to  the  required
           standard that he has a well-founded fear of persecution anywhere
           in Zimbabwe: (1)  by  reason  of  actual  or  imputed  political
           opinion or (2) by reason of membership of a PSG.

5) The appellant refers to the relevant UT Practice Directions and  Guidance
   Note  and to DSG and Others (Afghan Sikhs: Departure from CG) Afghanistan
   [2013] UKUT 148 (IAC), which is headnoted as follows:

                 1. A judge may depart from existing country guidance in the
                    circumstances described at Practice Direction  12.2  and
                    12.4  and  the  UT  (IAC)  Guidance  Note  2011,  No   2
                    (paragraphs 11 and 12).


                 2. The evidence  before  the  judge  in  the  present  case
                    justifies his departure from the country guidance ...












Secretary of State's Response under Rule 24

6)  The  response  to  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  includes  the
   following:

        3. The judge found that prior to  the  Presidential  elections  the
           appellant would  have  been  [at]  risk  of  being  required  to
           demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF.  However the  judge  found  that
           matters had changed and gave reasons for  his  conclusion.   The
           judge  had  already  put  this  point  to  the  representatives,
           paragraphs 31 onward refer.


        4. The Court of Appeal in KH Sudan 2008 EWCA Civ 887 at paragraph 4
           stated as follows:

        5. Baroness  Hale's  concurring  speech  in  AH  stresses  what  is
           uncontroversial, that no country guidance case is for  ever;  it
           is a factual precedent, as Laws LJ has aptly called it,  and  as
           such is open to revision in the light of new facts - new  either
           in the sense of being newly ascertained or  in  the  sense  that
           they have arisen only  since  the  decision  was  promulgated  -
           provided in each case that they are facts of sufficient weight.

        6. It was open to the judge to consider  that  the  result  of  the
           elections with a considerable vote for Zanu-PF  was  a  material
           issue altering the risk analysis.

        7. The respondent  does  not  consider  that  the  judge  gave  any
           adequate reasons for finding the appellant to be at risk in  his
           home area.  It is submitted that this must be the basis  of  the
           finding at paragraph 80 the appellant would have been  asked  to
           show loyalty.  However  given  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
           family background as Zanu-PF supporters it is far from clear why
           the judge found a real risk.

        8. However and in the alternative the respondent's position is that
           it is clear from ... CM ... that even if it were  accepted  that
           the appellant would be at risk in his home  area,  there  is  an
           internal relocation opinion.

        9. The head note of CM at 7 and 8  [quoted]  makes  it  clear  that
           there is an internal relocation option to  Harare  and  Bulawayo
           ...

       10. The appellant is young and  fit  and  educated  with  supportive
           family in both the UK and Zimbabwe.  Internal  relocation  is  a
           self evident option  rendering  any  error  in  law  to  be  not
           material.

       11. No material error in law is disclosed.

Submissions for the Appellant

7) Mr Forrest supplied a skeleton argument and expanded upon it as  follows.
    The First-tier Tribunal could depart from  country  guidance,  but  only
   where there was  either  credible  fresh  evidence  which  had  not  been
   considered in the CG case, or if the CG case had become out  of  date  by
   reason of developments in the country.  The panel  was  not  entitled  to
   depart from CM/EM, because the recent elections indicated  little  or  no
   likelihood that Zanu-PF had ceased to persecute political  opponents.   A
   bundle of further background evidence (Inventory of  Productions  2)  was
   tendered.  Mr Forrest referred to  item  5,  a  Home  Office  Operational
   Guidance Note (OGN) of November 2013.  At paragraph 3.9.22 this says that
   following the elections in  July  2013  the  situation  has  not  changed
   significantly from that considered in CM.  There were  continued  reports
   of ill-treatment of perceived MDC  supporters,  particularly  in  certain
   Zanu-PF  areas,  although  there  were  a  few   incidents   of   similar
   difficulties  in  MDC  dominated  areas,   namely   Matabeleland   North,
   Matabeleland South, low density  areas  of  Harare  and  Bulawayo.   This
   showed that the panel's findings at paragraph 80 could be  nothing  other
   than speculative.

8) Mr Forrest submitted that the observation at paragraph 81 that  it  would
   not "seriously offend the appellant's conscience" to say that he would be
   loyal to Zanu-PF was inconsistent with RT (Zimbabwe) [2013] UKSC 38.

9) Mr Forrest acknowledged that the next question was whether the errors  of
   law make any difference.  He raised a criticism of the  determination  at
   paragraph 73-76 where there are findings of no risk  through  two  family
   members.  The panel had not made it  entirely  clear  why  there  was  no
   positive finding in respect of the  appellant's  uncle,  failing  to  say
   whether it did believe that the appellant would be at risk "on return  in
   his own right, as opposed to because of alleged political opinions of two
   family members."  That was important because, applying CM, a person might
   be at risk without Zanu-PF connections on returning to a rural area,  and
   the appellant would be returning to a rural area.   The  panel  had  held
   that before the recent elections the appellant would have been at risk on
   return, and there was a tension between this finding and the findings  of
   paragraph 75 and 76. Thus, it was at least unclear whether the errors  of
   law would have made a difference to the outcome, and the absence of clear
   findings was enough to require a fresh decision.

10) In response to the Rule 24 note, Mr Forrest relied  on  the  submissions
   already made to establish that there was  error  of  law  in  respect  of
   declining to follow country guidance.  On internal  relocation,  he  said
   that the panel failed to apply the law to the particular circumstances of
   the appellant.

11) Finally, Mr Forrest said  that  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  a
   differently constituted First-tier Tribunal panel under directions for it
   to make clear findings on "(i) whether this appellant will be at risk  on
   return, and (ii) even if he would  be  if  returned  to  his  home  area,
   whether his personal circumstances indicated  that  he  could  internally
   relocate."

12) I enquired what information was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to
   where the appellant's area of return  might  be,  and  whether  that  was
   identified as an area of potential risk from Zanu-PF.   Mr  Forrest  said
   (and Mr Matthews agreed) that this did not appear to have been  addressed
   in the First-tier Tribunal.  It is mentioned only at Appendix  2  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal determination, a summary of  the  evidence  from  the
   appellant's mother, where the following appears in  the  summary  of  her
   cross-examination:

    "In Zimbabwe she lived with her husband and children in Mashengo (which
    used to be called Fort Victoria, in Mashingo  Province)  near  an  area
    called "Real Zimbabwe" about 5 hours drive from Harare.  There she  had
    a house which her late husband sold when he returned to Zimbabwe."


13) Neither party was able to assist on whether this information places  the
   appellant's origins in  a  Zanu  PF  or  MDC  region,  or  one  with  any
   particular history of difficulties.  Mr Forrest said that lack of enquiry
   into whether the appellant's potential area of return was one of risk was
   another reason for a further hearing.

14) I  further  enquired  whether  there  was  information  on  whether  the
   appellant is Shona, Ndebele or  of  some  other  ethnicity,  which  might
   impact on whether he could reasonably be expected to live in  Harare,  in
   Bulawayo, or somewhere else.  No such information was on record.

Submissions for the Respondent

15) Mr Matthews relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He went  firstly  to  the
   question of  how  CM,  without  any  modification,  would  apply  to  the
   appellant's Refugee Convention case.  He said that guidance is inevitably
   against the appellant.  He did not hold any actual political opinion  and
   had no connection to the MDC, so at best there could be a case  based  on
   imputed political opinion.  The determination at  paragraph  81  was  not
   well  framed  in  stating  that  it  would  "not  seriously  offend   the
   appellant's conscience or core beliefs to tell Zanu-PF supporters that he
   would be loyal", which suggested an incorrect legal  approach.   However,
   there was nothing to show that the appellant  might  be  called  upon  to
   manifest loyalty.  It is well established that there is no such  risk  at
   Harare  Airport,  his  point  of  return.   The  appellant  had  put   no
   information before the Tribunal about  where  his  home  area  should  be
   considered to be, and it was for him to make his case.  He  has  been  in
   the UK since age 11. Under the heading of  proportionality  at  paragraph
   147 the panel noted that he has education, training and  work  experience
   which should be transferable to any country and would suit  him  to  find
   reasonably well paid work in Zimbabwe, especially in the cities, so as to
   enable  him  to  accommodate  and  support  himself.   Although  internal
   relocation had not been expressly addressed, it was an obvious  point  to
   which both sides should  have  given  attention,  in  the  light  of  the
   findings in CM/EM.  The obvious options for the appellant were to  locate
   himself in Harare or in Bulawayo.  Even if the Upper Tribunal required to
   make a fresh decision, there was no need to remit to the FtT  or  to  fix
   any further hearing, as it was plain on the facts  and  on  the  guidance
   that the decision  could  only  be  against  the  appellant.   The  panel
   correctly directed  itself  about  the  law  on  internal  relocation  at
   paragraphs 57 to 59, but unfortunately did not  return  to  the  subject.
   Whether there was an error was  immaterial,  because  on  those  findings
   which were reached the appellant failed to show that he would be returned
   anywhere he might be at any risk, and even if his return did  imply  that
   he might be expected to go to a home area where a risk  was  present,  he
   had the option of internal relocation.








Reply for the Appellant

16) Mr Forrest argued that paragraph 147 of the determination  was  directed
   to a proportionality assessment and should not be prayed  in  aid  of  an
   internal relocation consideration.  Headnote 3-8 of the country  guidance
   required consideration of the appellant's individual  and  socio-economic
   circumstances.  That was apt for a further hearing.  Mr Forrest  accepted
   that the onus was on the appellant to show where in the country he  might
   be at risk.

Discussion and Conclusions

17) The respondent's  deportation  decision  did  not  deal  expressly  with
   internal relocation.  It was based on the appellant in a previous  appeal
   having failed to establish any risk in terms of the  Refugee  Convention;
   there having been no significant change in his circumstances  since  that
   determination; and the country situation, under reference to  CM,  having
   improved. The decision refers simply to the proposition that  the  return
   of a failed asylum seeker with no significant MDC profile does not result
   in that person facing a real risk of having  to  demonstrate  loyalty  to
   Zanu-PF.

18) Given the history, the appellant had to show to  the  contrary  how  his
   case did benefit from the guidance in CM/EM.  He failed  to  do  so.   He
   would be returned to Harare as a  person  with  no  Zanu-PF  connections.
   There is nothing to place him at risk there, even in a high density area.
    Wherever his "home" in Zimbabwe might be - and it was for him to clarify
   that -his case fell at that hurdle.

19) The case the appellant argued in  relation  to  his  father  and  uncle,
   which is not the subject of a ground of  appeal,  was  rightly  found  at
   paragraph 75(1) and (2) to take him nowhere.

20) I assume here that the appellant is from Masvingo (as the Province  name
   is usually spelled).  That is  a  Zanu  PF  stronghold,  and  so  is  the
   strongest conclusion he could have hoped for, if  any  thought  had  been
   given to the matter.  Even if that leads to  a  finding  of  risk  to  an
   apolitical person returning after years in the UK, the relocation  option
   is obvious.  The individual and socio-economic assessment  can  be  taken
   from paragraph 147, where it is neatly and concisely set out.  It  is  no
   less applicable for having been said in the proportionality context.

21)  I  uphold  the  submission  for  the  respondent  that  any  error   is
   immaterial.  That includes any  error  in  saying  that  the  appellant's
   conscience would not be seriously offended by  professing  loyalty;  that
   may well be true in fact, but it is not a legal test against him.

22) Whether there is any error at all might have been a good question.   The
   First-tier Tribunal might have resolved  the  case  by  applying  country
   guidance as it stood.  It preferred the route of considering whether  the
   Presidential election (a major recent event  of  potential  significance)
   changed the circumstances.  Having taken that  route,  the  reasoning  at
   paragraph 80 is logical.  Representatives did not address whether further
   evidence could, in  principle,  be  used  to  scrutinise  the  conclusion
   reached.  If it turns out from other (and probably later) evidence to  be
   wrong, that might more obviously be characterised as grounds for a  fresh
   claim, rather than legal error.  In the event,  the  point  is  academic.



23)  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not  err  in  law  on
   any point which requires it to be  set  aside,  because  the  appellant's
   appeal inevitably failed, applying country guidance (as it stood then and
   as it stands now) to its facts.  The determination shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                27 November 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
