
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01489/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MR SHAH RAHUL HASAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bremang, Counsel, instructed by Haque and Hausman
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.
However, the Appellant's children are to be referred to only by the
initials ST and SRH.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant in relation to the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Gladstone,  promulgated  on  23  September  2015,
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal ("the Decision"). It comes before  me
    in relation to whether the Judge made an error of law in the  Decision,
    permission to appeal having been granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Martins on 16 October 2015.

 2. The Appellant claimed to have entered the UK in 2003 with a visa as the
    spouse of Ms Tahera Begum.  He then applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in that capacity and that was granted.  The marriage to Ms Begum
    ended in divorce.  In 2008, Ms Akther applied for  entry  clearance  as
    the Appellant's spouse.  Entry clearance was granted to her  and  their
    son, "ST".  In 2011 she was granted indefinite leave to remain  as  the
    Appellant's spouse.  The Appellant's offending history  began  in  2003
    when he was cautioned for possession of a Class A drug.  Thereafter, he
    was convicted of battery and made subject to  a  restraining  order  in
    January 2014. That was in relation to his wife, Ms Akther.  In relation
    to his children, by then his son ST and also his daughter SRH,  he  was
    not permitted unsupervised contact and could  only  make  contact  with
    them via solicitors. He was restrained from going near their school. In
    March  2014  he  was  convicted  of  robbery  and  possessing  a  knife
    blade/sharp pointed article in a public  place.  He  was  sentenced  to
    sixteen months and two months  to  run  consecutively.   His  offending
    includes other offences and there have been a number  of  instances  of
    domestic violence.  The children have been subject to child  protection
    plans. The Respondent made a decision dated 15 July 2014  that  section
    32 UK Borders Act 2007 applies to the Appellant and a deportation order
    was signed on 14 July 2014.

 3. The appeal came before the First-Tier Tribunal  on  3  September  2015.
    Shortly before that hearing, on 11 August 2015, the Appellant  made  an
    application to the family court for  an  order  for  contact  with  his
    children.  That followed earlier proceedings for  a  supervision  order
    from which the Appellant had withdrawn in  2012.   Shortly  before  the
    promulgation of the Decision, on 16 September  2015,  the  East  London
    Family Court made an order giving the Appellant one hour of  supervised
    contact per fortnight.  At the hearing, Ms Brenang produced a copy of a
    further order which followed mediation on 8 December 2015.   The  order
    which is the final order in the case provides for the Appellant to have
    supervised  contact  increased  to  two  sessions  of  one  hour   each
    fortnightly in December, increasing after the  second  session  to  two
    hours per fortnightly session in January continuing for  three  months.
    After the period of supervised  contact,  it  is  intended  that  there
    should be supported contact for two hours per  session  for  a  further
    three months, increasing to three hours fortnightly  in  the  community
    from July 2016 and to five  hours  per  session  from  September  2016.
    Accordingly, eventually, the  Appellant  will  be  entitled  to  direct
    contact albeit in the community of approximately ten hours per month.





Submissions

 4. The grounds on which the Appellant submits that an  error  of  law  was
    made are that the Judge refused  to  adjourn  pending  the  outcome  of
    family contact proceedings.   The  Appellant  asserts  that  the  Judge
    should either have adjourned to permit those proceedings to take  their
    course or  should  have  allowed  the  appeal,  thereby  requiring  the
    Respondent to consider the grant of a short period of leave  until  the
    conclusion of those family proceedings.  Although the grounds contained
    also a submission that the Judge had erred  in  failing  to  take  into
    account the order from the family court at the initial contact  hearing
    notwithstanding that this was  dated  after  the  hearing,  Ms  Bremang
    sensibly did not  pursue  that  point  before  me.   The  grounds  also
    asserted that the Judge had failed to properly consider Article 8  ECHR
    outside the Rules because the children's best interests were not  taken
    into account.

 5. Ms Bremang relied in her grounds on caselaw relating to the interaction
    between immigration and family proceedings.  This  included  MS  (Ivory
    Coast)  2007  EWCA  Civ  133  and  MH  (pending  family  proceedings  -
    discretionary leave) Morocco [2010]  UKUT 439.   The  grounds  referred
    also to the headnote in RS (Immigration/family court liaison:  outcome)
    [2013] UKUT 82 (IAC).  As I pointed out  to  her,  that  case  was  the
    outcome of an earlier case which provided guidance on  this  issue  and
    was therefore of more relevance ([2012] UKUT 218 (IAC)).  That guidance
    was applied in another case of Nimako-Boateng (residence orders - Anton
    considered) [2012] UKUT 216 (IAC) where the Tribunal held that  on  the
    facts in that case, the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  had  not  erred  in
    failing to take into account evidence from the family  court  decisions
    because those contained no useful evidence.  I suggested to Ms  Bremang
    therefore  that  the  caselaw  did  not  necessarily  provide  that  an
    adjournment or an allowing of the appeal was an inevitable  consequence
    in all  cases  where  there  were  ongoing  contact  proceedings.   The
    guidance given in RS was approved by the Court of  Appeal  in  Mohan  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  1363.   In
    relation to the best interests of the children, Ms Bremang  pointed  to
    [103] of the Decision where the Judge found that the Appellant  has  no
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the children.   As  a
    result, she submitted, the Judge had also fallen into error in  failing
    to take account of the children's best interests.

 6. Mr Kandola submitted that there was no error of law  in  the  Decision.
    The Judge  properly understood the basis of the application to  adjourn
    and gave reasons why he refused to adjourn.   He  also  submitted  that
    there was no requirement for the Judge to consider the case outside the
    Rules.  The Judge was entitled to find on the facts here that there was
    no genuine and subsisting parental relationship and on that  basis  the
    best interests of the children did not fall to be  considered  further.
    The order now made in relation to contact was limited so that if  there
    was an error it was not material.  The best interests of  the  children
    would require to be  very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation.



Error of law decision and reasons

 7. The material parts of the guidance in RS  bear  repetition.   They  are
    contained in [43] and [44] of the decision in that case as follows:-

         "In our judgment, when a judge sitting in an immigration appeal has
             to consider whether a person with a criminal record or adverse
             immigration history should be removed or deported  when  there
             are family proceedings contemplated the judge should  consider
             the following questions:

               i) Is the outcome  of  the  contemplated  family  proceedings
                  likely to be material to the immigration decision?

              ii) Are there compelling public interest  reasons  to  exclude
                  the claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective  of  the
                  outcome of the family proceedings or the best interests of
                  the child?

             iii) In  the  case  of  contact  proceedings  initiated  by  an
                  appellant in an immigration appeal, is there any reason to
                  believe that the family proceedings have  been  instituted
                  to delay or frustrate  removal  and  not  to  promote  the
                  child's welfare?

              iv) In assessing the above questions, the judge will  normally
                  want to consider: the degree of  the  claimant's  previous
                  interest in and contact with  the  child,  the  timing  of
                  contact proceedings and the  commitment  with  which  they
                  have been progressed, when a  decision  is  likely  to  be
                  reached, what materials (if any) are already available  or
                  can be made available to identify pointers  to  where  the
                  child's welfare lies?

         44. Having asked those questions, the  judge  will  then  have  to
             decide:-

             (i)  Does the claimant have at least an  Article  8  right  to
                  remain until the conclusion of the family proceedings?

             (ii) If so should the appeal be allowed to  a  limited  extent
                  and a discretionary leave be directed?

             iii) Alternatively, is it more appropriate for a  short  period
                  of an  adjournment  to  be  granted  to  enable  the  core
                  decision to be made in the family proceedings?

              iv) Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by  a
                  view on the present state  of  knowledge  of  whether  the
                  appellant would be allowed to remain in the event that the
                  outcome of the family proceedings is  the  maintenance  of
                  family contact between him or her  and  a  child  resident
                  here?"

 8. In this case, the Judge dealt with the adjournment request as  set  out
    at [55] of the Decision, at [58] onwards in the following manner:-

         "58. After considering all the above,  I  noted  the  date  of  the
             family court application, 17 August 2015, and the reason given
             for the delay in making  such  application.   There  had  been
             reference to an intention to make such an application  at  the
             various  CMRs  and  proceedings  had  now  been   issued.    I
             considered that Ms Akther could make her intentions  clear  to
             the court or to her solicitors,  but  she  had  not  done  so.
             There  was  nothing  directly  from  her   either,   and   the
             information was from a mutual friend, apparently, who had also
             not submitted a statement and was not present.   I  considered
             that there was sufficient evidence before me to  proceed  with
             the appeal.

         59. Having been directed to the family court  application,  I  was
             concerned that it appeared to be,  at  best,  inaccurate,  for
             example at page 28 of the bundle in response to whether  there
             had been previous or ongoing proceedings for the children, the
             answer was no, yet there had been  a  supervision  order.   It
             appeared that the  family  court  was  not  being  given  full
             information.

         60. The appellant had also told me that he was of no fixed  abode,
             spending two unspecified nights of  the  week  at  a  friend's
             address,  and  other  nights  in  various  bed  and  breakfast
             establishments, which was not reflected in the application  to
             the family court or in the accompanying statement"

 9. The clear inference from the Judge's remarks is that he was  suspicious
    as to the genuineness of the  Appellant's  intentions  in  relation  to
    contact with his children due to the timing  of  the  application.   He
    also appears to have thought that if the family court was made aware of
    the Appellant's real intentions and  circumstances,  he  would  not  be
    given contact and that unless  Ms  Akther  was  willing  to  allow  the
    Appellant to have contact, it would not be granted.  Having found  that
    the Appellant had no contact with the children since October  2013,  he
    thereafter proceeded on the basis that the Appellant  did  not  have  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the  children.   This
    led him not to consider their best interests in the Decision.

10. The Judge was clearly entitled to take into account the timing  of  the
    application  and  to  be  suspicious  of  the  Appellant's  motivation,
    particularly where the Appellant  had  withdrawn  from  earlier  family
    proceedings.  He also had regard to the date when the family court  was
    due to consider the Appellant's application  and  was  aware  therefore
    that there was a hearing likely to take place in the near future.   The
    difficulty with the Judge's approach is that by focussing on the likely
    motivation for the application and what  the  Judge  perceived  as  the
    merits of that application,  he  has  pre-judged  the  children's  best
    interests without regard to those interests as now  determined  by  the
    family court.  If he had considered steps (i) and (ii) of the  guidance
    in RS, he may well have either considered that it  was  appropriate  to
    adjourn  (particularly  bearing  in  mind  the  likely  timescale   for
    determination of the application) or to  consider  deportation  on  the
    alternative basis of the family court deciding that the children's best
    interests would be to have some limited contact with their  father  (as
    has  now  occurred).   Unfortunately,  by  unduly  focussing   on   the
    Appellant's motivation and his own perceptions of the likely outcome of
    the application, the Judge has fallen into error  by  failing  to  take
    into account the impact of the contact  proceedings  on  his  decision,
    particularly in circumstances where there  was  no  other  evidence  of
    where the best interests of the children lay.

11. I have considered carefully whether the  error  could  be  said  to  be
    immaterial, particularly in light of the very limited contact which the
    Appellant  has  been  accorded  and  the  high   public   interest   in
    deportation.   However, in circumstances where the Decision is based on
    there being no genuine and subsisting parental relationship  and  where
    there is no consideration of what the best interests  of  the  children
    require, I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the  error  is  not  material.
    Clearly, the Appellant has a very high hurdle to surmount on the  facts
    of this case to show that his deportation would be unduly harsh on  his
    children if they remain in the UK with their  mother  and  lose  direct
    contact with him but that issue needs to be considered.

12. I am satisfied that the Decision does contain an error of law and I set
    it aside. I have considered whether it  is  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal.  Mr Kandola submitted that  I  could
    re-make the Decision based on  the  evidence  before  me.   Ms  Bremang
    submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal
    and that further evidence would be required in relation to the  contact
    which has begun and in relation to the children's best interests.  That
    does not of course mean that I could not re-make the Decision following
    a further hearing.  However, in circumstances where there has  been  no
    initial fact finding in relation to the Appellant's  relationship  with
    his children nor the impact on them of his deportation, the appropriate
    course is for the appeal to be remitted.

Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that the First-Tier Tribunal's Decision contains an error  of
law.  I set it aside and remit it to the First-Tier  Tribunal  for  the  re-
making of the decision.  No findings are preserved.


Signed   [pic]    Date     16 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

