

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: DA/01487/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 2 October 2014                      |On 14 October 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                     A K
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms C Robinson, Counsel
For the Respondent:      Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
                   Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This appeal comes before me following the  grant  of  permission  to
       appeal to the Secretary of State by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on
       6 January 2014. For ease of reference, I continue to  refer  to  the
       Secretary of State as the respondent.
    2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 27 July 1970.  He  came
       to the UK as a spouse and subsequently obtained indefinite leave  to
       remain although his marriage ended months later. He then started  to
       use drugs and began  to  suffer  from  mental  health  problems.  He
       stabbed himself twice. His brother decided to  send  him  to  Turkey
       where he remained for some 18 months before returning to the UK. His
       problems continued. In 2004 he returned to Turkey  for  a  year.  In
       July 2007 he was arrested for waving a  knife  in  public,  pursuing
       members of the public and threatening to kill one of them. When  the
       police arrived, he stabbed the roof and windscreen of their  vehicle
       and stabbed a police officer (who was  fortunately  wearing  a  stab
       resistant vest). On 25 February 2008 the  appellant  was  found  not
       guilty by reason of  insanity  and  hospitalised  under  the  Mental
       Health Act 1983. On 6 December 2010 the Mental Health  Tribunal  set
       out several conditions for his release and he  was  discharged  into
       the community  in  April  2011.  He  is  required  to  reside  in  a
       particular local authority nursing home, to be  compliant  with  all
       medications prescribed by his care team, to attend all appointments,
       to abstain from illicit drugs and submit to random drug testing.  He
       is also liable to recall to hospital for  further  treatment  should
       that become necessary.


    3. On 8 July  2013  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
       appellant under section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.  She
       considered that his deportation was conducive to the public good and
       took account of the public interest and the presumption in favour of
       deportation for someone liable to same.


    4. An appeal was lodged and heard by a panel of the First-tier Tribunal
       consisting of Judge Rothwell and Mrs Jordan. The panel found that as
       the appellant was not criminally responsible  for  his  actions,  he
       "ought not to be considered for deportation" (at paragraph  45).  In
       the alternative, it considered that paragraphs 399(a), (b) and  399A
       did not apply and so proceeded to consider article 8. it  found  the
       appellant had little or no contact with his family in  Turkey,  that
       he was no longer in touch with his brother who  had  returned  there
       and that his family would not wish to take  responsibility  for  him
       (paragraph 48). The Tribunal considered the evidence, noted that  he
       had taken several courses, had the tools to ensure he kept well  and
       abided by the terms of his discharge. It  concluded  that  he  posed
       little risk to others and that the  risk  of  re-offending  was  low
       (paragraph 50). Finally, it set out a list of what it considered  to
       be exceptional  circumstances  (paragraph  51)  and  concluded  that
       deportation  was  disproportionate.  As   stated,   the   respondent
       challenged the determination and the matter  came  before  me  on  2
       October 2014.


    Appeal hearing


    5.  The  appellant  was  present  at  the  hearing  and  observed   the
       proceedings. I heard submissions from both parties as to whether  or
       not the judge made an error of law.


    6. Mr Wilding chose not to rely on the argument  made  under  paragraph
       398c; accepting that the panel had not erred in looking at that.  He
       accepted that as the appellant had not been convicted, he was not an
       offender. He relied upon the three other grounds put forward.  These
       were: 1) that the panel made  a  material  misdirection  of  law  in
       finding  that  the  appellant  ought  not  to  be   considered   for
       deportation; 2) that the panel failed to give reasons,  or  adequate
       reasons, for the finding that the appellant  would  have  no  family
       support in  Turkey  or  why  such  support  was  required;  3)  that
       inadequate reasons were provided for the proportionality assessment.
       I shall deal with the amplification  of  the  grounds  later  in  my
       determination.


    7. Ms Robinson submitted in response that the  panel  had  conducted  a
       comprehensive assessment of the  case,  that  any  errors  were  not
       material to the outcome, that the Tribunal had been correct  on  the
       issue of liability  and  that  the  article  8  assessment  was  not
       infected by the finding on liability. She submitted  that  prior  to
       the paragraphs setting out the findings, the Tribunal had considered
       the evidence and the determination had to be read as  a  whole.  The
       Tribunal had the public interest in mind  and  weighed  up  all  the
       relevant factors. His conditional discharge showed that the risk  he
       posed had diminished. A holistic assessment had been undertaken. The
       Tribunal would have been aware of the  presumption  of  deportation.
       The findings  with  regard  to  the  appellant's  family  in  Turkey
       accorded with his evidence that his family had washed their hands of
       him when he had returned there.


    8. In response, Mr Wilding submitted that there was no engagement  with
       the  Secretary  of  State's  case  and  it  was  unclear  from   the
       determination why the public interest was found  to  be  outweighed.
       The error as to liability had infected all the other  findings.  The
       error was material because there was  little  engagement  of  public
       interest factors.


    9. Having heard the submissions I reserved my determination. I now give
       my decision and reasons.






    Conclusions


   10. I have carefully considered the determination, the submissions,  the
       helpful written arguments and  the  evidence  and  case  law  I  was
       referred to.


   11. This is a case where a decision to deport was made under  s.3(5)(a),
       not (b) as stated in the determination  (at  paragraphs  1  and  41)
       which relates to family members of a person subject to  deportation.
       This was not an error relied on by the respondent and although it is
       clearly an error, I do not consider it to be a material one  as  the
       panel was plainly aware that the decision related to the  appellant.
        The other errors in the determination which were relied  on  by  Mr
       Wilding are, however, such that the determination is unsafe.


   12. First, it is the respondent's case, with which I  concur,  that  the
       panel  fell  into  error  in  its  approach  towards  liability   to
       deportation.  As per EO (deportation appeals -  scope  and  process)
       Turkey [2007] UKAIT 00062, liability under s.3(5)(a) arises from the
       Secretary of State taking a view; i.e. that an individual's  conduct
       is such that deportation is conducive to the public good. A view  is
       taken, a decision is made and that decision  renders  the  appellant
       liable to deportation. Although the Tribunal is required to consider
       liability, such an assessment was considered to  be  essentially  an
       examination of whether the Secretary of State deemed the appellant's
       deportation to be conducive to the public good, or  whether  he  was
       the family member of a person subject to deportation or  whether  he
       had been recommended for deportation by a criminal court.  This  was
       expanded in Bah (EO (Turkey) -  liability  to  deport)  [2012]  UKUT
       00196 (IAC).  Mr  Justice  Blake  explained  that  when  considering
       whether the person liable for deportation, the judge was required to
       examine 1) whether the facts alleged by the Secretary of State  were
       accepted, 2) whether on the facts as a whole the  conduct  character
       or associations reached such a level of seriousness as to justify  a
       decision to deport and 3) any lawful applicable policy. There  being
       no dispute about the facts and no applicable  policy,  the  Tribunal
       was required to consider the second issue.


   13. It may be that in its finding that the appellant  ought  not  to  be
       deported because of the lack of criminal responsibility on his part,
       the Tribunal meant that the appellant's circumstances did  not  meet
       the level of seriousness required to justify deportation. If that is
       so, then its finding is flawed because it only took account of  that
       single factor; the other factors listed by the Secretary of State in
       her letter of 8 July 2013 were disregarded  at  this  stage  of  the
       assessment process. That letter set out full reasons  for  the  view
       the Secretary of State had taken; it considered the appellant's long
       history of  aggression,  violence,  drugs  abuse  and  his  paranoid
       schizophrenia. It noted  that  he  had  been  hospitalised  for  his
       behaviour on a number of occasions and discharged when his condition
       stabilised. It noted that the public was entitled  to  a  system  of
       immigration that protected it from harm borne  by  a  person's  poor
       mental health, noted that the appellant's conduct had been found  by
       the sentencing judge to pose a risk to  the  public  and  considered
       that deportation was justified by the legitimate aim  of  preventing
       crime  or  disorder.   Therefore,  notwithstanding  the  not  guilty
       verdict in respect of his most recent  offences,  the  Secretary  of
       State was entitled to make a decision to deport the appellant on non
       conducive grounds for all the reasons given in her letter of 8 July.
       As confirmed in Bah, there is nothing in section 3(5) and  (6)  that
       requires there to have been any convictions at all for a decision on
       deportation to be made (at paragraph 45).


   14.  It may have been open to the Tribunal to find that the  appellant's
       conduct was not serious enough  to  justify  deportation,  but  only
       after a full assessment of  all  the  factors  relied  upon  by  the
       Secretary of State had been considered. This was not done.


   15. Moreover, the Tribunal erred in presuming that the  appellant  ought
       not to be  deported  because  the  respondent  had  wrongly  applied
       paragraph 398(c) (at paragraph 45 of the determination).  Whilst  Mr
       Wilding  does  not  challenge  the  finding  in   respect   of   the
       inapplicability  of  paragraph  398(c),  his  complaint  about   the
       Tribunal's approach in those circumstances has substance.  The  fact
       that an inappropriate paragraph of the rules was considered does not
       render the deportation invalid. The Secretary of State had  set  out
       reasons for the deportation  in  her  letter  and  it  was  for  the
       Tribunal to grapple with them. The Secretary of State accepted  that
       the appellant was not responsible for his actions in 2007 but  other
       factors were relied on to justify deportation  and  those  were  not
       addressed by the panel when it reached its decision on liability.


   16. I have considered whether the Tribunal's finding that the  appellant
       was not liable to  deportation  because  of  his  insanity  and  the
       inapplicability of paragraph 398(c) is an  error  which  taints  the
       remaining findings.  Ms Robinson  urged  me  to  find  it  was  not.
       However, having read the  determination  in  its  entirety,  several
       times, I am unable to agree with her. Mr Wilding is right to  submit
       that the impression gleaned from a reading  of  the  proportionality
       assessment at paragraphs 49-52 is that the panel was  influenced  by
       its erroneous starting point  in  its  subsequent  findings.  Whilst
       there is a reference to the public interest in paragraph 49,  it  is
       brief and only a statement of what the respondent says. I can see no
       engagement with the presumption of deportation and no weighing up of
       the public interest as against the factors argued for the appellant.
       Mr Wilding argued that a clear finding on re-offending had not  been
       made; the appellant  was  still  considered  to  pose  a  risk  when
       discharged by the Mental Health Tribunal as he was required to  live
       in 24 hour staffed accommodation where he still  resides.  There  is
       also, of course, the appellant's previous  history  set  out  in  Dr
       Haydn Smith's psychiatric report of July 2012; convictions  in  2003
       and 2004 and repeated admissions to hospital  for  his  erratic  and
       violent behaviour. Whilst the appellant may have  been  stable  when
       conditionally discharged in April 2011 and  when  the  reports  were
       prepared, he had been stable in the past as well  but  continued  to
       suffer relapses. In the absence of up to date medical evidence and a
       full analysis of the chances  of  recurring  violent  behaviour,  Mr
       Wilding is right to argue that a clear and reasoned finding  on  re-
       offending has not been made.


   17. The respondent also argues that the panel gave  no  reasons,  or  no
       adequate reasons, for its finding that the appellant would  have  no
       family support in Turkey and that it  failed  to  explain  why  such
       support would be needed in the first place.  The appellant is one of
       eleven siblings. His mother  is  still  alive  although  his  father
       passed away in 2005. The appellant's evidence on  contact  with  his
       family indicates that he "is" in contact with his brother in Turkey.
        His psychiatrist confirmed contact with a brother and other reports
       confirm contact with his mother. It is argued by  Ms  Robinson  that
       the family washed their hands of the appellant when he  returned  to
       Turkey but that was at a  time  when  his  condition  was  far  more
       volatile. In any event, it would appear  that  the  appellant's  own
       evidence suggested contact was maintained with at least some  family
       members after that time yet the panel finds  otherwise.   The  panel
       failed to consider why, if the  appellant  had  appropriate  medical
       care in Turkey, and it is not  suggested  that  this  would  not  be
       available, his  condition  could  not  be  managed  by  health  care
       professionals rather than his family.


   18. The final ground is linked with the first one and takes  issue  with
       the proportionality assessment. The respondent  complains  that  the
       assessment was inadequate and that the panel was required  to  weigh
       up the public interest, including the provisions of  the  rules  and
       weigh that against the rights of the appellant. The  greater  weight
       to be attached to expulsion in deportation  as  opposed  to  removal
       cases was emphasised in JO (Uganda)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10.   It  is
       right, as Mr Wilding submitted, that the failure of the appellant to
       meet the requirements  of  the  rules  was  not  factored  into  the
       balancing exercise and that a balanced  assessment  of  the  broader
       public interest is needed.


   19.  For all these reasons, I am of the view that the panel made  errors
       of law which require its  determination  to  be  set  aside  in  its
       entirety except as a record of proceedings.


    Decision


   20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  The  appeal
       shall be re-heard by another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
       the decision to be re-made.


    Anonymity


   21. I continue the order for anonymity made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Directions


   22. This appeal shall be re-heard by a panel  chaired  by  a  Designated
       Judge. All documentary evidence relied on by the parties (except for
       that which has already been submitted) must be filed and served upon
       one another and upon the Tribunal in duplicate no  later  than  five
       working days prior to the next  hearing.  The  appellant's  evidence
       must include an updated witness  statement,  addressing  his  living
       circumstances, and updated medical evidence which  should  focus  on
       the treatment/medication he has been and is receiving, on the  risks
       of relapses of his schizophrenia and any other relevant matters.


   23. Should an interpreter be required, the Tribunal is  to  be  notified
       forthwith and in any case no later than ten working  days  prior  to
       the hearing.








       Signed:






       Dr R Keki?
       Upper Tribunal Judge




       Date: 13 October 2014

