
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01000/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 January 2014                         |On 31st January 2014       |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                         THE HON MR JUSTICE FOSKETT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                   MR A M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr S Saeed a Solicitor from Aman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr S Walker a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the determination of the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey who was born on 16 May 1969.  This
    appeal comes back to the  Upper  Tribunal  from  the  Court  of  Appeal
    following the judgement of Ward,  Elias  and  Pitchford  LLJ  dated  12
    December 2012 (AM v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1634).


 3. The background to the case, and the basis upon which it is  now  before
    the Upper Tribunal, is set out fully in the judgment of  Pitchford  LJ.
    Having referred to the decision of the Secretary of State  made  on  18
    November 2010 to deport the appellant on the  grounds  that  he  was  a
    "foreign criminal" within the meaning of section 32 of the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007  and to the relevant statutory  provisions,  he  set  out  the
    background as follows:


        "Background


        3.        I take the factual background from the  decision  of  the
           First Tier Tribunal ("FTT")  promulgated  on  9  May  2011.  The
           appellant was born on 16 May 1969 and is now aged 43  years.  He
           arrived in the United Kingdom from Turkey via Cyprus in December
           1993 and claimed asylum, relying on his Kurdish  background  and
           alleged association with the PKK. That application  was  refused
           and the appeal was dismissed in 1995. In 1994 the appellant  met
           his wife at a  Kurdish  community  centre  in  London  and  they
           married on 26 May 1995. They have two sons born on 10 July  1999
           and 24 February 2004, now aged 13 and 8 years respectively. On 5
           April 2001 the appellant made  further  representations  to  the
           Secretary  of  State  which  were  treated  as  a  human  rights
           application. The application was refused on 30 July 2001 but  an
           appeal to the second adjudicator was allowed on 18 July 2003. On
           15 October 2003 the appellant was granted discretionary leave to
           remain  which  expired  on  15  October  2006.  Thereafter   the
           appellant enjoyed indefinite leave to remain.


        4.        On 25 February 2005, following a trial at Southwark Crown
           Court, the  appellant  was  convicted  with  others  of  a  drug
           trafficking offence. The circumstances, which  I  take  from  an
           OASyS report referred to in more detail at paragraphs 35 and  36
           below, were that in August 2004 the appellant was employed as  a
           mini-cab driver in London. He was offered work by  an  associate
           driving a Dutch national for three days. On the  third  day  the
           appellant was requested to drive to an address  in  Bournemouth.
           When they arrived at their destination they  were  arrested  and
           his passenger was found by the police to  be  in  possession  of
           9.37 kilograms of heroin of high purity which he  had  collected
           from the address visited. The appellant was convicted  of  being
           knowingly   concerned   in   carrying,   removing,   depositing,
           harbouring, keeping or concealing a class A drug. On 23 February
           2005 the appellant was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment, later
           reduced on appeal to 12 years.  In  or  about  August  2008  the
           appellant was transferred to open conditions. On 6  August  2010
           the custodial part of the appellant's sentence expired,  but  he
           was detained pending deportation until 19  August  when  he  was
           released on bail.


        The decision letter


        5.        On  23  November  2010  UK  Border  Agency  notified  the
           appellant that he was subject  to  automatic  deportation  as  a
           foreign criminal pursuant to the terms of section 32 UK  Borders
           Act  2007,  because  he  had  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
           imprisonment of not less than 12 months, unless he  fell  within
           one of the exceptions set out in section  33  of  the  Act.  The
           Secretary of State accepted that the appellant had established a
           family life in the United Kingdom but concluded  that  his  wife
           and two sons could  reasonably  accompany  him  to  Turkey.  The
           Secretary of  State  acknowledged  her  duty  to  recognise  the
           interests of the appellant's children as a primary consideration
           but   concluded   that   other    factors    outweighed    those
           considerations. The  letter  informed  the  appellant  that  the
           decision to remove was in accordance with section 32(5)  of  the
           2007 Act and the Agency's published policy  in  pursuit  of  the
           permissible aim "of the prevention of disorder and crime and the
           protection of health and morals and the protection of the rights
           and freedom of others". The Secretary of State took into account
           the personal and  family  circumstances  of  the  appellant  but
           resolved the issue of proportionality in favour  of  deportation
           since, she concluded, the appellant  had  spent  his  youth  and
           formative years in Turkey and "it is not considered unreasonable
           to expect you to be able to readjust to life in  Turkey".  There
           was no reason why the appellant's spouse and children could  not
           be expected to return to Turkey since "your concern for your own
           children did not deter you from committing the serious crime for
           which you received a long sentence of 12 years imprisonment".


        The hearing before the FTT


        6.        The appellant relied before the FTT on witness statements
           from himself, his wife and two friends. The  appellant  and  his
           wife were cross-examined on behalf of the Secretary of State. In
           its important respects that evidence was accepted  [13].  Mrs  M
           arrived in the United Kingdom to join her father in  April  1992
           as his dependent. Her father claimed asylum and the  application
           was granted. In time, Mrs M became a British citizen and the two
           children who were born in the United Kingdom were  also  British
           citizens. From time to time Mrs M made  visits  to  Turkey,  for
           example for family  funerals,  and  occasionally  the  two  boys
           accompanied her. On one occasion she  had,  on  account  of  her
           ethnic origin, been assaulted in the presence of the boys at the
           airport on arrival in Turkey. The tribunal found that  the  ties
           of both mother and children were, at the time  of  the  hearing,
           predominantly with the United Kingdom and not with Turkey [3].


        7.        The  appellant  had  been  an  industrious  prisoner.  He
           received no significant disciplinary adjudications. He undertook
           educational  and  other  courses,  and   produced   confirmatory
           certificates. Mrs M  had  qualified  in  the  late  1990s  as  a
           pharmaceutical technician and worked in that capacity until,  in
           about 2009, she developed chronic back pain and  panic  attacks.
           Regular contact  was  maintained  between  the  family  and  the
           appellant while  he  was  in  prison.  He  was  released  on  an
           electronic tag for periods of home leave. The older boy's school
           performance deteriorated but, once  he  was  reunited  with  his
           father, it picked up again. Both children  were  doing  well  at
           school. The appellant was  undertaking  the  bulk  of  household
           duties because his wife was not fit  enough  for  heavier  work.
           However,  she  provided  some  care  for  her  own  mother.  The
           existence, duration and depth of family life were confirmed by a
           report from  an  expert  independent  social  worker,  Christine
           Brown, which was accepted by the tribunal. At paragraphs 6.6 and
           6.7 of her conclusions Ms Brown said:


           "6.6    ...  I  have  no  doubt   that   both   [children]   are
               significantly and closely bonded to their  father  and  that
               the impact of removal will be devastating for  them.  It  is
               the children who will in essence  be  "punished"  for  their
               father's  lack  of  status  with   enormous   and   enduring
               implications  for  all  three  family  members   but,   most
               significantly and  importantly  the  children  who  are  not
               responsible for the situation  that  they  unwillingly  find
               themselves [in] at this time.


           6.7    In this instance [the children's] needs are being met  by
               their mother and father although this has been a  precarious
               journey for this family. To remove [AM] would undermine this
               and  place  these  children  in  a  position  which  is  the
               antithesis  of  good  social  work  practice  and  what  the
               Children Act 1989 sought to enshrine as  essential  elements
               required for positive child development and,  what  was  the
               initial foundation for child care practices since this time,
               informing subsequent determinations including those of  Lord
               Lamming's  findings  into  the  Climbie  enquiry  and   more
               recently that of Baby Peter."


           Notwithstanding these bonds of  affection  and  dependence,  the
           Tribunal was satisfied that,  if  the  appellant  was  deported,
           neither his wife nor his sons would accompany  him.  They  would
           remain in the United Kingdom ([4], [7], [9], [13] - [16]).


        8.         The  FTT  correctly  instructed   itself   as   to   the
           considerations relevant to the issue which arose  under  Article
           8(2), namely whether expulsion was  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society and proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued,  citing
           Boultif v Switzerland [2002] 33 EHRR 1179 and Uner v Netherlands
           [2007] INLR 273. In Uner v Netherlands, at paragraphs 57 and 58,
           the Grand Chamber listed the relevant factors:


           "57.   Even if Article 8 of the Convention  does  not  therefore
               contained an absolute right for any category of alien not to
               be expelled, the Court's case law  amply  demonstrates  that
               there are circumstances where the expulsion of an alien will
               give rise to a violation of that provision ... in  the  case
               of Boultif the Court elaborated the relevant criteria  which
               it would use in order to assess whether an expulsion measure
               was necessary in a democratic society and  proportionate  to
               the legitimate aim  pursued.  These  criteria  ...  are  the
               following:


               The nature and seriousness of the offence committed  by  the
               applicant;


               The length of the applicant's stay in the country from which
               she or he is to be expelled;


               The time elapsed since the offence  was  committed  and  the
               applicant's conduct during that period;


               The nationalities of the various persons concerned;


               The applicant's family situation, such as the length of  the
               marriage and other factors expressing the effectiveness of a
               couple's family life;


               Whether the spouse knew about the offence at the  time  when
               he or she entered into a family relationship;


               Whether there are children of the marriage and, if so, their
               age; and


               The seriousness of the  difficulties  which  the  spouse  is
               likely to encounter in the country to which the applicant is
               to be expelled.


           58.    The Court would wish to make explicit two criteria  which
               may already be implicit in those identified in  the  Boultif
               judgment:


               The  best  interests  and  wellbeing  of  the  children,  in
               particular the seriousness of  the  difficulties  which  any
               children of the applicant are likely  to  encounter  in  the
               country to which the applicant is to be expelled; and


               The solidity of social, cultural and family  ties  with  the
               host country and with the country of destination."


           Furthermore, the FTT applied the five stage test which the House
           of Lords approved in R (Razgar) v  SSHD  [2004]  2  AC  368  and
           confirmed in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2009] 1 AC 1159.


        9.        The FTT proceeded to examine the legitimate aim  pursued,
           in particular the seriousness of the offence that the  appellant
           had committed. It noted the sentencing judge's remarks as to the
           seriousness of the offence, which I shall quote in full:


               "[You] have been convicted by the jury  of  being  knowingly
               concerned in dealing in a substantial quantity of heroin ...
               with  the  intention  of  evading  the  prohibition  on  its
               importation. This offence is regarded by  Parliament  as  so
               serious that the maximum sentence after conviction  is  life
               imprisonment and the particular level of sentence  for  this
               kind of offence set by the Court of Appeal is very  high  to
               reflect that position. The  seriousness  of  trafficking  in
               heroin cannot be understated. It is a drug  that  is  highly
               addictive and for those who take it and become  addicted  so
               often leads to personal degradation, squalor  and  premature
               death. So powerful is the addiction  that  huge  numbers  of
               addicts are led to commit a whole range of serious offences,
               including burglary and robbery, in order to obtain the money
               to feed the drug and feed their addiction."


           The Tribunal noted the appellant's poor immigration history.  He
           was unlawfully in the United Kingdom from 1995 to 1998  when  he
           was  arrested  for  a  road  traffic  offence.  Having  obtained
           indefinite leave to remain  in  2006,  he  committed  a  serious
           criminal offence. The Tribunal acknowledged that  the  appellant
           retained links with Turkey.  His  parents,  brother  and  sister
           still lived there. Nonetheless the Tribunal found  it  would  be
           disproportionate to deport him.


        10.       The FTT relied on the following matters:


           (1)    Notwithstanding a period  of  unlawful  presence  in  the
               United Kingdom the appellant had been resident in the United
               Kingdom for 17 years;


           (2)    The probation officer who carried out an OASyS assessment
               of the risk posed by the appellant concluded that  his  risk
               for re-offending was low. The  appellant  had  one  previous
               conviction for a road traffic offence. He was not a habitual
               criminal and he had learned his lesson.


           (3)    The Tribunal found that the  appellant  had  acquired  an
               "especially strong family life under Article 8". In 2003 the
               second adjudicator had been satisfied that the appellant had
               enjoyed  a  strong  family  life  which  was  sufficient  to
               outweigh the Secretary of State's interest in pursuit of the
               legitimate aim of the prevention of disorder  and  crime  by
               the commission of further  offences  such  as  road  traffic
               offences.


               The FTT continued:


               "By the date of  the  hearing  before  us  and  taking  into
               account the  additional  evidence,  largely  comprising  the
               further reinforcement of that family life which  the  second
               adjudicator had recognised, the  argument  in  favour  of  a
               finding that the appellant's family life  is  an  especially
               strong one became difficult to resist. It  became  difficult
               to resist in particular  in  the  light  of  two  developing
               features. They comprised the ill-health over the  period  of
               the last 3 years of Mrs [M] and the continued development in
               the way that children indigenous to the United Kingdom often
               do develop ... in terms of their education and, it was to be
               inferred, their continuing establishment of  community  ties
               with the United Kingdom, the country in which they were born
               and of which they are nationals. A strong private  life  was
               also established by the appellant and  his  family  members.
               ..."


           (4)    It would not be reasonable to expect other members of the
               family to follow the appellant to Turkey. The effect on  the
               children would be particularly harsh. Mrs M and the children
               had few, if any, ties with  Turkey.  The  children  did  not
               speak Turkish. It was in the children's best interests  that
               they remain in the United Kingdom.


        11.       The Tribunal concluded with these words:


           "Again, the consequence of the respondent's decision to  make  a
           deportation order would be to separate and  indeed  break  up  a
           family. For that reason her decision is unlawful. The  appellant
           established that Exception 1 contained in section 33(2)  of  the
           Act was established and that accordingly section 32(4)  and  (5)
           is disapplied. The appeal on human rights grounds is allowed."


        Applications by the Secretary of State for permission to appeal


        12.       In her application for permission to appeal to the  Upper
           Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber ("UT"), it was asserted
           on behalf of the Secretary of State that "whilst it is  accepted
           that the panel do refer to the offence and its seriousness it is
           submitted that the consideration was flawed as a matter  of  law
           by the failure of the panel  to  properly  consider  the  public
           interest in deportation in this case". Further,  it  was  argued
           that the FTT placed too much weight upon its finding that  there
           was a low risk of re-offending. On 3  June  2011  permission  to
           appeal was refused  by  FTT  because  the  grounds  amounted  to
           "little more than" an argument as to the merits.


        13.       The  Secretary  of  State  renewed  her  application  for
           permission to appeal to the UT relying upon the grounds  already
           advanced  and  she  enlarged  upon  the  submission   that   the
           identification by the FTT of a low risk was a wrong  conclusion.
           On 30 June 2011 Senior Immigration Judge Gill gave permission to
           appeal on two grounds, first  that  it  was  arguable  that,  in
           reaching a conclusion that the appellant was a low risk for  re-
           offending, the panel had  overlooked  the  appellant's  evidence
           that he was not guilty of any  offence  and,  second,  that  the
           panel had  failed  to  identify  the  strength  of  the  State's
           interest  in  deportation  in  concluding  that,  without  more,
           deportation which resulted in the break-up of a family  resulted
           in a breach of Article  8.  I  do  not  accept  the  appellant's
           submission  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  public   interest
           argument was not properly before the UT for decision.


        Hearing before the UT


        14.       The UT acknowledged that the FTT had cited both  European
           and domestic authority which  established  the  principles  upon
           which the deportation decision should be  judged.  However,  the
           FTT had  made  no  reference  to  important  domestic  decisions
           identifying   the   public   interest    against    which    the
           proportionality  of  deportation  was   to   be   measured.   In
           particular, at paragraph 22 the UT said:


           "22.   It is quite clear to us, that when considering whether or
               not in this case it would  be  proportionate  to  order  the
               deportation of this  claimant,  the  panel  failed  to  have
               regard to the principles enunciated in the Court  of  Appeal
               authorities set out above. Nowhere is there any reference to
               the  legitimate  need  to  deter  non-British  citizens   by
               ensuring that  they  clearly  understand  that  one  of  the
               consequences of serious crime may well be  deportation.  Nor
               is there any consideration of  the  role  of  a  deportation
               order as an expression  of  society's  revolution  (sic)  at
               serious crimes and in  building  public  confidence  in  the
               treatment of foreign citizens  who  have  committed  serious
               crimes."


           The UT noted that the words with which paragraph 27 of the FTT's
           determination concluded (at  paragraph  11  above)  were  simply
           wrong in law.


        15.       Secondly, the UT concluded that the FTT's finding  as  to
           low risk was perverse. It reasoned its decision as follows:


           "13.    Having  considered  the  submissions  carefully  we  are
               satisfied that there were material  errors  of  law  in  the
               Panel's  determination.  We  note  first  of  all  the  last
               sentence of paragraph 23 of the Determination  where  it  is
               stated on behalf of the Panel that "we accord some weight to
               [the  claimant's]  protestation  that  he  has  learnt   his
               lesson". In light of the claimant's continued denial that he
               committed the offence of which he was convicted,  he  cannot
               have demonstrated that he has learnt any lesson at  all,  in
               any meaningful sense. In  our  judgment,  the  consequential
               finding that the claimant presents low risk of  re-offending
               is simply not tenable."


        16.       Having set aside the decision of the FTT  for  errors  of
           law, the UT proceeded to remake  the  proportionality  decision.
           For this purpose the UT accepted the findings made by the  panel
           with regard to the appellant's family life and,  in  particular,
           to the devastating effect which the  removal  of  the  appellant
           would have on his family. The UT  accepted  that  for  perfectly
           legitimate reasons neither the appellant's wife nor his children
           would follow him to  Turkey  but  would  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom. It was accepted that it would be in the best  interests
           of the children that the appellant was not deported.


        17.       Mr Aslam, the solicitor representing the appellant before
           the UT, tendered the appellant  for  cross-examination.  In  its
           determination the UT observed:


           "29.   In the light of our acceptance of the evidential findings
               made by the First Tier Tribunal, Mr Aslam  relied  upon  the
               evidential findings already made, but tendered the  claimant
               for cross-examination. In answer to the question  which  was
               put to him as to what he accepted he  had  done  wrong,  the
               claimant said that "my biggest mistake was I  trusted  those
               people who put me in that situation"."


        18.       The UT recognised  that  there  were  present  "obviously
           important  compassionate  factors".  Nevertheless,  there   were
           circumstances in which the best interests of the children  would
           not necessarily be determinative. As to the appellant's evidence
           in cross-examination about his "biggest mistake" the UT said:


           "42.   With regard to the claimant's continued  protestation  of
               innocence, there are two possibilities. The  first  is  that
               both the judge and the jury, who were both satisfied  beyond
               reasonable doubt of the claimant's guilt,  were  wrong;  the
               other possibility is that the claimant is lying when he says
               he was not guilty. We cannot go behind the  verdict  of  the
               jury, and so are forced to the conclusion that the  claimant
               was lying when he told us that he was not guilty,  and  that
               the extent of his wrongdoing  had  been  to  trust  his  co-
               defendants. We cannot therefore accord  any  weight  to  the
               claimant's "protestation that he has learnt his  lesson"  as
               found by the First Tier Tribunal Panel and to that extent we
               do not accept its findings. Nor, in the light of our finding
               (which is inevitable in the light  of  the  jury's  verdict)
               that the claimant has lied to us with regard to the  offence
               which he committed, can we accept that he  presents  only  a
               low risk of re-offending."


        19. The UT, as did the FTT, took full cognisance of the seriousness
           of the offence committed by the appellant. It continued:


           "44.   We must take into account that for  an  offence  of  this
               seriousness, there is a clear public need to  deter  foreign
               criminals, so that they understand that a likely consequence
               of committing offences of this seriousness is that they will
               be deported, even if there are  compassionate  circumstances
               in their case."


        20. In striking the balance  between  competing  interests  the  UT
           noted that although the appellant had been in the United Kingdom
           for 17 years he  had  status  for  only  two  years  before  the
           commission of an extremely serious offence. It continued:


           "45    ....we also take note of the fact that if he were  to  be
               deported, it would be to  a  country  where  he  speaks  the
               language and would be able  to  make  a  life  for  himself,
               albeit without his family."


        21. In conclusion, the UT accepted that deportation would have  the
           effect  of  breaking  up  the  family.  That  would  necessarily
           interfere with the appellant's and his family's family life such
           that  his  Article  8  rights  were   engaged.   However,   that
           interference would be lawful, necessary and proportionate to the
           legitimate purpose of the protection of society against  serious
           crime. Thus, the decision of the FTT was reversed."


4.       In his conclusion at paragraph 39 Pitchford LJ said;


        "In my judgment the FTT erred  in  law  in  failing  adequately  to
        identify or to apply the relevant public interest component in  the
        legitimate aim; accordingly, the UT was entitled to  make  its  own
        decision. However, I also conclude that the UT made an error of law
        in its failure to accept the  factual  decision  of  FTT  that  the
        appellant presented a low risk for offending. As I  read  the  UT's
        refusal to accept that the appellant represented a low risk of  re-
        offending, it may have  regarded  that  finding  as  a  significant
        component in the balancing exercise. I do not think that  the  UT's
        conclusion can stand. The proper forum for decision remains, in  my
        view, the specialist tribunal. I would quash the  decision  of  the
        Upper Tribunal and remit the matter for further consideration by  a
        differently constituted panel of the Upper Tribunal  in  the  light
        both of our judgments and the findings of fact made by the FTT."


5.       Elias and Ward  LJJ,  whilst  adding  observations  of  their  own,
    agreed with the  reasoning  and  disposal  of  the  case  suggested  by
    Pitchford LJ.


The hearing before us

6.       The appellant attended the hearing, together with his  brother  who
    is a UK citizen, and  was  assisted  by  a  Kurdish  Kurmanji  speaking
    interpreter. He gave evidence, was cross-examined and  re-examined.  We
    asked some questions for the purpose of clarification. We were supplied
    with what we are told were the documents submitted at earlier  hearings
    together with a supplementary  witness  statement  from  the  appellant
    dated 20 December 2013 and a letter from the appellant Offender Manager
    at the London Probation Trust dated 15  January  2014.  No  authorities
    other than  SS  (Nigeria)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 550 were put before us by Mr Walker.


Changes in circumstances and a further Welfare Officer's report


7.       It was clear from the appellant's  recent  witness  statement  that
    the family circumstances had changed somewhat since the hearing  before
    the FTT. The appellant had separated from his wife in around June 2013,
    the two sons remaining with her in London. The appellant had  moved  in
    about October 2013  to  live  with  his  brother  in  Northampton.  The
    appellant said that he saw his sons at least every  other  weekend  and
    spoke to them on the telephone several times  each  week.  We  have  no
    reason to doubt that evidence.


8.       Bearing in mind our duty to have regard to the  best  interests  of
    the children as a primary consideration we asked Mr Saeed  whether  the
    appellant had considered  obtaining  an  up-to-date  welfare  officer's
    report. We adjourned to enable him to take  instructions.  He  told  us
    that the appellant wished to proceed without an adjournment to obtain a
    report. We returned to the point  suggesting  that,  depending  on  the
    circumstances, we might consider it necessary to order that  a  welfare
    officer's report be obtained. After another short adjournment  we  were
    told that whilst the appellant was legally aided up to  some  point  in
    the proceedings before the Court of Appeal, he was  no  longer  legally
    aided and his representatives had advised him  that  it  would  not  be
    possible to obtain further legal aid. They were appearing for  him  pro
    bono and the reality was that he could not raise the funds to pay for a
    welfare officer's report. His instructions remained the  same.  In  the
    circumstances we concluded that, whilst  a  further  welfare  officer's
    report would have been highly desirable, neither an adjournment nor  an
    order would be likely to produce one.  We have considered it  right  to
    make assumptions generally favourable to the appellant  in  respect  of
    his relationship with his sons and indeed his wife.


Respondent's submissions


9.        Mr  Walker  submitted  that  the  appeal  turned  on   Article   8
    considerations. The appellant had been separated from his wife and sons
    since June 2013. It was respondent's case that if the appellant went to
    Turkey his wife would remain the primary carer  for  their  sons,  that
    contact between the appellant and his sons would be reduced, but  could
    continue through visits during school holidays and  on  the  telephone.
    There had been a lengthy period of separation in the  past  whilst  the
    appellant was in prison. The appellant had a large family in Turkey and
    in Cyprus and his sons had visited Turkey.


10.      Mr Walker accepted that the FTT's findings as to the  risk  of  re-
    offending stood and that  there  was  an  up-to-date  letter  from  the
    Probation Service. However, he submitted that the risk of  re-offending
    was not the most important factor. The appellant had been convicted  of
    a very  serious  offence  for  which  the  maximum  sentence  was  life
    imprisonment. He referred to the remarks of the  sentencing  judge  and
    submitted by reference to paragraphs 52 to 54 of SS  Nigeria  that  the
    public interest  and  the  seriousness  of  the  crime  outweighed  the
    considerations of family  life.  He  accepted  that  the  date  of  the
    decision was such that we should consider the Article  8  jurisprudence
    outside the later codification of this in the Immigration Rules.


Appellant's submissions


11.      Mr  Saeed  submitted  that  the  factual  starting  point  was  the
    determination of the FTT. Despite the appellant's separation  from  his
    wife and his sons the family  life,  whilst  different,  was  still  as
    strong as it was when they were all living together. His  role  in  his
    sons' lives had not diminished. Indeed where there was a separation the
    role of the father was arguably more important. His  sons  needed  him.
    They were the formative ages of 9 and 14 and he and his wife  were  co-
    operating amicably about  contact  arrangements.  Contact  from  abroad
    through visits and by telephone or other electronic means would not  be
    enough.



12.       Mr  Saeed  submitted  that  it   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with family life of the appellant and  his  sons  for  the
    appellant to be deported. It  was  accepted  that  his  offence  was  a
    serious one, but he had not re-offended and he was at low risk  of  re-
    offending, something confirmed by the latest report from the  Probation
    service.


13.      He submitted that SS Nigeria depended on its own  particular  facts
    and in that case the appellant continued to present a real risk of  re-
    offending. In this  case  the  appellant  had  shown  remorse  and,  he
    contended, there was no public interest in removing a man  who  was  no
    longer a real risk. He could not change what he had done  in  the  past
    but the focus should be on what had happened since  the  commission  of
    the offence. Whilst Mr Saeed accepted that the deterrence of others was
    a relevant factor, he asked us to bear in mind that the  appellant  had
    been here since 1993 and the children had lived here all  their  lives.
    He asked us to have regard to the full  terms  of  the  welfare  report
    before the FTT. It would  be  in  his  sons'  best  interests  for  the
    appellant to remain in the UK and their best interests were  a  primary
    consideration. We should give this great weight. We were asked to allow
    the appeal and to anonymise our determination.


14.      We reserved our determination.


Findings of fact


15.      As we have indicated, the Court  of  Appeal  did  not  disturb  the
    findings  of  fact  made  by  the  FTT.  There  is  a  section  in  the
    determination of the FTT headed "Findings of Fact"  covering  paragraph
    13 to 16 which (suitably anonymised) read as follows:


    "13. We should arrive at findings  of  fact  necessary  to  decide  the
        appeal.  An overt issue as to the capacity of the appellant, Mrs M,
        Mr T and Mr U  to  tell  the  truth  did  not  easily  arise.   The
        appellant was not interviewed by an immigration officer before  the
        respondent made the decision to make a deportation order.   At  the
        hearing Mr Morley cross-examined the appellant and  the  supporting
        witnesses in a lengthy, probing but  sensitive,  cross-examination.
        Discrepancies and inconsistencies were not identified by Mr  Morley
        when making submissions.  A careful consideration of  the  evidence
        has led us to the conclusion that discrepancies and inconsistencies
        were not present.


    14.  It was perhaps unremarkable that persons  married  to  each  other
        such as the appellant and Mrs M and blessed with two children might
        enjoy family life in the general  sense  of  the  expression.   The
        appellant and Mrs M in particular were  entitled  to  contend  that
        they had been cross-examined by a well-prepared Presenting  Officer
        and that discrepancies and inconsistencies in  their  evidence  had
        not arisen.  An overt issue as to the strength of the family's ties
        and connections with the United Kingdom did not arise.  A  distinct
        measure of support for the explicit  contention  of  the  appellant
        that his family are inextricably linked with the United Kingdom was
        to be found in the documentary evidence  which  confirmed  Mrs  M's
        British nationality (her  passport,  page  34  of  the  appellant's
        bundle) the place of birth of the children as  the  United  Kingdom
        (birth certificates of both, pages 28 and  29  of  the  appellant's
        bundle) and their continuing education in the United Kingdom at the
        date of the hearing (letters from an Academy and a school (pages 41-
        43 inclusive of the appellant's bundle).


    15.  A distinctive feature of  the  documentary  evidence  lay  in  the
        report of Christine Brown.  Christine Brown, an independent  social
        worker,  was  qualified  to  consider  the  circumstances  of   the
        appellant's family by  reason  of  her  academic  and  professional
        qualifications.  Her report was to be  found  at  page  48  of  the
        appellant's bundle.  That exceptionally detained (sic)  account  of
        family life which Christine Brown mentioned in her  lengthy  report
        provided  very  strong  support  for  the   paramount   proposition
        contended by the appellant and Mrs M, namely, that over  the  years
        and notwithstanding the appellant's incarceration for the period of
        six years, they have enjoyed family life with each other  and  more
        recently their sons.  It would not be out of place at this point to
        refer to the determination of the second adjudicator whose findings
        we should uphold.  As long ago as 18 July 2003, on which  date  the
        second adjudicator's determination was promulgated,  the  right  of
        the appellant to respect for family life - that same family life of
        which  the  more  recent  evidence   introduced   a   logical   and
        understandable extension - outweighed the  legitimate  aim  of  the
        prevention of  disorder  or  crime  (paragraph  26  of  the  second
        adjudicator's determination).  That  the  second  adjudicator  made
        that finding at that date provided  yet  further  support  for  the
        paramount proposition which underlay the witness statement and oral
        evidence which we read and hear.


    16.  We make findings of fact in line with that  extensive  summary  of
        the appellant's contentions to which we referred  earlier  in  this
        determination, the contents of the  witness  statements,  the  oral
        evidence and the  documentary  evidence  as  including  the  report
        prepared by Christine Brown.  Against such a backcloth of  findings
        we now proceed to consider whether the appellant  established  that
        Exception  1  defined  in  Section  33(2)  of  the  2007  Act   was
        established so as to disapply Sections 32(4) and (5)  of  the  2007
        Act.


16.      As is apparent from paragraph 16 these findings were  not  intended
    to be the FTT's full findings of fact as matters dealt with earlier  in
    the determination are incorporated by reference. We  adopt  and  follow
    these which, if fuller details are  required,  can  be  found  in  that
    determination. They are summarised in the judgement  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal which we have set out.


17.      The FTT heard the appeal on 7 April  2011.  The  FTT  decision  was
    based on the facts at that  date.  The  FTT  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant, his wife, and two friends. They were found  to  be  credible
    witnesses. We have indicated the nature of the evidence we  have  heard
    from the appellant.  Mr Walker did not  suggest  that  the  appellant's
    evidence should not be believed and we accept the evidence he gave us.


18.      Although it is not clear exactly what stage  the  proceedings  have
    reached, the appellant and his wife have agreed that they will divorce.
    The appellant said that he has signed divorce papers.  They  have  also
    agreed that she is to have custody of their sons  and  that  they  will
    live with her, but the appellant will have access to them  at  weekends
    and during school holidays. The appellant said  that  his  wife  had  a
    university education and spoke good English. His view  was  that  their
    sons would benefit  from  living  with  her.  They  did  not  have  any
    difficulty in communicating with  each  about  arrangements  for  their
    sons. His wife was better able to  help  and  advise  them  with  their
    schoolwork. However, he helped them with their music:  one  played  the
    guitar in the other the violin. They had  relatives  with  children  of
    similar ages in the UK. The appellant said that if his sons needed  him
    he was no more than an hour away.  He  believed  that  it  would  be  a
    tragedy if they were not able to see each other on a regular basis. His
    sons had, however, visited Turkey, with their mother.


19.      When he sees the boys he picks them up from home,  spends  four  or
    five hours with them and then returns them the same day. He  speaks  to
    them on the telephone four or five times during the  week.  Usually  he
    calls them but sometimes they call him. Both boys are  at  school;  the
    younger at a primary school in year five. The appellant says that he is
    doing well. The elder is studying at a Community Academy. The appellant
    has not spoken to his sons about  the  possibility  of  his  having  to
    return to Turkey although he indicated they  were  aware  that  he  was
    attending a hearing  before  the  Tribunal.  He  believes  that  he  is
    building up a strong relationship with his sons and that it would  have
    a big impact on them if he could not see them.


20.      The appellant sees his Offender  Manager  every  eight  weeks.  His
    licence period will finish in 2016. In the letter of 15 January 2014 to
    which we have referred the Offender Manager confirms that the appellant
    was released from custody on 6 August 2010 and  has  attended  all  his
    probation appointments. He has not received any  warnings  or  breached
    the conditions of his licence. He presents as well mannered and engages
    well with supervision. The view  is  that  he  has  maintained  a  good
    relationship with his family and has made such good progress that he is
    considered suitable for attendance on a two monthly basis.  Whilst  the
    letter states that the appellant has gained employment his evidence  to
    us was that he was not presently employed.  He  believed  that  he  was
    permitted to work but it was not practicable for him to do  so  because
    he needed to sign on twice a  week  in  London  as  part  of  his  bail
    conditions. Since he moved to Northampton he has been trying to  change
    this  to  somewhere  closer.  We  were  told  that  there   have   been
    difficulties but that this should be achieved soon.


21.      The appellant has a mother, seven brothers and  seven  sisters.  He
    is in touch with all of them. His mother, two brothers and four sisters
    live in Turkey. His other siblings are either in Cyprus or the UK.


Discussion


22.      The issue we have to consider is whether  his  otherwise  automatic
    deportation would breach his Convention rights or the Convention rights
    of other members of his family, in particular those of  his  two  sons.
    The only relevant Convention rights are those under Article 8.


23.      In paragraph 17 of Razgar, R (on the Application of)  v.  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27  (17  June  2004)  Lord
    Bingham said;


    "17. In considering whether a challenge to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to remove a person must clearly fail, the reviewing  court
         must, as it seems to me, consider how an appeal would be likely  to
         fare  before  an  adjudicator,  as  the  tribunal  responsible  for
         deciding the appeal if there were an appeal. This  means  that  the
         reviewing court must ask itself  essentially  the  questions  which
         would have to be answered  by  an  adjudicator.  In  a  case  where
         removal is resisted in reliance on article 8, these  questions  are
         likely to be:


         (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
             authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect
             for his private or (as the case may be) family life?


         (2)      If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?


         (3)      If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


         (4)      If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security, public safety or
             the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


         (5)       If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate   to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?


24.      Following this step by step approach, it is plain that the  Article
    8 rights of the appellant and his two sons will be interfered  with  by
    his deportation and, of course, would be in accordance with the law.


25.      Turning to steps (4) and (5), the relevant  factors  are  contained
    in paragraph 8 of the judgement of Pitchford  LJ  set  out  above.  The
    observations of the Court of Appeal in N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ
    1094 at paragraphs 64, 65 and 83 (set out in paragraph 24 of  Pitchford
    LJ's judgment) are particularly material to this part of the  analysis.
    Pitchford LJ summarised the effect of these observations as follows:


         "Deportation in pursuit of the legitimate aim of  preventing  crime
         and disorder is not, therefore, to be seen  as  one-dimensional  in
         its effect. It has the effect not only  of  removing  the  risk  of
         reoffending by the  deportee  himself,  but  also  deterring  other
         foreign  nationals  in  a  similar   position.   Furthermore,   the
         deportation of foreign criminals preserves public confidence in the
         system of control whose loss would itself tend  towards  crime  and
         disorder."


26.      It is step (5) in the process that is crucial in this context.


27.      The best interests of the appellant's sons must  be  treated  as  a
    primary consideration. We  have  referred  to  the  assessment  of  the
    independent Social Worker, Christine Brown, as in March 2011 above. The
    views quoted by Pitchford LJ should be read in the context of paragraph
    6.5 in which she says "I would argue that in this instance  that  their
    welfare needs are met by their parents in an established, loving family
    home ... (the children) represent  the  good  aspects  and  outcome  of
    positive parenting."


28.      The position has, of course, changed since then.  However,  on  the
    evidence we have received, we are  satisfied  that  there  is  still  a
    strong bond between the boys and their father.  We  have  little  doubt
    that the boys will be just as devastated now as they would have been  3
    years ago if their father  is  deported.   Whilst  we  have  no  expert
    evidence with which to judge the position, all we would observe is that
    the boys are now of an age where they  might  understand  the  position
    when it is explained to them a  little  better  than  they  might  have
    understood a few years ago and are of an age where travel to  and  from
    Turkey to  see  their  father  is  more  easily  arranged.   Whilst  we
    recognise that nothing really  replaces  the  advantage  of  child  and
    parent having direct physical  contact,  various  forms  of  electronic
    communication (for example, Skype) do exist whereby closer contact  can
    be maintained than once was possible.


29.      There is little evidence on which we can make findings  as  to  the
    current effect of the appellant's removal on his wife, though we  would
    accept that anything that  upsets  the  boys  will  have  at  least  an
    indirect on her enjoyment of her family life.


30.      There is little evidence that the appellant has a  family  life  in
    the UK of any great consequence with anyone other than his wife and his
    children. Whilst he is living with his  brother  and  there  are  other
    members of his family in this country there is little evidence  of  the
    nature and extent of his relationship with any of  them.  There  are  a
    number of members of his family in Turkey and Cyprus. He  is  in  touch
    with them. We have little evidence as  to  his  private  life  in  this
    country although we accept that he must have one. He was  born  in  May
    1969. He has been in  this  country  for  more  than  20  years,  since
    December 1993. He made an asylum claim which failed. By September  1995
    his appeal rights were exhausted. He remained in this country illegally
    and was arrested for a road traffic offence in August 1998. He  made  a
    human rights application which was allowed  on  appeal  in  2003  after
    which he was granted discretionary leave until October 2006. He made an
    application for British citizenship in March 2004 which was refused  in
    February 2008, after his conviction in February 2005. The FTT described
    his immigration history as poor and that assessment must be correct.


31.      The essential question, therefore, is whether the  public  interest
    in the need to reflect the public condemnation of  serious  criminality
    and to deter  other  foreign  nationals  from  coming  to  the  UK  and
    committing serious crimes outweighs the strong Article 8 claims of,  in
    particular, the appellant's two sons.


32.      In SS (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550 (22 May 2013) Laws LJ said in paragraphs 53 to 55;


    "53. The importance of the moral and political character of the  policy
         shows that the  two  drivers  of  the  decision-maker's  margin  of
         discretion - the policy's  nature  and  its  source  -  operate  in
         tandem. An Act of Parliament is anyway to be  specially  respected;
         but all the more so when it declares policy of this kind.  In  this
         case, the policy is general and overarching.  It  is  circumscribed
         only by five carefully drawn exceptions,  of  which  the  first  is
         violation of a person's Convention/Refugee Convention rights.  (The
         others concern  minors,  EU  cases,  extradition  cases  and  cases
         involving  persons  subject   to   orders   under   mental   health
         legislation.) Clearly, Parliament in the 2007 Act has attached very
         great weight to the policy as a well justified imperative  for  the
         protection of  the  public  and  to  reflect  the  public's  proper
         condemnation of serious wrongdoers.  Sedley  LJ  was  with  respect
         right to state that "[in the case of a 'foreign criminal'  the  Act
         places in the proportionality scales a markedly greater weight than
         in other cases".


    54. I would draw particular attention to  the  provision  contained  in
         s.33(7):  "section  32(4)  applies  despite  the   application   of
         Exception 1...", that is to say, a foreign  criminal's  deportation
         remains conducive to the public good notwithstanding his successful
         reliance on Article 8. I  said  at  paragraph  46  that  while  the
         authorities demonstrate that there is no rule of exceptionality for
         Article 8, they also clearly show that the more pressing the public
         interest in removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim
         under Article 8 if it is to prevail. The  pressing  nature  of  the
         public interest here is  vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by
         Parliament's express declaration the public interest is injured  if
         the criminal's deportation is not effected. Such a result could  in
         my judgment only be justified by a very strong claim indeed.


    SUMMARY


    None of this, I apprehend, is inconsistent with established  principle,
    and the approach I have outlined is well supported by  the  authorities
    concerning the  decision-maker's  margin  of  discretion.  The  leading
    Supreme Court cases, ZH and H(H), demonstrate that the interests  of  a
    child affected by a  removal  decision  are  a  matter  of  substantial
    importance, and that the court must proceed on a  proper  understanding
    of the facts which illuminate those interests (though upon  the  latter
    point I would not with respect accept that the  decision  in  Tinizaray
    should be regarded as establishing anything in the  nature  of  general
    principle). At the same time H(H) shows the impact of a powerful public
    interest (in that case extradition) on what needs  to  be  demonstrated
    for an Article 8 claim to prevail over it. Proportionality, the absence
    of  an  "exceptionality"  rule,  and  the   meaning   of   "a   primary
    consideration" are all, when properly understood,  consonant  with  the
    force to be attached in cases of the present kind to the two drivers of
    the decision-maker's margin of discretion: the policy's source and  the
    policy's nature, and in particular to the great weight which  the  2007
    Act attributes to the deportation of foreign criminals."


33.      Whilst each case depends on its own facts, it is  clear  from  that
    case that a "very strong" Article 8 claim is required to  displace  the
    normal consequence of deportation for criminal offending.





Decision and reasons


34.      We are  prepared  to  accept  that  the  Article  8  considerations
    concerning the boys are as strong now as they  were  three  years  ago,
    only observing that maintaining contact from a distance might  be  more
    easily achieved now than  it  would  have  been  then.   However,  when
    balanced  against  the  extremely  serious  criminality  of  which  the
    appellant was convicted, reflected in an eventual sentence of 12  years
    imprisonment, we are of the view that the public  interest  element  to
    which we have referred decidedly outweighs those considerations and any
    Article 8 considerations affecting  the  appellant  personally  or  his
    wife.


35.       Accordingly,  in  our  judgment,  it  would  be  a   proportionate
    interference with the Article 8 rights of the appellant, his  wife  and
    children to remove him from this country. The respondent's decision  to
    do so is, accordingly, lawful and the exception in s 33(2)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 does not apply.


Anonymisation


36.      We consider that it is necessary to  anonymise  this  determination
    in order to protect the interests of the appellant's wife and sons.


37.      We make an order under rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify  the  appellant
    or any member of his family.


Outcome

38.      For the reasons we have given, we dismiss the appellant's appeal.











.............................................
Signed                                       Date    27 January 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

