
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01521/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd June 2014                             |On 1st August 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                   Mr w t

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel, instructed by Cale Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  26th  July  1992.   He
    seeks to appeal against the respondent's decision  of  17th  July  2013
    making him the subject of a deportation  order  by  virtue  of  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.
2.   The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Phillips
    and Miss Singer (non-legal member) for hearing on 12th March 2014.  The
    appellant's appeal was dismissed.

3.   Grounds of appeal were submitted essentially  on  the  basis  that  the
    principles in  the  case  of  Maslov  had  not  been  applied  nor  the
    principles as set out in Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new  Rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC).  Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  that
    basis.

     Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that permission.

4.   The appellant was included as a dependant in the asylum  claim  of  his
    mother made on 31st January 2000 at port.  That application was refused
    and an appeal lodged.  Appeal rights  were  exhausted  on  30th  August
    2000.  The appellant's father entered the United Kingdom on  3rd  April
    2002 and claimed asylum on arrival.  His application was  also  refused
    and eventually the appeal was recorded as withdrawn.

5.   Shortly after arrival in  2000  the  appellant's  mother  and  youngest
    sibling moved away from Middlesbrough to London leaving  the  appellant
    and two of his siblings in the care of another.  That  care  passed  to
    the Social Work Department and he went into foster care in  July  2000.
    In June 2004 the appellant and one of his siblings were returned to the
    care of his parents now living in London.   The  parents  separated  in
    June 2005 but did not divorce.

6.   On 20th June 2007 the appellant was convicted for  common  assault  and
    attempted theft for which he  received  a  referral  order  for  twelve
    months.  On 16th December 2010 he was convicted at  the  Croydon  Crown
    Court for robbery and was sentenced to 27 months in a young  offenders'
    institution.  On 5th April 2011 he was also convicted for possession of
    a prohibited firearm and sentenced to six years in a  young  offenders'
    institution.

7.   On 10th June 2013 the  appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    deportation and given an opportunity to make representations.   At  the
    date of making the deportation order no response had been  received  to
    that notice.

8.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  a  number  of  witnesses
    gave evidence including the appellant himself, his mother and father.

9.   The burden of the submissions made at that time was that the  appellant
    had come to the United Kingdom when aged 8.  He was still a  relatively
    young man having spent most of his life in the United Kingdom.  It  was
    argued on his behalf that he had lost any realistic ties with Nigeria.

10.  The position  as  adopted  by  the  respondent  was  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect him  to  return  and  to  readjust  to  life  in
    Nigeria.  The appellant has grandparents and  two  maternal  uncles  in
    Nigeria  as  well  as  two  paternal  uncles,  aunts  and  a   paternal
    grandmother.  The appellant will be able to utilise any  qualifications
    gained in the United Kingdom on return to Nigeria.

11.  The position as advanced on behalf of the appellant at the hearing  was
    essentially that he had very few relatives in Nigeria who would be able
    to help him.  Seemingly the mother of his mother  now  lives  in  Ghana
    rather than in Nigeria.  The appellant's mother gave evidence that  she
    does not know the whereabouts of her brothers in Nigeria,  having  lost
    contact  some  four  years  previously.   She  contended  that  if  the
    appellant were to return to Nigeria there would be no property  and  no
    family.  The appellant's father also gave evidence to the  effect  that
    he did not have any family left in Nigeria.  His parents had  died  and
    his brothers were in the United Kingdom.  He said there was  no  family
    property.

12.  The Tribunal was also addressed at length as to  the  efforts  made  by
    the appellant to improve himself by undertaking courses.  It  was  said
    that he was not a risk to the public.

13.  The Tribunal, however, came to the conclusion as  to  risk  that  there
    was no reason to differ from the risk  assessment  made  in  the  OASys
    Report.

14.  The Tribunal noted the circumstances in Maslov and in Masih.

15.  Notwithstanding the contentions that had been  made,  the  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 93 of the decision found  themselves  to  be  satisfied  that
    there remain family, social and cultural ties to Nigeria.   They  noted
    that the appellant's father was in the United  Kingdom  in  a  business
    exporting to Nigeria.  He had business contacts.

16.  Both  the  appellant's  mother  and  father  had  been  found  to  lack
    credibility in the asylum claims which they  had  previously  presented
    and the Tribunal was of the opinion that the appellant and his  parents
    had sought to discount the  possibility  that  there  were  family  and
    friends in Nigeria.

17.  The Tribunal noted the serious nature of the appellant's offences,  the
    most serious offence being committed when the appellant was aged 18 and
    therefore no longer a  juvenile.   The  Tribunal  considered  that  the
    appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He did not show that he had no ties to Nigeria  and
    did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Overall it was found that it was legitimate  and  proportionate
    for the deportation to take place.

18.  Mr Haywood who  represents  the  appellant  relies  upon  his  skeleton
    argument.

19.  He seeks to suggest that in the present case the decision in  Maslov  v
    Austria [2008] ECHR 548 should have  been  followed  by  the  Tribunal.
    This was particularly so, in that he suggests that the  Tribunal  erred
    in finding that there were ties  with  Nigeria  such  as  to  meet  the
    requirements in Ogundimu.
20.  Further he submits that the Tribunal failed to  take  into  account  or
    afford due  weight  to  various  relevant  and  material  factors  when
    assessing proportionality, such factors  to  include  the  age  of  the
    appellant at the time when the offences were committed, the passage  of
    time since the last  conviction  and  the  appellant's  good  behaviour
    since.  Inadequate consideration was given to the importance of  family
    and private life in all the circumstances.

21.  Ms Isherwood, on behalf of the respondent,  invites  me  to  find  that
    contrary to such contentions the  Tribunal  was  very  careful  in  its
    analysis of the matters.  She invites me to find that the principles as
    set out  in  Maslov  have  been  enshrined  in  the  Immigration  Rules
    themselves.  In any event this was such  a  serious  offence  that  the
    considerations of family  ties  were  deemed  by  statute  to  be  less
    important than otherwise would be the case.

22.  She invites me to find that the Tribunal properly applied the  law  and
    the principles to the case.

23.  The case of Maslov seeks to set out in  general  terms  the  principles
    that  should  be  applied  in  the  deportation   of   an   individual,
    particularly one that came into  the  country  as  a  minor  and  whose
    offending generally was as a minor.

24.  In general terms those principles are as follows:-

    (a)  The nature and  seriousness  of  the  offences  committed  by  the
         appellant.


    (b)  Length of appellant's stay.


    (c)  Time  elapsed  since  the  committing  of  the  offences  and  the
         appellant's conduct during that period.


    (d)  Solidarity of social, cultural and family ties with  host  country
         and country of origin.


    (e)  Duration of the exclusion order.

25.  The court considered that for a settled migrant who has lawfully  spent
    all or the major part of his or her childhood and  youth  in  the  host
    country very serious reasons are required to justify  expulsion.   This
    is all the more so where the person concerned committed the offences as
    a juvenile.   It  was  however  recognised  that  national  authorities
    enjoyed a certain margin of  appreciation  when  assessing  whether  an
    interference with the right protected by Article 8 was necessary  in  a
    democratic situation.

26.  Mr Haywood relies heavily upon the comments made  in  the  decision  of
    Ogundimu and particularly the stress  placed  upon  the  importance  of
    establishing that there are realistic family ties.  Mr Haywood  submits
    the mere fact that the appellant's father  has  a  business  linked  to
    Nigeria is not sufficient in all the circumstances.   Mr  Haywood  also
    submits that Maslov stressed the importance of considering the progress
    towards improvement since offending and this the Tribunal failed to  do
    or to give due weight to that improvement.

27.  Although Maslov is clearly of importance in  setting  out  the  general
    principles to  apply  it  is  readily  apparent  from  the  wording  of
    paragraph 398  and  399  and  399A  that  those  principles  have  been
    enshrined within the Immigration Rules.

28.  It is the case, as was recognised indeed by the court in  Maslov,  that
    the more serious  the  offending  the  greater  the  weight  should  be
    attached to the public interest in the removal.

29.  Thus it is significant to note the hierarchy of seriousness as set  out
    in paragraph 398(a) to (c).

30.  In this case paragraph 398(a) is the appropriate passage which  applies
    to the appellant, namely that the deportation of a person in the UK  is
    conducive to the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
    offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
    of at least four years.

31.  Significantly, therefore, those persons who have been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least four years find themselves  excluded
    from paragraphs 399 and 399A because such applies only to those persons
    in the less serious category of offending as  envisaged  in  398(b)  or
    (c).

32.  The issue of  having  ties  in  the  home  country  is  one  raised  in
    paragraph 399A(b).  Such a consideration does not apply  in  this  case
    because parliament clearly has  decided  that,  for  the  most  serious
    category of offending, such a consideration should  not  apply  in  the
    proportionality assessment or at  any  rate  should  be  afforded  less
    weight.

33.  Notwithstanding the merits or otherwise of the arguments  addressed  to
    me by Mr Haywood in respect of family ties in Ogundimu, the reality  of
    the situation is that parliament has decided that for persons who  have
    committed the most serious category of  offences  the  argument  as  to
    family ties does not extend to them to the extent that it may apply  to
    others.

34.  Similarly arguments about risk and improvement generally  are  of  less
    significance in the overall consideration of the matter than  otherwise
    perhaps would be the case, given that parliament has decreed that it is
    in the best  interests  of  society  for  those  convicted  of  serious
    offences to be removed from the jurisdiction.   The  less  serious  the
    offence the more attention should be given to the issue of risk whereas
    the greater the criminality the less weight should be attached.

35.  In this case as the Tribunal noted there  are  connections  in  Nigeria
    with his father.  No doubt he  can  be  financially  supported  by  his
    family and no doubt his father with his connections could  find  a  job
    for the appellant or at least contacts on his behalf.  The Tribunal saw
    no reason why the appellant could not make his own way in Nigeria.

36.  The situation of circumstances over and  above  the  Immigration  Rules
    has been considered in a number of decisions in particular in  Nagre  v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), in MF (Article 8  -  new  Rules)  Nigeria
    [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) and in Green (Article 8  -  new  Rules)  [2013]
    UKUT 00254 (IAC).

37.  There may be factors not significantly taken into account in the  Rules
    which may merit the application of Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

38.  The circumstances of the appellant's youth, his family  connections  in
    the United Kingdom, his lesser ties with Nigeria or the length of  time
    that he has been in the United Kingdom and his relative youth  are  all
    matters that have been envisaged within the Immigration Rules.

39.  Despite Mr Haywood's cogent arguments on behalf  of  the  appellant  it
    seems to me to be nothing that is compelling, exceptional or of such  a
    nature that there should be  consideration  of  the  appellant's  human
    rights outside of the Immigration Rules themselves.  This is not a case
    where removal would constitute a breach of human rights under Article 3
    of the ECHR or would have such a detrimental  effect  to  those  family
    members remaining in the United Kingdom such  as  would  amount  to  an
    exceptional or compelling situation.  There is nothing to suggest  upon
    Janusi principles that removal would incur undue hardship or  suffering
    .

40.  In all the circumstances I do not find there to be any error of law  in
    the approach taken by the Tribunal.  It  clearly  recognised  that  the
    appellant fell to be considered under paragraph 398(a) and  have  taken
    proper account of all matters that had been urged on his behalf.

41.   In  those  circumstances  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The  original  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand namely that his appeal is dismissed in respect  of
    the Immigration Rules and indeed in respect of all  matters,  including
    human rights.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

