
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01626/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent                         |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18 March 2014                                |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                          RAYMOND LAWRENCE SAPEZEKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Draycott, instructed by Paragon Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Raymond Lawrence Sapezeka, was born on  9  August  1978
    and is a male citizen of Zimbabwe.  I  shall  refer  hereafter  to  the
    respondent as "the appellant" as he was before the First-tier Tribunal;
    I shall refer to the Secretary of State for the home Department as  the
    respondent.  On 31 July 2013, the Secretary of State decided to make  a
    deportation order in respect of the appellant under  Section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.  The appellant appealed against that  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge North  and  Mr  Yates)  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 23 December 2013, allowed the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was
    granted by Judge Nightingale on 16 January 2014.

 2. At the end of the appeal hearing at Stoke-on-Trent on 18 March 2014,  I
    notified the parties that  I  intended  to  dismiss  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.  I shall now give my reasons.

 3. The appellant had been convicted of possessing  a  Class  A  controlled
    drug (crack cocaine) with intent to supply and sentenced  to   fourteen
    months' imprisonment.  The appellant was  released  from  detention  in
    June 2010.

 4. The parties agree that the appellant has a continuing relationship with
    Miss Stacey Smith (hereafter Miss Smith). The couple have two children,
    R (born in 2006) and B (born in 2012). Ray Jr  has  a  number  of  very
    serious medical conditions, the details of which are  set  out  in  the
    determination at [7].   The  child's  condition  is  described  in  the
    voluminous medical evidence as "dilated cardiomyopathy with significant
    hypertrophy and poor functions  mitochondrial  complex  11  deficiency.
    Gross motor delay with significant contractures." The prognosis is that
    his  health  will  get  progressively  worse  and  will  become   "very
    vulnerable". The parties agreed that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect Miss Smith and the children to relocate  to  Zimbabwe  with  the
    appellant.  The Tribunal found [15] that the  appellant's  relationship
    with Miss Smith "was significant and had lasted for a number of years".
    It  found  that,  absent  the  existence  of  the  two  children,   the
    relationship between Miss Smith and the appellant would, per  se,  have
    led the Tribunal to allow the appeal.  The  Tribunal  noted  that  Miss
    Smith also  suffers  from  medical  difficulties  and  had  suffered  a
    breakdown.  However, it was  the  presence  of  the  children  and  the
    involvement of the appellant in their day-to-day lives, which  led  the
    Tribunal to find that the welfare of R,  in  particular,  required  the
    presence of the appellant.  It found that the removal of the  appellant
    would be likely to have a "serious detrimental effect"  on  R's  health
    and welfare. It found (by reference to paragraph 339A of HC  395)  that
    there are no other family member who was able to  care  for  R  in  the
    appellant's absence.

 5. The grounds of appeal take  issue  with  this  latter  finding  of  the
    Tribunal. The grounds noted that Miss Smith suffers  from  anxiety  and
    depression but also record that the Tribunal had found that Miss  Smith
    had been able to mange her own and the  children's  medical  conditions
    during the appellant's absence in prison. The grounds assert  that  the
    children's  grandparents  (notwithstanding  the  fact  that  they   are
    themselves unwell and receive Disability  Living  Allowance)  would  be
    able to provide emotional support.

 6. As Mr Draycott, for the appellant, submitted, the  Secretary  of  State
    is, in essence, arguing that, because Miss Smith coped previously  with
    the children during the absence of the appellant, she would be able  to
    do so again.  I agree with Mr Draycott that that analysis  ignores  the
    detailed findings of the Tribunal, in particular that the condition  of
    R is likely to deteriorate, possibly rapidly.  The  Tribunal  found  at
    [11] that, "the presence of the appellant is  of  assistance  to  [Miss
    Smith] in managing her condition and that his removal is likely to make
    it more difficult for her to maintain  mental  health".   The  Tribunal
    recorded that the appellant's partner's doctor was of the opinion  that
    the appellant's deportation would "have a significant notable impact on
    Stacey and her children".

 7. I find that the Tribunal  was  careful  to  have  regard  to  the  very
    particular factors in this case and its finding  that,  notwithstanding
    that Miss Smith had been able to cope in the  past,  the  physical  and
    mental welfare of Miss Smith and the children would be damaged  if  the
    appellant were to leave the country was clearly available  to  them  on
    that evidence.  The argument contained in paragraph (1) of the  grounds
    of appeal did not find favour  with  the  Tribunal.   Raised  again  on
    appeal, it is little more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Tribunal's
    findings.

 8. The second ground of appeal asserts that the Tribunal made  a  material
    misdirection in law. The grounds cite SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  550
    and MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 112 and assert,  whilst  acknowledging
    that there are "compelling circumstances relating  to  the  appellant's
    children", that it was unclear why those circumstances should be  "very
    compelling" in the context of  the  appeal  in  general.   The  grounds
    suggest that the Tribunal considered the problems of R, in  particular,
    "in isolation" and failed also to have  proper  regard  to  the  public
    interest concerned with the appellant's removal.

 9. I find that that ground of appeal does not have merit.   In  a  careful
    and well reasoned determination, the Tribunal has  considered  all  the
    circumstances both for and against allowing this appeal.  It is, in  my
    view, unfair to suggest that excessive weight has been attached to  the
    needs of the child R; the Tribunal, has, quite properly, considered the
    child's very serious and complex medical requirements  in  some  detail
    but it has also tackled the question of public interest head on (see in
    particular [14]).

10.  This  is  one  of  those  unusual  cases  where,  notwithstanding  the
    appellant's offending, the circumstances are so compelling as  to  meet
    the exacting  requirements  imposed  by  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Tribunal's determination  of  the  Immigration  Rules  appeal  and  its
    (admittedly brief) allowing of the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds  at
    [16] are free of legal error and I dismiss the appeal.

DECISION

11. This appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 24 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
