

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01604/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 June 2015                               |On 25 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                            RODNEY MANDA ILLUNGA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mohamed, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a determination of
       Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Coates promulgated on 23
       March 2015, which dismissed the appellant's appeal against
       deportation.




    2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  born
       on 12 November 1991.  The appellant was issued  with  an  Indefinite
       Leave to Enter the UK visa on 13 April 2004 on the basis  of  family
       reunion with his father.  The exact date of his arrival in the UK is
       unknown, although the appellant claims it was sometime in 2004.


    3. The appellant was convicted of Possessing an Offensive Weapon  in  a
       Public Place on 23 April 2010 and sentenced to a Community Order. On
       29 April 2011 he was convicted of possession of  a  controlled  drug
       for which he was fined.  On 18 July 2011 he was again  convicted  of
       possession of a controlled drug and sentenced to detention  for  one
       day.  On 25 October 2011 the appellant was convicted on  two  counts
       of possessing a class A drug with intent to supply and was sentenced
       to 45 months imprisonment.   In light of the latter  conviction  the
       respondent made a Deportation  Order  on  3  December  2012  and  an
       automatic  deportation  decision  served  on  the  appellant.    The
       appellant did not appeal this decision.


    4. On 29 April 2014 the appellant made an asylum claim.  The respondent
       refused that claim, together with  the  appellant's  application  to
       revoke the Deportation Order, on 5 August 2014.   The  asylum  claim
       was certified under  Section  72  of  the  Nationality,  Asylum  and
       Immigration Act 2002.  The appellant appealed those decisions  on  8
       August 2014.


    5. The ground of appeal before us was limited to the  ground  that  the
       Tribunal failed to make findings on risk as a criminal deportee,  to
       properly apply the decision in P (DRC) R (on the application  of)  v
       SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879 and to assess the objective evidence on return
       for criminal deportees.


    6. Subsequent to the grant of permission to appeal on 21 April 2015 the
       Upper Tribunal promulgated the  country  guidance  case  of  BM  and
       others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG  [2015]  00293
       (IAC).  The Presidential panel stated, at paragraphs  1 and 2 of the
       headnote:


       '1.  A national of the Democratic Republic of Congo ('DRC') who has
           acquired the status of foreign national offender in the United
           Kingdom is not, simply by virtue of such status, exposed to a
           real risk of persecution or serious harm or treatment proscribed
           by Article 3 ECHR in the event of enforced return to the DRC.


       2.   A national of the DRC whose attempts to acquire refugee status
           in the United Kingdom have been unsuccessful is not, without
           more, exposed to a real risk of persecution or serious harm or
           proscribed treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR in the event of
           enforced return to DRC.'


    7.  Mr Mohammed conceded that BM caused the appellant difficulties  but
       submitted that a  decision  with  different  facts,  postdating  the
       decision of Designated Judge Coates, could not be a complete  answer
       to the issues raised in the grant of permission to appeal.



























    8. However we were of the view that there was  merit  in  the  argument
       that Designated Judge Coates was entitled to give the limited weight
       that he did in paragraph 44 of  the  Decision  and  Reasons  to  the
       effects of the decision in P which the judge had already  noted,  in
       paragraph 38 of the decision, related to the  position  of  criminal
       deportees. The judge expressly stated at paragraph 44  that  he  did
       not  accept  the  submission  of  the   appellant's   representative
       concerning the effects of the decision in P.  It seemed to  us  that
       it was implicit therefore that his findings at paragraph 44  related
       to the position of criminal deportees.


    9. In any event, notwithstanding  our  findings  at  paragraph  8,  the
       alleged error of law cannot be material such that  the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside, given that the  Country
       Guidance case of BM shows that the claim has to fail.

          Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.


Signed:                                            Date: 24 June 2015



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson





