
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01446/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th December 2013                            |On 6th January 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              cephas matanhire

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Harrison, instructed by Halliday Reeves


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Batiste made following a hearing at Bradford on 30th September 2013.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  26th  June  1959.  He
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to make an automatic
    deportation order against him under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
    2007.  On 4th January 2010 the claimant was convicted of two counts  of
    obtaining property by  deception  and  one  count  of  fraud  by  false
    representations and  was  sentenced  to  fifteen  months'  imprisonment
    concurrently on each count.  The dishonesty concerned  holding  himself
    out as an immigration lawyer when he was not entitled to do so.

 3. The claimant arrived in the UK as a visitor on 3rd December  1999.   He
    made an unsuccessful application for leave to remain as a  student  but
    on 22nd November 2002 applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of a person settled in the UK and was granted  indefinite  leave
    on that basis on 7th May 2004.

 4. The claimant has three adult children from that  marriage  and  he  has
    four grandchildren.  It seems that he has also  been  in  a  long  term
    relationship with a lady called Joy Nyadete and they have four children
    together aged 19, 12, 10 and 1.  Three were born in  the  UK  and  have
    indefinite leave to remain here.  It was conceded at the  hearing  that
    it would not be proportionate to argue the case on the basis that  they
    should return with the claimant to Zimbabwe.

 5. The judge had the benefit of a social worker's report which he accepted
    as an independent assessment of the wishes  and  circumstances  of  the
    children.  It was clear that all three of the  older  children  have  a
    firm and settled wish for their father to remain  with  them  and  they
    spoke of the central role that he played in their lives.  The judge saw
    documents which spoke of behavioural changes in the older two  children
    when their father was imprisoned.

 6. The judge took a poor view of the claimant's evidence,  which  he  said
    was unimpressive, and he observed that in the sentencing remarks of the
    judge who imposed the fifteen months' sentence it was clearly his  view
    that the claimant was a devious and manipulative  individual.   He  was
    unable  to  accept  anything  that  he  claimed   without   independent
    verifiable evidence.

 7. The judge concluded that the claimant did not enjoy  family  life  with
    his wife or her  adult  children  which  could  not  be  maintained  by
    indirect means. There were however factors suggesting that the decision
    was not proportionate, chief amongst which were the best  interests  of
    his children with Joy.  He noted that the author  of  the  pre-sentence
    report was concerned that he  might  commit  similar  offences  in  the
    future but observed that the claimant had been at liberty for  well  in
    excess of three years and had not committed any further offences  which
    were in any event towards the lower end of  offences  which  carried  a
    mandatory deportation order.  They were financial rather than involving
    violence or sexual offences.

 8. On balance he concluded that,  placing  considerable  weight  upon  the
    impact of the claimant's removal on his children, it would be in  their
    best interests for them to grow up with  their  father  being  actively
    involved in their life, and it would not be proportionate for him to be
    removed.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds.
    First, the judge had erred in applying a two stage test in the  Article
    8 assessment and had misdirected itself in law.  The Secretary of State
    relies on MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 when  the  Court  of
    Appeal held that the new Immigration Rules  are  a  complete  code  for
    considering Article 8 claim.  Paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the Rules
    reflect the Strasbourg principles in a way that ensures  a  contingency
    of assessment. Given the comprehensive approach and the ability to take
    into account exceptional factors as set out in paragraph 397 to 398  it
    was an error of law to apply a two stage test.

10. The Tribunal should not have  simply  have  regarded  the  Rules  as  a
    starting point before moving on to  a  second  freestanding  Article  8
    assessment.  The new Rules have "enhanced judicial understanding of the
    public interest".  They are a clear expression of the  public  interest
    and the weight attached to it as set out by the Secretary of State  and
    endorsed by Parliament. The Tribunal must have regard to the nature and
    weight of that public interest as expressed in the Rules when assessing
    a claim under Article 8.  Had the Tribunal  adopted  this  approach  it
    would have assessed the case in line with the Immigration Rules and  it
    would have reached a different conclusion.

11. Second, in essence, the Tribunal had erred in law in  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for findings on material matters.   The  Tribunal  had
    found that the claimant was at low risk of reoffending but the offender
    manager had found him not to be remorseful and was likely to  reoffend.
    Whilst he may not have reoffended he has shown that he is still devious
    and manipulative as found by the Tribunal and  there  was  no  evidence
    that he had rehabilitated.

12. The Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons  why  the  claimant
    could  not  continue  family  life  from  abroad,  why   it   was   not
    proportionate for him to do so and why it was in  his  children's  best
    interests to remain in the UK.  Whilst the children may  be  negatively
    affected by his absence, it was of his own making and they could  learn
    to cope without him as they did when he  was  outside  the  UK  and  in
    prison. The social worker's report stated that the children experienced
    problems prior to 2009 which demonstrates that their problems were  not
    purely related to his absence during imprisonment.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pullig for the reasons stated
    in the grounds on 30th October 2013.

14. On 21st November 2013 the  claimant  served  a  comprehensive  Rule  24
    response arguing that there was no error of law in the judge's decision
    which should stand.



Submissions

15. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds but said he was not pursuing them with
    any vigour.

16. Miss Harrison relied upon her reply.

Findings and Conclusions

17. In MF the Court of Appeal held:

         "We would therefore hold that the new Rules are a complete code and
         that  the  exceptional  circumstances  to  be  considered  in   the
         balancing exercise involved the application  of  a  proportionality
         test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence.   We  accordingly
         respectfully do not agree with the UT that  the  decision-maker  is
         not 'mandated or directed' to take all  these  relevant  Article  8
         criteria into account (paragraph 38).

         Even if we were wrong about that it would be necessary to  apply  a
         proportionality test outside the new Rules as was done by  the  UT.
         Either way the results should be the same.  In these  circumstances
         it is a sterile question whether this is required by the new  Rules
         or it is a requirement of the general law.  What matters is that it
         is required to be carried out if paragraphs  399  or  399A  do  not
         apply.

         There has been debate as to whether there is a  one  stage  or  two
         stage test.  If the claimant succeeds on an application of the  new
         Rules at the first hurdle, i.e. he shows that paragraph 399 or 399A
         applies then it can be said he has succeeded on a one  stage  test.
         But if he does not, it is necessary to consider whether  there  are
         circumstances which  are  sufficiently  compelling  (and  therefore
         exceptional) to outweigh the public interest in deportation.   That
         is an exercise which is separate from a  consideration  of  whether
         paragraph 399 or 399A applies.  It is the  second  part  of  a  two
         stage approach which, for the reasons we have given, is required by
         the new Rules.    The  UT  concluded  (paragraph  41)  that  it  is
         required because the new Rules  do  not  fully  reflect  Strasbourg
         jurisprudence.  But either away it is necessary to carry out a  two
         stage process."

18.  It is therefore difficult  to  see  how  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    justified in relying on the decision in MF for the proposition that  it
    was an error of law for the judge to apply a two stage test.

19. It was conceded at the  hearing  that  the  claimant  could  not  bring
    himself within the family and private life consideration of  paragraphs
    399 and 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  recorded,  the
    concession having been made, that it was therefore  not  necessary  for
    him to consider the issue.  There is no error in that approach.   There
    is no support in the decision of MF that the judge  was  not  entitled,
    albeit that the new Rules were a complete code, not to have allowed the
    appeal on classic Article 8 principles in that case.

20. The court held:

         "Although we have disagreed with the UT on the question whether the
         new Rules provided a  compete  code  the  differences  between  our
         approach and theirs  is  one  of  form  and  not  substance.   They
         conducted a meticulous assessment of the factors weighing in favour
         of deportation and those  weighing  against.   As  they  said,  the
         factors in favour of deportation were  substantial.  They  properly
         gave significant weight to the serious view taken by the  Secretary
         of State of MF's criminality and his poor immigration history.   On
         the other  hand,  they  attached  considerable  importance  to  the
         interests of F.  The decision was finally balanced and  a  contrary
         decision would have been difficult for the Appellant to  challenge.
         But they did not take into account any irrelevant factors and  they
         did not fail to take into account any relevant factors.   In  these
         circumstances the UT were entitled to strike the balance in  favour
         of MF.  We can find no basis for interfering with their decision."

21. The same applies here.  This is a careful and considered  determination
    of all of the relevant issues.  The judge noted the reservations in the
    pre-sentence report and made his own  observations  on  the  claimant's
    character.  It cannot be said that he did not  take  into  account  the
    matters relied on in the grounds.  Ground two, as Mr  Diwnycz  candidly
    acknowledged, is a mere disagreement with the decision.  It was for the
    judge to decide whether the clear best interests  of  the  three  minor
    children  were  determinative  in  concluding  that  removal  would  be
    disproportionate, bearing in mind all of the other circumstances of the
    case, and there is no basis for interfering with that assessment.

Decision

22. The judge did not err in law.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
    dismissed.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

