
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
DA/01953/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 November 2017                         |On 21 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     O F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Gaisford, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 14 August  2017  Judge  Bird  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) allowed the appeal of  the  respondent  (hereafter  "the
    claimant") against the decision made by the appellant  (hereafter  "the
    Secretary of State" or "SSHD") on 26 April 2016 refusing his protection
    and human rights claim and maintaining a decision to  deport  him  from
    the UK.  The claimant is aged 44 and is a national of Nigeria. The SSHD
    did not accept his claim that he faced persecution on  account  of  his
    Christianity and on account of the risk his two daughters would face of
    FGM.  Nor did  the  SSHD  accept  that  the  claimant's  mental  health
    problems would place him at real risk  of  ill  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3. The deportation order followed his  conviction  at  Kingston
    Crown Court on 6 November 2011 for sexual offences  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to six years' imprisonment.  The three women he assaulted had
    learning difficulties.

2.   The particularly serious nature of his offending also led the  SSHD  to
    certify the claimant's protection claim under s. 72 of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

3.   At the hearing the claimant did not  give  evidence  in  light  of  the
    psychiatric evaluation  that  he  was  unfit  to  do  so.   The  appeal
    proceeded on submissions only.

4.   The FtT judge decided to uphold the s. 72  certificate  in  respect  of
    the asylum claim and to conclude commensurately that  he  was  excluded
    from humanitarian protection by the terms  of  paragraph  339D  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  However the judge decided to allow  the  claimant's
    appeal on Article 3 grounds on the basis that attempts to remove him or
    any removal would create a real risk that he  would  seek  to  end  his
    life.  In the course of giving her reasons for allowing the  claimant's
    appeal on this basis the judge sought support from the judgment of  the
    Grand Chamber  of  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  (ECtHR)  in
    Paposhvili v Belgium, App. No. 41738/10, 13 December 2016.

5.   The SSHD's grounds raise no challenge to the judge's findings that  the
    claimant was not entitled to asylum or humanitarian  protection.  Their
    focus was solely on her decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  3
    grounds relating to the claimant's mental health problems.

6.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal first submitted that if  the  guidance  in
    the authorities cited  in  her  refusal  decision  had  been  correctly
    applied the judge would have been bound to  dismiss  the  appeal.   The
    authorities principally relied on were the two Strasbourg cases, N v UK
    [2008] 47 EHRR, App. No. 41738/10; Bensaid v UK [2001] 33 EHRR; and two
    Court of Appeal cases, J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 (hereafter J) and Y
    v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  It was argued that the judge had  made  no
    findings that the appropriate  level  of  medical  care  would  not  be
    available if the claimant was  returned  to  Nigeria  as  indicated  in
    paragraphs 98-99 of the decision letter.  It was noted that  there  was
    no suggestion  the  receiving  country  would  refuse  treatment.   The
    grounds further placed reliance  on  the  authority  of  Richen  Turner
    [2012] EWHC 2426, a case in which the court found  no  Article  3  risk
    would face an applicant who had made three attempts at  self-harm.   It
    was submitted that the judge should  have  treated  the  mechanisms  to
    prevent self-harm as decisive rather than focusing  on  the  claimant's
    determination to self-harm.

7.   Finally the grounds stated  that  the  authority  of  Paposhvili  "runs
    counter to binding domestic case  law"  and  it  was  the  latter,  the
    leading authority of J in particular, that should prevail.

8.   The claimant sent a Rule 24  Response  which  in  turn  drew  upon  the
    lengthy skeleton argument the claimant's representatives  had  produced
    before the judge.  The essential points made in  these  documents  were
    that: the judge's findings  were  properly  and  expressly  founded  on
    uncontradicted psychiatric evidence; further or alternatively the judge
    correctly applied Paposhvili and was entitled to do so; in  any  event,
    the judge  evidently  considered  the  nature/availability  of  medical
    treatment in Nigeria and concluded that it was inadequate to avert  the
    risk of serious harm and/or suicide; in the  alternative  the  judge's'
    failure   to   make   detailed   findings    in    respect    of    the
    nature/unavailability/adequacy of  medical  treatment  in  Nigeria  was
    immaterial to the outcome.

9.   We heard helpful  oral  submissions  from  Mr  Duffy  and  Mr  Gaisford
    amplifying their respective written submissions.

10.  We remind ourselves that we  are  not  entitled  to  interfere  in  the
    decision of a FtT judge unless it is one vitiated by material error  of
    law.  That consideration  is  of  potential  importance  in  this  case
    because the SSHD's grounds raise no challenge to the  medical  evidence
    or to the judge's assessment of it.  The judge had before  her  several
    medical reports.  The main one from Professor Katona dated 17 July 2016
    stated that the claimant's history  showed  serious  suicide  attempts,
    suicidal ideation and significant self-harm from January 2012 until the
    present date.  It stated  that  the  claimant  "suffers  from  a  Major
    Depressive Episode, experiences great difficulty in coping with  stress
    and adverse events and exhibits impulsive and potentially dangerous and
    disruptive self-harming behaviour".   Professor  Katona's  opinion  was
    that the claimant would be at "high risk of suicide" once he  lost  all
    hope of being allowed to remain in the UK and  would  remain  at  "high
    risk" during the removal process and once he was back in Nigeria.

11.  Professor Katona also considered that  "[a]lthough  measures  (such  as
    hospitalisation, removal of means and close or consistent  observation)
    could be taken to reduce that risk, they would  not  eliminate  it  and
    could not be sustained long-term".  Professor  Katona  also  considered
    that the marked and continued deterioration in  the  claimant's  mental
    health would leave him unable to secure his basic needs.

12.  The judge also took into account a forensic psychiatric report from  Dr
    Boucher dated 3 September 2016 which noted  the  claimant's  "recurrent
    ongoing suicidal ideation, his multiple impulsive past suicide attempts
    [including the week before his interview with her] and his  history  of
    attempts without seeking assistance or  attention  afterwards".   These
    factors demonstrated that "he is a  high  and  chronic  suicide  risk".
    Return to Nigeria would increase his suicide risk.

13.  Before the judge were also a number of psychiatric  care  plans  of  Dr
    Gaete, Speciality Doctor in Psychiatry.  Dr Gaete's  opinion  was  that
    the claimant not being able to stay  in  the  country  "would  be  very
    detrimental  to  his  mental  health".  There  were  also   GP  records
    recording the claimant's suicide attempts, suicidal ideation, low mood,
    recurrent depressive disorder, a hanging attempt on 25 August 2015  and
    repeat entries of anxiety with depression;  letters  from  Dr  Sukhwai,
    Consultant  Forensic  Psychiatrist;  and  extensive  medical   evidence
    indicating the claimant suffered from erectile dysfunction and  urethra
    constriction, the latter for which he had had operations.  The  medical
    documentation recorded that the claimant's latest suicide  attempt  was
    in March 2017 resulting in hospitalisation for a period of two weeks as
    a psychiatric in-patient.

14.  Both Professor Katona and Dr Boucher considered  that  having  his  two
    children in the same vicinity helped to protect the claimant  from  his
    intrusive suicidal thoughts.

The judge's treatment of Article 3 risk

15.  The SSHD's grounds reveal a difference  of  view  between  the  parties
    regarding the status of Paposhvili as an authority.  We  shall  address
    that issue below, but we first of all consider  the  SSHD's  contention
    that the judge's assessment of Article 3 was inconsistent with  J.   If
    that contention is not made out, then the SSHD must palpably fail since
    in her view the approach taken by  the  ECtHR  in  Paposhvili  is  more
    favourable to the claimant.

16.  At [25]- [32] of J Dyson LJ set  out  the  applicable  principles  that
    should be applied in Article 3 cases involving suicide risk:

         "25. It should be stated at the outset that the phrase "real  risk"
             imposes a more stringent test than merely that the  risk  must
             be more than  "not  fanciful".  The  cases  show  that  it  is
             possible to amplify the test at least to the following extent.


         26.  First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum  level  of
             severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that the
             assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances of
             the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily be  serious"
             such that  it  is  "an  affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian
             principles to remove an individual to a country where he is at
             risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].


         27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:


                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).


             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."


         28.  Thirdly, in the context of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.



         29.  Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).


         30.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question of importance is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to be based is
             objectively well-founded. If the fear is not well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real risk that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.


         31.  Sixthly, a further question of considerable relevance is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has effective
             mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide. If there are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily against an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights.


         32.  We were shown a number of cases which were declared
             inadmissible at Strasbourg: A.G v Sweden Appl No 27776/95;
             Kharsa v Sweden Appl No 28419/95; Nikovic v Sweden Appl No
             28285/95; Ammari v Sweden Appl No 60959/00; Nasimi v Sweden
             Appl No 38865/02. The sixth factor which we have identified
             above was considered to be relevant in each of these cases.
             The fifth factor was considered to be an additional relevant
             factor in Kharsa, Ammari and Nasimi."

17.  Before proceeding to decide whether Judge Bird's decision was  vitiated
    by legal error it is useful to note some  of  its  main  features.  Her
    decision contains a number of findings negative  to  the  claimant.  As
    regards his asylum claim, she reminded herself that it  relied  on  two
    factors: that he has converted to Christianity  and  that  he  has  two
    daughters who would be at risk of further FGM if returned  to  Nigeria.
    The judge was prepared to discharge the s. 72 certificate but found his
    claim to have converted to Christianity and  to  be  at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment in Nigeria as a consequence to be unsubstantiated.  The judge
    also considered that the claimant had failed to substantiate his  claim
    that the children he claimed were his had been partially  subjected  to
    FGM before coming to the UK and that, in any event,  his  paternity  of
    the two children was not established.   She  also  concluded  that  the
    claimant had not been a victim  of  trafficking  (in  that  regard  she
    concurred with the Competent Authority who on 5 May 2016  had  rejected
    his claim to them to be a victim of trafficking).

18.  The judge  noted  the  parties'  different  submissions  regarding  the
    adequacy of mental health services in Nigeria.  She noted at  paragraph
    48 that the claimant's Counsel before her  (Ms  Francis)  had  produced
    background country information about this; and earlier at paragraph  20
    she had noted Ms Francis's submission that there was little evidence of
    adequate mental health services in Nigeria (there were said to be  only
    ten regional mental health centres there and only three were  providing
    relevant mental health support; there was also stigmatisation of mental
    health).  At paragraph 50 the judge noted the contrasting submission of
    the SSHD that there are medical facilities available to the claimant in
    Nigeria to deal with his mental health issues (earlier at paragraph  26
    she had recorded the submissions made by Ms Alvarez on  behalf  of  the
    SSHD that the claimant would be able to  access  medical  treatment  in
    Nigeria and had family who could return with him to Nigeria).

19.  We turn then to the SSHD's  grounds,  bearing  in  mind  that  for  the
    present we are concerned only with the issue of whether the judge  gave
    sustainable reasons for allowing the appeal on Article 3 grounds  based
    on the claimant's mental health difficulties. It is convenient to begin
    with the SSHD's contention that the judge made  no  findings  that  the
    appropriate level of care would not be available if  the  claimant  was
    returned to Nigeria.  That is correct as a description (and we consider
    the claimant's Rule 24 Response is wrong to suggest otherwise), but  we
    do not find that that that failure gave rise  to  any  error  since  at
    paragraph 50 the judge was  prepared  to  proceed  on  the  basis  that
    "[t]his may well be".  Put another way, the judge's decision  to  allow
    the appeal under Article 3 was not based at all on the availability  of
    adequate mental health services in Nigeria; it was based solely on  her
    assessment that such availability would not obviate the  real  risk  of
    suicide.

20.  We turn next to the SSHD's grounds placing reliance on [33]  of  J  and
    maintaining that it was the existence of mechanisms  to  prevent  self-
    harm that were normally decisive. Dyson LJ in J stated at [33]:


          "33.    In  relation  to  domestic  cases,  it  is  apparent  that
             Strasbourg applies a somewhat different  approach,  since  the
             concern to avoid or minimise the extra-territorial  effect  of
             the ECHR  (ie  the  third  of  the  6  factors  we  have  just
             mentioned) is absent. But the remaining  factors  are  equally
             applicable  in  domestic  cases.  The  sixth  factor   is   of
             particular significance. This is not  surprising  because  the
             signatories to the ECHR have sophisticated mechanisms in place
             to protect vulnerable  persons  from  self-harm  within  their
             jurisdictions. Although someone who is sufficiently determined
             to do so can  usually  commit  suicide,  the  fact  that  such
             mechanisms exist is an important, and often  decisive,  factor
             taken into account when assessing whether there is a real risk
             that a decision to remove an immigrant is in breach of article
             3."

21.  This analysis has to be read together with what is stated  at  [17]  of
    the same judgment:

         "17. ... In cases such as the present case the risk of a  violation
             of article 3 or 8 must be  considered  in  relation  to  three
             stages. By reference to the claim made  in  this  case,  these
             are: (i) when the appellant is informed that a final  decision
             has been made to remove him to Sri  Lanka;  (ii)  when  he  is
             physically removed by airplane to Sri Lanka; and  (iii)  after
             he has arrived in Sri Lanka. In relation  to  stage  (i),  the
             case is plainly a domestic case. In relation to  stage  (iii),
             it is equally clearly a foreign case.  The  classification  of
             the case in relation to stage (ii)  is  less  easy.  Since  in
             practice arrangements are made by the Secretary  of  State  in
             suicide cases for an escort it is safer to  treat  this  as  a
             domestic case."

        We shall summarise these three stages as pre-removal;  removal;  and
    post-removal.

22.  We asked Mr Duffy to elaborate this part of the challenge further.   He
    was not able to refer to any specific Home Office  policy,  but  stated
    that in his understanding there were procedures in place to ensure  the
    safety of persons who were a suicide risk both prior to the removal and
    during the removal process, including on the plane.

23.  Bearing in mind that on J principles there are three  different  stages
    that have to be considered in suicide cases [pre-removal;  the  removal
    itself; and post-removal] we see force  in  the  point  raised  in  the
    grounds regarding the judge's treatment of the first  two  stages.   At
    paragraphs 50-51 the judge appears to have simply seen the evidence  of
    the medical experts to be enough on its own establish a  real  risk  of
    treatment contrary to Article 3 at both  the  pre-removal  and  removal
    stages - e.g. at paragraph 50 she stated with approval that  "Professor
    Katona's opinion was that the [claimant] was not fit to fly  and  would
    not survive his flight to  Nigeria".   When  questioned  by  the  bench
    regarding this  matter,  Mr  Gaisford  pointed  to  Professor  Katona's
    statement in his report that although measures such as hospitalisation,
    removal of means; close or constant supervision might reduce  the  risk
    of suicide "they would not eliminate it and it could not  be  sustained
    in the long term".  We agree that this part  of  the  medical  evidence
    lends some evidential support to the judge's conclusions at  paragraphs
    51-52, but it cannot be said to be conclusive.  If such measures  would
    "reduce" risk, then it was possible they brought the level  down  below
    the threshold of sufficient severity needed to establish  a  breach  of
    Article 3.   The  judge  did  not  specifically  address  this  matter.
    Further, she did not specifically address what measures the Home Office
    were able to guarantee in cases such as this.  We  observe  that  in  J
    Dyson LJ stated at [62]:

         "62.     In our judgment, the IAT were entitled  to  take  judicial
             notice of the arrangements that, no  doubt  conscious  of  his
             obligations under section 6 of the 1998 Act, the Secretary  of
             State makes to escort vulnerable persons who  are  removed  to
             their countries of origin. This is  reflected  in  a  document
             that we were shown which  sets  out  Home  Office  policy  for
             dealing with claimants who threaten suicide."


24.  At the same time, we do not understand his lordship  to  mean  in  this
    passage that taking judicial notice of Home Office policy  for  dealing
    with claimants who threaten suicide necessarily absolves the SSHD  from
    providing assurances that such policy can be effectively implemented in
    every case. To  take  a  hypothetical  example,  suppose  that  on  the
    unchallenged medical evidence the individual  concerned  would  respond
    involuntarily to escorted removal by panic attacks  that  would  induce
    fits and asphyxiation; in such  a  scenario  the  policy  may  have  no
    practical utility. In this regard the SSHD's and Mr Duffy's failure  to
    provide any evidence to demonstrate that the UK immigration authorities
    would be able to put in place effective mechanisms to  prevent  suicide
    at the pre-removal and removal  stages  in  the  claimant's  particular
    case, was decidedly unhelpful.


25.  Even so, had the judge's decision turned on her assessment of the  pre-
    removal and removal stages we would have found her decision vitiated by
    legal  error  through  failure  to  address  the  question  of  whether
    effective mechanisms would have been available to obviate  the  serious
    risk of suicide at these stages in light of the  evidence  as  a  whole
    (which included that concerning Home Office policy as identified in J).

26.  However, it is clear  from  paragraphs  50  and  51  that  the  judge's
    conclusion was that the claimant's high risk of suicide would  continue
    at the third stage, once back in the country of origin.   Applying  the
    guidance in J we would make two observations.  First, if the judge  was
    right about this, then her assessment did  not  involve  any  deviation
    from the principles set out in J.  In essence a real risk of suicide on
    return to a country of origin can give rise to a breach of  Article  3.
    Second, on the evidence before the judge it was reasonably open to  her
    to find that on return "there is a real risk he will seek  to  end  his
    life".  Clearly from the judge's treatment of the issue of availability
    of mental health services in Nigeria, she was not here relying  on  any
    argument as to their non-availability.  She was relying simply  on  the
    compelling medical  evidence  showing  a  strong  causal  link  between
    removal and high suicide risk; and showing that the claimant is someone
    who (i) was profoundly mentally unwell, (ii) would not be in sufficient
    mental state to seek assistance from anyone or anybody in a position to
    help him avoid self-harm there; and  (iii)  would  also  be  unable  to
    secure his basic needs.

27.  We consider the above  analysis  to  sufficiently  address  the  SSHD's
    written grounds and Mr Duffy's elaboration  of  them.  Nevertheless  we
    consider it necessary to  explore  further  propriu  motu  whether  the
    judge's decision was in fact consistent with the principles set out  in
    J. Here several observations are in order.  We have  already  addressed
    the sixth factor of the test set out in J relating  to  the  "domestic"
    dimension encompassing stages 1 and 2 (see  above  paragraph  20).   We
    consider the judge can be criticised for not expressly confirming  that
    she understood that in a case turning on its "foreign" dimension (stage
    3 as set out in J at [17]) the threshold was a  very  high  one  as  it
    could not be said that the  harm  likely  to  befall  the  claimant  in
    Nigeria would be inflicted by state (or non-state) actors there. At the
    same time, she formulated the test she applied in  precisely  the  same
    terms as set out in Bensaid and approved by the Court of Appeal  in  J.
    Hence in our judgement the judge's assessment complied with the  first,
    third and fourth factors of the six-fold test set  out  in  J.  Dealing
    with the fourth factor, we have already observed  that  the  judge  was
    satisfied on the basis of  the  uncontradicted  medical  evidence  that
    there was a direct causal link between the proposed decision to  deport
    and the likely suicide back in Nigeria. were satisfied. Concerning  the
    fifth factor comprising the test in J regarding  whether  a  claimant's
    fear of ill-treatment in  the  receiving  state  is  objectively  well-
    founded, we construe the judge's decision to have clearly rejected  the
    claimant's claims that he had  objective  fears  about  persecution  on
    account of his  Christianity  and  on  account  of  the  risk  his  two
    daughters would face of FGM.  However, the  nature  of  the  claimant's
    case was not one that turned on such objective fear.  Rather it  turned
    on the objective nature of the real risk of suicide.

28.  We also gave consideration to whether it was consistent  of  the  judge
    to rely heavily on the medical evidence when some of that  appeared  to
    consider that one of the factors likely to place the claimant at a high
    risk was his alarm at being physically  separated  from  his  daughters
    (see above paragraph 16) - whereas the judge had found his paternity of
    these children had not been established.  Mr Duffy's submissions to  us
    did advance an argument on these lines. On analysis we  have  concluded
    that the medical opinions relied on by the judge nowhere  treated  such
    alarm as constitutive of the seriousness of  the  suicide  risk.   They
    were confined to observing that claimant's relative  proximity  to  the
    children in the UK  served  to  protect  him  to  some  degree  against
    impulsive attempts at suicide.  In any event, whilst the judge did  not
    find paternity established, she did  not  dispute  that  he  considered
    himself their father (we note as well that the SSHD accepted they  were
    his children).

The Richen Turner case

29.  In deciding this case we took account of the SSHD's submissions in  the
    Richen Turner case and Mr Gaisford's counter-submissions.  We  did  not
    find this case of assistance.  It did not seek to enunciate  any  legal
    principles distinct from those set out in  J  and  it  turned  on  very
    different facts involving a  person  whose  suicidal  ideation  on  any
    reading was much less severe than the claimant's  (see  paragraphs  42-
    48).

The Paposhvili issue

30.  In light of our conclusion that the judge's assessment did  not  breach
    binding UK authority, J in particular, it  is  unnecessary  for  us  to
    address the issue of whether her analysis of the two "developments"  in
    the Article 3 case law exhibited by Paposhvili involved legal error. We
    note the analysis of Paposhvili by UTJs Jordan and Pitt in   EA  &  Ors
    (Article 3 medical cases-Paposhvili not applicable-Afghanistan)  [2017]
    UKUT 445, 7 August 2015. In the instant case, however, the nub  of  the
    matter is that although the judge sought to  rely  on  Paposhvili,  her
    assessment did not  materially  rely  on  it.  In  our  judgement,  her
    assessment of the claimant's Article  3  circumstances  was  consistent
    with UK authority. It was based essentially on the particularly  strong
    and uncontradicted medical evidence that due to the  claimant's  mental
    state and high risk of suicide he would be unable  to  engage  with  or
    seek medical help in Nigeria and would be at real risk  of  ending  his
    life there through self-harm.

31.  In conclusion we would reiterate the point made  earlier  that  we  can
    only interference in a judge's findings of fact  if  they  are  legally
    erroneous. We must also have regard to the  ambit  of  the  grounds  of
    challenge to the judge's decision on which permission was  granted.  We
    do not find the SSHD's grounds made out even  after  interpreting  them
    broadly to include points not explicitly made.

Notice of Decision

31.  For the above reasons we conclude that the  judge  did  not  materially
    err in law.  Accordingly, her decision to allow the  claimant's  appeal
    on Article 3 grounds must stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 20 November 2017
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

