
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01813/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 7 July 2014                                |On 13 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                            Zana Abdullah Ismaeel
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an asylum appeal I see no need  for  anonymity  and  I
    make no order restraining publication.

 2. This appeal challenges the legality of a decision of panel of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's appeal against a  decision  of
    the respondent to make him the subject of a deportation order.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted because a First-
    tier Tribunal Judge thought it reasonably arguable  that  the  Tribunal
    had  reached  conclusions  for  legally  impermissible   reasons.    In
    particular, it was  said,  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  make  proper
    findings on background evidence suggesting that the appellant would  be
    at risk in the event of return  to  Iraq  because  of  his  westernised
    appearance, because it had interpreted medical evidence inappropriately
    and, possibly, had misunderstood the medical evidence it was given.

 4. For completeness I note that  the  original  grounds  provided  by  the
    appellant were in draft form and so, for example, perfectly  reasonable
    propositions  of  law,  were  supported  by  nothing  more   than   the
    instruction "insert case".  Whilst I am sure this  was  vexing  for  Mr
    Lemer, whose professional standards are better  than  this,  the  error
    caused no inconvenience  to  anyone.   Indeed  it  was  sufficient  for
    permission  to  appeal  to  be  granted  and  the  perfected  (formally
    "amended") version of the grounds was accepted without difficulty.

 5. The papers show that the appellant was born in 1982 and claimed  asylum
    in the United Kingdom on 27 August 2003 after  he  was  apprehended  by
    police in Kent.  He said he had entered the previous day.

 6. His  application  for  asylum  was  refused  and  a  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed on 9 December 2004.  His appeal rights against that  decision
    exhausted on 30 December 2004.  He was listed as  an  absconder  on  17
    March 2006.

 7. On 6 December 2010 at  the  Crown  Court  sitting  at  Newport  he  was
    sentenced to consecutive terms of  six  months'  imprisonment  for  the
    offences of possessing a false identification document with  intent  to
    deceive and also for failing to surrender to court in 2006.   According
    to paragraph 3  of  the  determination  "on  6  December  2010  he  was
    sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment  on   each   count   to   run
    concurrently".  As far as I can see that is just wrong.  The  sentences
    were clearly consecutive to one another which, presumably, is  why  the
    First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 36 of the  determination  referred  to
    his "twelve months' sentence".

 8. This is a case where I remind myself very firmly that an error is not a
    material error of law unless it might have made  a  difference  to  the
    outcome of the case.

 9. I consider carefully the grounds and submissions made.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal discounted the opinion of a witness, Julia Guest,  because  it
    did not regard her as an expert.  There is room for different  opinions
    about the meaning of the  word  "expert"  in  the  context  of  country
    conditions.  There is no recognised qualification or professional  body
    to which "country experts" can belong.  Each report must be  considered
    on its own merits and, where necessary, the expertise  of  the  witness
    evaluated.

10. I do not agree that it is a particularly telling feature of a  person's
    expertise that she has not visited a country recently or at  all.   The
    value of a visit can be much exaggerated.  A person can only perceive a
    very small slice of life over a relatively short period of time  during
    the course of a visit and it does not seem to me that  it  has  obvious
    advantages over careful analysis of reports of various  qualities  from
    various sources.

11. The particular criticism made here is that Ms Guest does not claim  any
    relevant  qualification.   She  describes  herself  as  a  "documentary
    filmmaker and photographer".  This is not  impressive.   She  does  not
    claim to be trained in producing publications subject  to  peer  review
    and whilst her personal conscience might encourage her to report things
    accurately I have no basis for assuming that any particular  event  she
    reported was typical or representative of the treatment  of  a  certain
    person or classes of people in a particular place.

12. This does not mean that she has nothing valuable to say.   One  of  the
    things that Ms Guest has done is to refer to respected reports, such as
    the Human Rights Watch Report, and draw from  it  points  of  interest.
    Whilst it may not have been necessary to have instructed  Ms  Guest  in
    order to consider such reports their weight is not  diminished  because
    they come from her rather than another route.

13. Ms Guest explained, and I accept, that there was for a time  a  fashion
    amongst some young people for wearing  their  clothes  and  hair  in  a
    particular way that came to be known as "Emo" which is a shortened form
    of the word  "emotional".  Whilst  the  people  who  chose  to  present
    themselves in that way may well have  intended  nothing  more  than  to
    adopt a passing trend, it was seen by some in Iraq as being linked with
    Satanism and attracted sharp opposition there.  Although the government
    disapproved it seemed disinclined or unable to  stop  vigilante  groups
    from harassing, attacking and, in extreme  cases,  killing  people  who
    offended their values by their dress.

14. Ms Guest suggested that the appellant would be at risk because he would
    not know where he could dress in a particular way.

15. I have taken particular care to read the statement of 5 February  2014.
    There the appellant expresses his preference for wearing silver  chains
    and bracelets in a way that would be unacceptable in Iraq, particularly
    amongst the Kurdish community.  It does not assert a need to  dress  in
    this way to give effect to his conscience.  It  is  not,  for  example,
    remotely like the case of a Sikh wishing to wear a turban.   I  do  not
    accept that it is within the scope of the Refugee Convention  to  offer
    protection to a person who risks disapproval because he prefers not  to
    dress in accordance with the fashion  of  the  community  in  which  he
    lives.  That might be personally frustrating but it is not  persecution
    and adverse consequences can be avoided by changing his  appearance.  I
    see no reason  to  find  that  this  appellant  would  not  change  his
    appearance, albeit possibly with ill grace.

16. I note that there is reference to a Daily Mail  report  that  90  Iraqi
    students were killed for having "strange hair and tight  clothes".   It
    is difficult to see how the figure of 90 is established but even if  it
    is anywhere near the truth it is shocking  to  think  of  people  being
    killed just because of their  clothes.   Nevertheless,  dressing  in  a
    particular way out of fashion sense  is  something  the  appellant  can
    reasonably be expected to avoid.

17. I reject the suggestion in the report that he might find himself so  at
    sea in the country to which he is returned that he will not know  where
    he can and cannot dress in a particular way and would  be  at  risk  of
    violence as a result.  Quite simply he could find out and not dress  in
    accordance with his tastes unless he knew it to be safe.   What  he  is
    complaining about here is a restriction on personal choice but, without
    more, he is not allowed protection against that.

18. I find no material error in the consideration of the expert evidence.

19. The second point taken in the grounds is  that  the  Tribunal  made  an
    impermissible medical finding.

20. Here I am satisfied that an error has been made out.  The determination
    reads as if the Tribunal found that he was  not  engaging  in  "talking
    therapy" when it is clear from paragraph 13 of the report that he did.

21. I cannot accept that there could be any proper  basis  for  challenging
    the view of Dr Ibbotson at paragraph 11(f) where he said:

         "It is my opinion that  he  would  attempt  suicide  if  this  were
         possible once he knew repatriation were imminent.  If he could  not
         succeed then he would do this at the first opportunity in  Iraq  as
         he sees that situation as totally hopeless."

22. However I do not see that this is of much assistance to  the  appellant
    in the context of this appeal.  The authorities in the  United  Kingdom
    are now alerted to this possibility  and  could  be  expected  to  make
    suitable arrangements in enforcing the appellant's removal if  that  is
    what they decide to do.  I do not doubt  that  medical  facilities  are
    less attractive in Iraq but the First-tier Tribunal noted evidence that
    treatment was available and  for  the  purposes  of  determining  human
    rights this is enough.

23. I acknowledge the evidence before  me,  particularly  the  report  from
    Doctors Without Borders in the form of a press release dated  30  April
    2013, commenting on the need for increased mental healthcare  in  Iraq.
    It would appear that  there  are  many  people  in  Iraq  whose  mental
    condition is not very  different  from  this  appellant's.   There  are
    people who have been traumatised by things that have happened  to  them
    in the upheavals that have taken place in that country in recent years.
     I do not accept that there is the complete  absence  of  medical  care
    that would be necessary in order to found a human rights claim.

24. The Tribunal gave satisfactory reasons for finding that  the  appellant
    was not at risk because  of  any  perceived  Ba'ath  Party  affiliation
    because of his father's political background.

25. It is also clear to me that the original decision of the  Secretary  of
    State was based on  a  finding  that  the  appellant's  deportation  is
    conducive to the public good because, in the Secretary of State's, view
    the offending has caused serious  harm  and  the  appellant  has  shown
    particular disregard  for  the  law.   He  is  therefore  eligible  for
    deportation.  It is absolutely plain that the Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to find that the appellant had shown particular disregard  for
    the law.  That is a very apt description  for  someone  who  commits  a
    criminal offence and then commits a further  criminal  offence  by  not
    attending court when required.  The concept of "serious harm"  is  more
    elastic but false document offences are serious because they  are  part
    of a relatively easy of a person  establishing  himself  in  a  country
    where he was not entitled to be.

26. In any event, once a proper reason has been identified by the Secretary
    of State for  finding  the  appellant  eligible  for  deportation,  the
    decision could only be appealed on  grounds  of  irrationality  to  the
    Administrative Court.  This Tribunal has no  power  to  interfere  with
    such a decision and on the  facts  before  me  I  certainly  would  not
    encourage any application.

27. I agree with Mr Lemer  that  paragraph  36  of  the  determination,  by
    referring to the appellant's "twelve months' sentence", appears  to  be
    considering paragraph 398(b) of  HC  395  but  that  is  not  material.
    Paragraph 399A applies where 398(b) or (c) applies.  The error has made
    no difference.

28. Essentially this is a story of a citizen of Iraq  who  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom irregularly and claimed asylum after being  arrested  on
    27 August 2003.  His application was refused and  a  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed.  He did not go home.  Rather he used illegal  means  to  try
    and  extend  his  stay  and  was  caught  and  convicted  and  then  he
    disappeared.  He was eventually caught in 2010 and sent to prison for a
    total of twelve months when he  was  warned  about  his  liability  for
    deportation on grounds of public good.  He made a further  and  equally
    unsuccessful asylum claim and  eventually  in  2013  was  told  of  his
    liability to being deported.

29. There is no avoiding the fact that the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  used
    language sloppily in a few places and this has given Mr Lemer a way  in
    to criticise the determination which  he  has  done  energetically  and
    professionally.  The fact remains that in my judgment the decision  was
    inevitable and the errors were immaterial.  The Tribunal was  entitled,
    maybe even obliged, to conclude that the appellant was not a refugee.

30. In my judgment the appellant is mentally ill but the Tribunal was right
    to find that the issues of mental  health  can  be  addressed  so  that
    removing him does not contravene his rights under Article  3  or  under
    Article 8.

31. The appellant does not raise any of the  arguments  such  as  having  a
    close life partner or a  minor  child,  which  can  sometimes  be  very
    weighty in an Article 8 balancing exercise. The appeal  cannot  succeed
    on human rights grounds on the evidence that is before the Tribunal.

32. I recognise that the situation in Iraq might be  thought  to  be  in  a
    state of flux. If there  is  new  evidence  available  concerning,  for
    example, the medical care that the appellant would get in Iraq then the
    appellant might want to consider a fresh application but  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal does not support a finding that could lead  to  the
    appeal being allowed.

33. It follows that although the appellant has identified problems  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal he has not shown any  material
    error of law and I dismiss his appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 February 2015               |

