
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
DA/01850/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice       |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 July 2016                        |     On 20 July 2016                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               The SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       PAULO CICERO FARIAS ALBERGHINI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bellara, Counsel instructed by Westerns
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on  7  May  2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  which  allowed  the  Respondent's
    appeal against deportation under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations) and Article 8 ECHR.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department as the respondent  and  to  Mr  Alberghini  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant raised a preliminary issue in his Rule 24 reply as to the
    timeliness of the respondent's challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. That  concern  was  settled  at  the  hearing  before  me  on
    provision of three pieces of evidence showing that the  respondent  did
    appeal in time on  18  May  2015  but  that  the  application  was  not
    registered correctly by the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The background to this matter is that  the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Italy, came to the UK in 2005 aged 10 years' old. He began offending as
    a minor and was first convicted in  2010  of  receiving  stolen  goods.
    Further convictions for affray, possessing Class A drugs, possessing an
    offensive weapon and travelling without paying a fare followed.

 5. His offending escalated. On  6  September  2013  he  was  convicted  of
    possession of Class A drugs with intent to supply and given a  sentence
    of 18 months in a Youth Offender Institution.  On 20  January  2014  he
    was sentenced for a further offence of possession of Class A drugs with
    intent to supply and given 2  years'  detention  in  a  Young  Offender
    Institution.

 6. Unsurprisingly, on 31 July 2014 the respondent made a deportation order
    against him.

 7. The appellant's First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  against  deportation  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie who heard evidence on  11
    March 2015 from the appellant, his mother and, her former  partner  and
    Mr  Dayes,  the  appellant's  case  worker  in  a   project   for   the
    rehabilitation of young offenders.

 8. In his decision Judge Devittie sets out  the  correct  EEA  deportation
    legal framework at [4]-[5].

 9. At [16] he found that the appellant was entitled to the second level of
    protection provided for by the legislation and that  "serious  grounds"
    had to be shown for the respondent to be able to remove him.

10. It is now well understood that in addition to the  application  of  the
    hierarchy of protection (set out at  [4]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision) the provisions of  Regulation  21  (5)  (identified  at  [5])
    require the decision to deport an EEA national to be based "exclusively
    on  the  conduct  of  the  person  concerned"  and  provide  that   the
    appellant's "previous criminal convictions do not in themselves justify
    the decision".

11. These provisions make the assessment in a deportation appeal concerning
    an EEA national quite different from a deportation appeal of a  non-EEA
    national under the Immigration Rules.

12. Having set out the sentencing remarks of the judge at  [2(ix)],  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie considered at [17] to [24] the question of
    whether the appellant's personal conduct could said to  be  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to a  fundamental  interest  of
    society to the "serious" level.

13. First, he addressed the NOMS report which was undated but shows that it
    was requested by the respondent on 24 February 2014.  The  NOMS  report
    found the appellant to be at a high risk of reoffending. Judge Devittie
    set out parts of it and parts of the respondent's view of that evidence
    at [17]-[21]. At [22 he concludes:

         "It is plain to see that the respondent has made a strong case  for
         the conclusion that the appellant's personal conduct constitutes  a
         present and sufficiently serious threat to the public interest; the
         respondent has relied on the detailed opinion, which  is  evidenced
         based, of the offender manager's report."

14. Judge Devittie considered the appellant's evidence at [23]:

         "Equally, if not more compelling, is the evidence  of  Paul  Dayes,
         the  director  of  a  youth   programme   that   engages   in   the
         rehabilitation of juveniles who are involved in gangs. I have found
         the written and  particularly  the  oral  evidence  of  Dayes  most
         impressive. I fully  accept  his  evidence,  that  if  he  did  not
         genuinely hold the opinion that the appellant has high prospects of
         rehabilitation, he would not have attended  court  to  give  formal
         evidence on that issue. I also attach significance to his evidence,
         that his  recent  exchanges  with  the  police  and  the  probation
         officers indicate that they too have come to share and  accept  his
         opinion that this appellant is  well  and  truly  on  the  path  to
         rehabilitation. This witness's evidence, as is the  case  with  the
         offender manager's report, was detailed, - for example,  he  states
         that the fact the appellant, on his own initiative, has  been  able
         to find employment, is yet a further indication that reinforces his
         belief as to the progress that the appellant continues to  make  in
         the rehabilitation process.  I  accept  Daye's  evidence  that  the
         appellant does have significant support not just from the probation
         system but also from his mother, whom he says  has  a  very  strong
         bond with him. He observes that the mother has not been able in the
         past to have a sufficiently strong influence on  the  appellant  to
         prevent him from continuing to embark on a life of crime. His  most
         recent offence however earned him the longest  prison  sentence  to
         date. The appellant states that the  length  of  his  sentence  has
         given him the opportunity to  seriously  reflect  on  his  life  of
         crime. Whilst not wishing to undervalue the opinion of the offender
         manager in any way, it cannot be contested, that there  are  strong
         indicators that  support  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is
         undergoing  a  genuine  rehabilitation  process.  These  indicators
         include the positive relationship he has had with Paul  Dayes,  the
         fact that he has fully complied with what has been required of  him
         from the probation service since his  release,  his  initiative  in
         seeking work, the confidence that Paul Dayes expresses in him -  to
         the extent that he has managed to secure  an  apprenticeship  which
         will enable him to gain a profession and permanent employment. I do
         not doubt this evidence and I believe that it will go  a  long  way
         towards enabling the appellant to rely on employment as a  form  of
         income and not revert to a life of crime. Paul Dayes' evidence that
         he has already found a placement for the appellant, and all that he
         is awaiting, is (sic) the decision of this  tribunal  is  a  factor
         that carries significant weight in my assessment of the  likelihood
         of the appellant re-offending

         23. In all the circumstances and having considered the evidence  in
         its totality I come to the conclusion that there is strong evidence
         to show a significant reduction in the risk of  the  appellant  re-
         offending since his release from prison and the compilation of  the
         offender manager's report. In my opinion the evidence does not show
         that his  personal  conduct  constitutes  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently serious threat to the public interest."

15. It is not arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider  the
    respondent's case against the appellant appropriately.  It  did  so  in
    terms at [17]-[21] and found it to be a  strong  case.  Judge  Devittie
    overtly kept it in  mind  during  his  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    evidence, referring to it twice, being consistent in his view  that  it
    was important and strong evidence.

16. It is also not arguable that the consideration at [23]-[24]  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons as to why, notwithstanding  the  NOMS  report,
    the First-tier Tribunal still did not find the appellant  to  pose  the
    requisite level of risk.  The  respondent  knows  why  the  appeal  was
    allowed. The First-tier Tribunal gave detailed reasons in  [23]  as  to
    why it preferred the more recent evidence of Mr  Dayes  which  included
    reference to the Probation Service's more recent view of the  appellant
    and the conduct of the appellant since release from detention.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a summary of Mr Dayes'
     oral evidence on this point at [13(i)]:

         "He [Mr Dayes] has worked closely with  the  appellant's  probation
         officer who is based at Walthamstow, and she too has not  expressed
         any concerns. She has in fact informed him that she is very pleased
         with the appellant's progress towards rehabilitation."

18. It was suggested before me that Mr  Dayes'  statements  concerning  the
    view of the police and probation service was "insufficiently analysed".
    That is really another way of saying that it was not open to the First-
    tier Tribunal to place weight on Mr Dayes' statement as to the position
    of the police and probation service. Nothing before me suggests that it
    was submitted to the judge that Mr Dayes' was not able or authorised to
    make those comments or that they were in some way unfounded.  There  is
    nothing to that effect before me now, the evidence  remaining  that  Mr
    Dayes worked closely with the Probation Service who had a positive view
    as to rehabilitation.

19. It is also not my judgement that it can be said that the  weight  given
    to the evidence of Mr Dayes by the First-tier Tribunal was not open  to
    it and perverse. It set out the evidence on which he relied on order to
    distinguish the risk of reoffending identified in the NOMS  report  and
    that was a decision reasonably open to him. It is not a  decision  that
    all judges might have reached but remains one  that  was  open  to  the
    judge who had the benefit of the oral evidence of  the  appellant,  his
    mother and Mr Dayes.

20. The respondent's challenge, when analysed, is really one of rationality
    or weight attributed by the First-tier Tribunal to  the  evidence.  The
    threshold for the former is a high one and it is well  understood  that
    weight  is  a  matter  for  the  judge.  My  conclusion  is  that   the
    respondent's challenge does not succeed.

21. It was  agreed  before  me  that  having  failed  on  this  ground  the
    respondent's second ground fell away as there was  no  requirement  for
    the First-tier Tribunal to go to  assess  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision by way of reference to integration, rehabilitation and so on.

22. As indicated to the appellant at the hearing, this decision is based on
    his known offences up until 2013. If further criminal offending of  any
    kind comes to light, he should be in no doubt that the respondent  will
    consider re-commencing deportation proceedings against him. It will  be
    very difficult for a  judge  in  future  to  find  even  the  "serious"
    threshold had not been met if the appellant showed  himself  unable  to
    abstain from criminal behaviour in future.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 18 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
