
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01615/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham City Centre Tower         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2016                            |On 23 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     sb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lane, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) we continue the anonymity order made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim and  to  the  minor
    children of the family.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal we refer to SB as the appellant and  to
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent,  reflecting  their  positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. We also refer to the main members of the appellant's family  circle  as
    follows:

         SLK, the appellant's partner

         X, son of SLK from a previous relationship, now aged 8

         Y, daughter of SLK from a previous relationship, now  aged  8,  X's
         twin sister

         Z, son of the appellant and SLK, now aged 3

         TM, mother of SLK

         GB, brother of the appellant

         R, sister of the appellant

         OS, cousin of the appellant

    We also refer to a former partner of the appellant as TN and to her son
    as TBN.

 4. This decision is the re-making of SB's appeal against the  respondent's
    decision dated 22 July 2014 to refuse to revoke  a  deportation  order.
    Under sections 32 (6) and 33 (2)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,  the
    Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation order unless removal of
    the foreign criminal would breach the Refugee Convention or  the  ECHR.
    The former is not relevant here as a certificate under  Section  72  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is in place  and  acts
    to exclude the appellant from the protection of the Refugee Convention.
    The appellant challenges the refusal to revoke his deportation order on
    the grounds that it would breach his rights under Articles2, 3 and 8 of
    the ECHR, however.

Chronology

 5. This matter has a somewhat lengthy history so, firstly, we set out  the
    main events in a chronology.

 6. SB is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  He was born
    in 1974.

 7. SB came to the UK on 26 January 2002 using a false passport. It is  not
    disputed that he entered illegally and has  remained  unlawfully  since
    then.

 8. SB claimed asylum shortly after coming to the UK. He was interviewed on
    12 March 2002 accompanied by a representative. The claim was refused by
    the respondent on 16  March  2002  and  the  appellant  was  placed  on
    reporting restrictions. On 2 April 2002 he appealed against the refusal
    of his asylum claim.

 9. On 2 April 2002 the appellant was admitted to New  Cross  Hospital  for
    what was thought to be  testicular  cancer.   He  was  treated  by  the
    removal of his left testicle and then discharged  from  hospital  on  4
    April 2002.  It was later discovered that he had been misdiagnosed  and
    that the operation may not have been required.  The  appellant  took  a
    medical negligence case against the hospital but,  after  a  number  of
    years of litigation, this was not successful.

10. SB's appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim was dismissed in  a
    decision dated 30 March 2004 by Adjudicator Billingham.  The  appellant
    was represented in that  appeal.  It  is  undisputed  that  no  medical
    evidence was presented at that time.

11. The appellant became appeal rights exhausted on  8  November  2004.  He
    failed to report on 5 October 2005 and he was recorded as an  absconder
    on 3 February 2006. He next came to the attention of the authorities in
    July 2006 and made a fresh asylum and human  rights  claim  on  23  May
    2007.

12. On 18 June 2008 the appellant was convicted of driving  otherwise  than
    in accordance with a licence and using a vehicle whilst  uninsured.  He
    was fined, disqualified for  6  months  and  his  driving  licence  was
    endorsed.

13. In December 2008 the appellant stopped reporting again and was recorded
    as an absconder on 19 February 2009.

14. On 4 March 2009 the appellant pleaded guilty to a charge of  conspiracy
    to  defraud.  On  17  July  2009  he  was  sentenced  to   27   months'
    imprisonment.  He  was  detained  under  immigration  powers  after  he
    completed his sentence on 28 December 2009.

15. Following the fraud conviction, the respondent made a deportation order
    against the appellant on 1 February 2010.

16. The appellant appealed against the making of a  deportation  order  but
    his appeal was dismissed in a decision dated 10 May 2010 of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McAll and Mr T A Jones  MBE.  The  appellant  had  legal
    advice during the progress of the appeal but his legal  representatives
    came off the record on the day  before  the  hearing.  He  attended  in
    person and informed the Tribunal that he did not  did  not  require  an
    interpreter. It is undisputed that no medical evidence was provided  in
    support of the second appeal. At that time, in his Article 8 claim,  SB
    relied on a relationship with TN,  a  British  national  with  whom  he
    maintained he had a child, TBN, born on 28 June 2008.

17. On 7 July 2010 the appellant submitted a Detention Rule  35  report  in
    which he claimed to be a victim of torture. The  respondent's  response
    was that detention could be maintained.

18. The appellant became appeal rights exhausted with regard to his  appeal
    against the deportation order on 29 September 2010.

19. On 21 October 2010, with the assistance of  legal  representatives,  SB
    made further  submissions.   Those  submissions  were  supported  by  a
    medical report provided by Dr Katharine Wrigley dated 15 October  2010.
    On 8 November 2010, the respondent decided that the further submissions
    did not amount to a fresh claim. The appellant made further submissions
    on 15 December 2010.

20. On 2 August 2011, the appellant was granted bail. He  was  notified  of
    his liability  to  deportation  and  on  21  October  2011  returned  a
    questionnaire and additional representations. The representations again
    relied on his  relationship  with  TN  and  their  child  TBN.  Another
    liability to deportation questionnaire was issued to the  appellant  on
    18 May 2012 and, again with the assistance of legal representation,  he
    returned it on 13 June 2012. He again relied on his  relationship  with
    TN and TBN, stating that they lived together and enclosing a letter  of
    support from TN dated 29 May 2012.

21. On 22 June 2012 the respondent sought clarification of the  appellant's
    asylum claim from his legal representatives. A response was provided on
    6 November 2012 and additional representations were made on 21 November
    2013.

22.  The appellant was arrested on 1 October 2013 in relation to a criminal
    matter, held on remand  and  went  into  immigration  detention  on  18
    November 2013.  He  was  granted  bail  on  4  December  2013.  In  the
    application for bail, the appellant relied on a new relationship,  that
    with SLK. She provided a letter dated 20 November 2013  in  support  of
    bail stating that they had been in a relationship for two  and  a  half
    years and that she was pregnant with the appellant's  child.  She  gave
    birth to their son, Z, on 17 December 2013.

23. On 18 December 2013 the appellant was  convicted  of  three  counts  of
    handing stolen goods and on 6  January  2014  was  sentenced  to  eight
    months' sentence suspended, an eighteen month supervision order, twelve
    months' unpaid voluntary work with a requirement for 120 hours and �100
    victim surcharge.

24. On 23 April 2014 the appellant's legal representatives  were  asked  to
    provide further information on his  asylum  claim  and  he  provided  a
    response dated 6 May 2014 together with a questionnaire and  additional
    representations  which  relied  on  the  relationship  with  SLK,   the
    appellant maintaining they had been together  since  August  2011.  The
    respondent granted the appellant permission to work on 29 May 2014.

25. On 22 July 2014 the respondent made a decision to refuse to revoke  the
    appellant's deportation order. That decision  and  a  "reasons"  letter
    were served on the appellant on 29 July 2014.  It is that decision that
    gave rise to these  proceedings  as  the  appellant  lodged  an  appeal
    against it on 12 August 2014. He has been  represented  in  this  third
    appeal other than for a short period at the end of 2015.

26. In a decision dated 1 December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shanahan
    upheld the respondent's Section 72  certification  of  the  appellant's
    asylum claim and this has not been challenged further.  The  First-Tier
    Tribunal allowed the appeal under Article 3 ECHR, however, on the basis
    that SB was a foreign national offender who would be at risk because of
    that status on return to DRC.

27. The respondent challenged the decision under Article 3 ECHR  and  in  a
    decision dated 6 March 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal as case law  and  country  evidence
    showed that there was no automatic risk to a foreign national  criminal
    if returned to DRC.  The appeal was adjourned to be re-made. The  error
    of law decision is attached at Appendix A.

28. A hearing listed for 22 October 2015 was adjourned as  the  appellant's
    partner, SLK, was unable to  attend.  A  hearing  on  2  December  2015
    adjourned as the appellant  was  not  legally  represented.  A  hearing
    listed for 8 February 2016 was adjourned in order for the current legal
    representatives to prepare the case.

29. In August 2016 SB moved out from  the  home  he  shared  with  SLK  but
    continued to visit regularly in order to  assist  in  bringing  up  the
    children of the family.

30. The appeal was heard by us on 19 October 2016.

Preliminary Issue

31. At the hearing before us Mr Lane made an application for Upper Tribunal
    Judge Pitt to recuse herself. The basis for the application was that  a
    complaint had been made by the appellant and SLK  because  of  comments
    showing bias, alleged to have been made by the judge at the hearing  on
    21 December 2015. The panel had not seen the response to the  complaint
    but Mr Lane confirmed  that  it  had  been  rejected  in  full  by  the
    President of the Tribunal and  that  nothing  in  the  refusal  of  the
    complaint suggested any requirement for Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  to
    recuse herself from the appeal. The Tribunal adjourned briefly in order
    to consider the application. We determined that where the complaint had
    not been made out there was nothing requiring recusal, and proceeded to
    hear the appeal.

Article 2 and 3 ECHR Claim

32. The appellant maintains that  he  will  face  serious  mistreatment  on
    return to DRC. His arguments refer to both Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR
    but they are essentially the same claim and for the  purposes  of  this
    decision we refer to Article 3  by  way  of  covering  both.  The  core
    account the appellant relies on now is the same as  that  he  presented
    when he arrived in the  UK  in  2002.  There  have  been  two  Tribunal
    decisions on that claim already, both finding that his account was  not
    credible. Following  Devaseelan  v  SSHD  [2002]  UKIAT  00702*,  those
    determinations are our starting point and we  considered  the  material
    findings from them first.

    Previous Tribunal Decisions

33. The first decision is that of  Adjudicator  Billingham  from  30  March
    2004. The appellant's claim is set out in paragraphs 7.1 to 7.5 of  the
    decision, as follows:

         "7.1 The appellant lived in Kinshasa  in  the  DRC.   He  had  been
             educated  up  to  secondary  level  but  later  trained  as  a
             mechanic.  In early 2001, he said that he had  met  a  certain
             Commander Mosese through a friend.  The Commander asked him if
             he would like to work for him by taking secret documents to  a
             friend of his in Brazzaville, the other side of the  river  in
             the Congo Republic.  The appellant said that  as  he  believed
             the DRC was in need of political change he was willing  to  go
             along with it as he understood that the documents  were  about
             the rebel cause.

         7.2  In his statement, the appellant went  through  the  procedures
             for  obtaining  the  documents  and   transporting   them   to
             Brazzaville.  He said that once a week he went to  the  office
             of the Commander and picked up  the  folio  of  documents  and
             would hand in his ID card in exchange for a visa to enter  the
             Congo.  On return, he would be paid $70 in local currency  and
             have his ID card returned  once  it  was  confirmed  that  the
             mission had passed without  problems.   This  continued  until
             August 2001 when the appellant said that he was stopped by DRC
             soldiers who searched him.  When they found the documents they
             beat him and punched and kicked him.  Chained, he was put in a
             cell where he was tortured and interrogated until a warder who
             was responsible for feeding him gave him a warder's uniform to
             put on and he escaped.

         7.3  Outside the police station, he ran until  he  met  a  man  who
             spoke Portuguese.  The man invited him to go with him  to  his
             house after two hours' walk and a car ride.  On  25/1/02,  the
             man took the appellant by car  to  Ndjili  Airport  where  the
             appellant took a plane  to  another  country  before  boarding
             another plane which took  him  to  the  UK.   The  man  had  a
             passport for him and stayed with him until he arrived  in  the
             UK.  In poor French, the appellant thought that the  man  said
             that he knew Commander Mosese.  The  appellant  believed  that
             his life would be in danger if he returned to the DRC since he
             had assisted the rebels.

         7.4  In interview he explained that he had belonged  to  the  Jeune
             pour D�mocratie and had met the Commander there.  He explained
             the objects of the parties such as free  education.   He  also
             said that in the documents the soldiers who arrested  him  saw
             the name Bemba who was a rebel leader.  He also showed a  scar
             he had received during the beatings.  He asserted that he went
             to  get  the  documents  on  a  Thursday  and  returned   from
             Brazzaville on a Saturday.  He said that he escaped the  night
             of 24/1/02.

         7.5  In evidence to the Court, the appellant said that he  met  the
             Commander in a  restaurant  in  the  19th  Avenue  in  Limite,
             Kinshasa.  He said that he thought it was either Wednesday  or
             Thursday when he went to collect the documents.  He said  that
             on return he did not make direct contact  with  the  Commander
             but made the contact through a friend.  He denied that he  had
             run away after leaving the prison but after a walk there  were
             people in  a  jeep  waiting  for  him  after  he  had  changed
             clothes."

34. Adjudicator Billingham did not find the  appellant  credible,  however.
    The main negative credibility findings on the claim  are  contained  in
    paragraph 11, as follows:

         "On the issue of persecution and  ill-treatment  I  find  that  the
         notable discrepancy in the appellant's story, that he obtained  the
         documents variably from the  Commander  in  his  office  and  in  a
         restaurant, cast doubt over his story as a  whole  since  it  is  a
         fundamental difference.  If  the  Commander  wished  to  cover  his
         tracks, he  would  not  have  had  any  contact  at  all  with  the
         appellant, a fact which the appellant acknowledges when he says  in
         one of his versions that a friend was the go between  him  and  the
         Commander.  This does not appear in the first version of the story.
          I am also satisfied that if he was arrested at all, it  would  not
         have been for his alleged political  allegiance  but  for  carrying
         illegal documents.  Although  he  gives  vague  details  about  the
         beatings he had, the fact that he may have been  a  danger  to  the
         Commander by anything he said, is not explained other than he  said
         nothing.  If the papers had been really incriminating,  then  I  do
         not consider that the appellant would have got  out  of  prison  so
         easily if at all and  the  commander  would  not  have  been  in  a
         position to save him afterwards as he claims.   The  implausibility
         of his story is further compounded by the Portuguese  man  who  met
         him outside the prison.  The scarring to  his  leg  proves  nothing
         about how he obtained it.  I find the story of the appellant to  be
         incredible and I do not consider that he was at risk because of his
         political beliefs or that he would be arrested on return."

35. The appellant's second appeal, that against the deportation order,  was
    dismissed in a decision dated 10 May 2010 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    McAll and Mr T A Jones MBE.

36. In that appeal the appellant presented a similar case to that  set  out
    above.  The First-tier Tribunal indicated correctly at paragraph 18  of
    their decision that under the ratio of Devaseelan* they  were  required
    to take the decision of Adjudicator Billingham as  the  starting  point
    for the assessment of the asylum claim.

37. The First-tier Tribunal panel found as follows, in paragraphs 19 to  22
    of the determination:

         "19. Our starting point therefore is the  findings  of  Adjudicator
             Billingham.  In his determination at paragraph 11  he  states,
             'I find the story of the appellant incredible  and  I  do  not
             consider that he was at risk because of his political  beliefs
             or that he would be arrested on return'.  The appellant argued
             before the Adjudicator that he was a  member  of  a  political
             group known as the 'Jeunes pour D�mocratie',  the  Adjudicator
             was not satisfied the group even existed and even if it did he
             found that the level at which the appellant  was  claiming  to
             have operated at which that would not bring him to the adverse
             attention of the DRC authorities.  We have been  told  by  the
             witness, Ms Shako that the appellant's parents are  alive  and
             living in Kinshasa which would suggest that  they  are  of  no
             interest to the authorities.  The appellant  has  produced  no
             evidence that Jeunesse pour Democratie exists  despite  having
             seven years to prepare his case.  Whilst we would accept  that
             Jeunesse pour Democratie may exist we are not  satisfied  that
             this appellant has ever played any part in  that  organisation
             or that he would be of interest to the DRC authorities.

         20.   In  his  asylum  claims,  and  before  the  Adjudicator,  the
             appellant maintained his claim that after  escaping  from  the
             detention centre he met a white man who came towards  him  and
             was  speaking  Portuguese  and   the   appellant   could   not
             communicate with him.  The appellant explained  that  the  man
             used hand gestures to indicate what he wanted the appellant to
             do and by this method they made their way to  the  man's  car.
             The appellant later added that the man spoke a  little  French
             but it was very poor and he could not understand him properly.
              Despite these handicaps the appellant and the man made  their
             way from  the  DRC  to  the  UK  passing  through  immigration
             controls in the DRC, Portugal and the UK (B20).  The appellant
             stated that he thought the man was trying to tell him that  he
             knew Commander Mosese.   The  Adjudicator  made  reference  to
             these claims  in  his  determination  and  described  them  as
             'implausible' (F5).  Along with this evidence we  now  have  a
             letter from the appellant written to the  respondent  when  he
             was considering making the deportation order  (I2).   In  that
             letter the appellant writes,  '....my  father's  close  friend
             smuggled me out of the country and later assisted in  bringing
             me to the UK'.  That statement is a clear contradiction of the
             earlier asylum claim and we find the appellant is  fabricating
             his evidence and his account of how he came to be in the UK.

         21.  The appellant told the author of the PSR [Pre-Sentence Report]
             that his father had been killed in the DRC and it is  recorded
             that the appellant became very tearful  during  the  interview
             for that report when discussing his parents; so much  so  that
             the author of the report decided it was appropriate to take  a
             break to allow the  appellant  to  compose  himself.   In  the
             appellant's letter at I2 the appellant writes, '....my  family
             supported the opposition  party,  as  a  consequence  both  my
             parents and a few members of my family were killed'.   At  the
             hearing the witness Ms Shako told us that the appellant has  a
             sister in South Africa and parents  living  in  the  DRC.   We
             asked where did  the  parents  live  and  she  said  Ozone  in
             Kinshasa.  The witness informed us that she had been  speaking
             with the appellant's parents just a matter of a day or two ago
             as they had been robbed and wanted their relatives in  the  UK
             to know.  That evidence totally  contradicts  the  appellant's
             claim that his parents died in 1995.  We asked the name of the
             appellant's sister in South Africa and we are told that it was
             Cecile.  The appellant did make reference  to  another  sister
             but he gave her whereabouts as being Leeds and  said  she  was
             called Annie Njoyshaku.  We find the  appellant's  credibility
             is damaged by the contradictions in the evidence which  go  to
             the core issues in his claim namely the authorities'  attitude
             towards his family and his family's activities in the DRC.  We
             find the appellant has fabricated his asylum claim.

         22.  The appellant claims he is now  in  possession  of  an  arrest
             warrant.  We gave him leave to serve that document by 30 April
             2010.  The appellant has failed to do that.  Even  if  such  a
             document had been produced we would have had doubts about  its
             reliability  given  our  findings  as   to   the   appellant's
             credibility, the fact that he has been  convicted  along  with
             others of conspiracy and  part  of  that  conspiracy  involved
             false instruments and our findings that he and his family have
             not been involved in politics in the DRC.  The  appellant  has
             in any  event  failed  to  produce  the  document  for  us  to
             consider."

    Current Claim

38. The applicant submits that, notwithstanding the  findings  of  the  two
    previous Tribunal decisions, we should find his  account  credible  and
    that he is at risk of mistreatment on return to DRC.  To  support  that
    submission, he has provided new evidence that was not before either  of
    the previous Tribunals. The new materials include a  witness  statement
    from the appellant  dated  30  September  2016,  two  physical  medical
    reports and a psychology report.

39. As above, Devaseelan* provides that the two previous determinations are
    our starting point. That case also provides guidelines  as  to  how  to
    approach a situation such as this where there is  material  potentially
    capable of leading to a different outcome. As this is a  critical  part
    of the assessment we had to  conduct,  we  referred  ourselves  to  the
    details of the "Devaseelan* guidelines which are set out at  paragraphs
    37 to 40 of that decision:


        "1   The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
             starting-point.  It is  the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
             Appellant's status at the  time  it  was  made.   In  principle
             issues such as whether the Appellant was properly  represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.


          2. Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's determination can
             always be taken into account by  the  second  Adjudicator.   If
             those facts lead the second Adjudicator to the conclusion that,
             at the date of his determination and  on  the  material  before
             him, the appellant makes his case,  so  be  it.   The  previous
             decision, on the material before the first Adjudicator  and  at
             that date, is not inconsistent.


          3. Facts happening before the  first  Adjudicator's  determination
             but having no relevance to the issues before him can always  be
             taken into  account  by  the  second  Adjudicator.   The  first
             Adjudicator will not have been concerned with such  facts,  and
             his determination is not an assessment of them.


          4. Facts personal to the Appellant that were not  brought  to  the
             attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were relevant
             to the issues before him,  should  be  treated  by  the  second
             Adjudicator with the greatest circumspection.  An Appellant who
             seeks, in a later appeal, to add to the available facts  in  an
             effort to obtain a more favourable outcome is properly regarded
             with  suspicion  from  the  point  of  view   of   credibility.
             (Although considerations of credibility will not be relevant in
             cases where the existence of  the  additional  fact  is  beyond
             dispute.)  It must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  first
             Adjudicator's determination was made at a time  closer  to  the
             events alleged and in terms of both  fact-finding  and  general
             credibility assessment would tend to have the  advantage.   For
             this reason, the adduction of such  facts  should  not  usually
             lead to any reconsideration of the conclusions reached  by  the
             first Adjudicator.


          5. Evidence of other facts - for example country  evidence  -  may
             not suffer from the same concerns as to credibility, but should
             be treated with caution.  The reason is different from that  in
             (4).  Evidence dating from  before  the  determination  of  the
             first Adjudicator might well have been relevant if it had  been
             tendered to him: but it was not, and he made his  determination
             without it.  The situation in the Appellant's  own  country  at
             the time of that determination is very unlikely to be  relevant
             in deciding whether the Appellant's removal at the time of  the
             second  Adjudicator's  determination  would  breach  his  human
             rights.  Those  representing  the  Appellant  would  be  better
             advised  to  assemble  up-to-date  evidence  than  to  rely  on
             material that is (ex hypothesi) now rather dated.


          6. If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on  facts
             that are not materially different from those put to  the  first
             Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by  what  is  in
             essence the same evidence as that available to the Appellant at
             that time, the second Adjudicator should regard the  issues  as
             settled by the first Adjudicator's determination and  make  his
             findings in line with that determination rather  than  allowing
             the matter to be re-litigated.  We draw attention to the phrase
             'the same evidence as that available to the Appellant'  at  the
             time of the first determination.  We have  chosen  this  phrase
             not only in order to accommodate guidelines (4) and (5)  above,
             but also because, in respect of evidence that was available  to
             the Appellant, he must be taken to have made his choices  about
             how it should be presented.  An Appellant cannot be expected to
             present evidence of which he has  no  knowledge:  but  if  (for
             example) he chooses not to give  oral  evidence  in  his  first
             appeal, that does not mean that the  issues  or  the  available
             evidence in the second appeal are rendered any different by his
             proposal to give oral evidence (of  the  same  facts)  on  this
             occasion.

        7.   The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4)  and  (6)
             is greatly reduced if there is some very good  reason  why  the
             Appellant's failure to  adduce  relevant  evidence  before  the
             first Adjudicator should not be, as it were, held against  him.
             We think such reasons will be rare.   There  is  an  increasing
             tendency to suggest that unfavourable decisions by Adjudicators
             are brought about by error  or  incompetence  on  the  part  of
             representatives.      New     representatives     blame     old
             representatives; sometimes representatives blame themselves for
             prolonging the litigation  by  their  inadequacy  (without,  of
             course, offering the public any compensation for the wrong from
             which they have profited by fees).   Immigration  practitioners
             come  within  the  supervision  of  the  Immigration   Services
             Commissioner under part V of the 1999 Act.   He  has  power  to
             register,  investigate  and  cancel  the  registration  of  any
             practitioner, and solicitors  and  counsel  are,  in  addition,
             subject to  their  own  professional  bodies.   An  Adjudicator
             should be very slow to conclude that an appeal  before  another
             Adjudicator has been materially affected by a  representative's
             error or incompetence; and such  a  finding  should  always  be
             reported (through arrangements made by the  Chief  Adjudicator)
             to the Immigration Services Commissioner.


         Having said that, we do accept that there will be occasional cases
             where the circumstances of the first appeal were such  that  it
             would be right for the second Adjudicator to look at the matter
             as if the first determination had never been made.   (We  think
             it unlikely that the second Adjudicator would, in such a  case,
             be able to build very meaningfully on the  first  Adjudicator's
             determination; but we emphasise that, even in such a case,  the
             first determination stands as the determination  of  the  first
             appeal.)"

40. The comments in guidelines 4 and 7 are of particular relevance  to  our
    assessment. We are  directed  to  approach  evidence  relevant  to  the
    appellant's claim that was not brought to the attention of the previous
    Tribunals "with the greatest circumspection". The  first  determination
    of the appellant's claim was undoubtedly made at "a time closer to  the
    events alleged" so "would tend to  have  the  advantage"  and  the  new
    evidence "should not usually lead to any reconsideration". We also bore
    in mind in our assessment that guideline 7 makes specific  comments  on
    the caution that should be  taken  in  finding  that  a  case  was  not
    properly made out because of inadequacies of previous representatives.

41. However, SB now argues that  he  has  new  evidence,  which,  following
    paragraph 7 of the Devaseelan* guidelines,  amounts  to  a  "very  good
    reason" for his claim not having been put forward  as  it  should  have
    been in the past. He maintains that his is  one  of  the  "rare"  cases
    identified in guideline 7 where we should look at his case  as  if  the
    two previous Tribunal determinations had never been made.

42. In brief, the appellant maintains is that he was unable to put  forward
    a credible case in his earlier claims  as  he  was  in  pain  from  his
    mistreatment in DRC and experiencing mental health problems. He  relies
    on the medical and psychology reports to support  that  submission  and
    also his claim to have been tortured in DRC because  of  his  political
    profile.

43. We set out below our reasons for finding that  the  appellant  has  not
    shown that the two  previous  determinations  should  not  be  taken  a
    starting point and that we should not follow the  findings  therein  on
    the appellant's credibility. The new material is extensive and required
    careful consideration. Our reasons for finding that it did  not  assist
    the appellant are somewhat extensive as a result. It is appropriate  to
    indicate here that when assessing the material that was before  us,  we
    did so holistically, considering each individual document  against  and
    with the evidence as a whole before reaching any  conclusion.  We  must
    start to set out our reasons somewhere and do so with  the  appellant's
    most recent witness statement.  We did not make our findings on  it  or
    on any of the other evidence discretely or without consideration of all
    of the other evidence.

    Witness statement dated 30 September 2016

44. The  appellant's  statement  dated  30  September  2016  explains  what
    happened after he arrived in the UK and claimed asylum and how  he  was
    unable to present his case properly, stating at paragraphs 38 - 41:

         "38. ... I was in  excruciating  pain  until  the  removal  of  the
         testicle and this would have affected me at my screening interview,
         my substantive interview (which took place on 12 March  2002),  and
         my initial appointments with a lawyer. I was terrified when I first
         arrived and couldn't think straight, and was racked with pain.

         39. I  can't  really  remember  anything  at  all  about  my  early
         interviews, I was just in  pain.  I  couldn't  tell  them  anything
         straight. It is quite  possible  that  I  confirmed  whatever  they
         suggested to me because I just wanted to get interview  (sic)  over
         with. I think this probably accounts in large part  for  the  early
         accounts of my case  being  wrong.  I  think  there  were  probably
         difficulties  with  the  interpreters  too.  I  didn't  trust   the
         interpreters. I was generally very distrustful at the time  because
         of my recent experiences.

         40. My time in detention in the DRC was worse than hell and I think
         about it frequently and it takes over. I have never had counselling
         about this. I feel ashamed to discuss it with  people  I  know.  It
         leaves me with problems in my head. I know that my personality  has
         changed - I don't socialise as I used to. I go out,  but  not  with
         confidence. The only thing that calms me down is spending time with
         my children. When I start thinking dark thoughts, I think about the
         children and that helps me to  overcome  them.  I  experience  what
         happened to me in detention in the DRC as being like a rock  in  my
         head that disturbs me. I think the beatings  around  the  head  may
         well have caused brain damage. My memory is not as reliable  as  it
         was before.

         41. I was prescribed anti-depressants when I was in prison and also
         by a GP in the community but I didn't want to take  them  for  long
         because I didn't want to get dependent on them."

45. We had a number of concerns about the appellant's evidence in  the  new
    witness statement that led us to approach with caution his  claim  that
    pain and trauma from his experiences in DRC prevented him from giving a
    clear account in his previous protection claims and  appeals.  Firstly,
    as mentioned in  the  chronology  above,  he  was  represented  in  his
    previous asylum claims. It is not clear to us why he  could  not  raise
    his pain and trauma with his then legal advisors if only to say that he
    did not yet feel well enough to give a proper account. According to his
    account he would have had very recent and serious injuries  to  explain
    his difficulties and justify a request to delay  having  to  prepare  a
    statement or be interviewed by the respondent.

46. Also, it is uncontested that on arrival  he  had  a  medical  condition
    relating to a growth and  pain  in  his  left  testicle  and  underwent
    surgery soon after coming here. It  was  therefore  also  open  to  him
    merely to refer  to  this  condition  and  need  for  treatment  as  an
    explanation of his difficulty in giving evidence in the initial  stages
    of his asylum claim even if he did not want  to  or  was  not  able  to
    mention what had happened to him in DRC.

47. Secondly, SB was specifically asked about his fitness to give  evidence
    at the beginning and end of his asylum  interview  in  March  2002.  He
    stated that he was fit to do so and confirmed  that  he  was  happy  to
    proceed and happy with the conduct of the interview. He was accompanied
    by a representative who confirmed that he was happy with the conduct of
    the interview. We found that the absence of any reference  to  physical
    or psychological problems when he  was  specifically  asked  about  his
    health undermined his current claim  that  he  was  unable  to  provide
    proper evidence at that time.

48. Thirdly, even if it is accepted that  trauma  and  pain  prevented  the
    appellant giving a proper account after he arrived in 2002,  his  first
    asylum claim was not  completed  during  the  first  months  after  his
    arrival. The first appeal hearing was in 2004, over two years after  he
    came to the UK and two years  after  his  surgery.  His  second  appeal
    hearing was in 2010, eight years after he arrived. Again, he has always
    had legal representation, other than on the day of  the  second  appeal
    and for a short period at the end of 2015. In neither of the first  two
    appeals did he maintain that he had been too unwell on arrival to  give
    a proper account.  He did not refer in the appeals in 2004 or  2010  to
    having at any time the extensive physical and  mental  health  problems
    which he now seeks to raise. He did not do so in the witness  statement
    dated 21 October 2014 prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    before Judge Shanahan in this third appeal.   His  claim  that  he  was
    unable to give a proper account previously because of pain  and  trauma
    was not raised until the hearing before us in 2016.

49. We did not find the appellant's new witness statement  showed  that  he
    was unable to give proper evidence in his previous appeals,  therefore,
    or that the difficulties in his evidence could be explained as a result
    of his experiencing pain and  trauma  during  his  previous  protection
    claims. We recognise that he maintains that the medical and  psychology
    reports also support this aspect of his case but, as set out below,  we
    did not find that those documents could assist him.

50. If anything, the new witness statement only added to the concerns about
    the appellant's reliability as a  witness  arising  from  his  previous
    claims. It contains significant discrepancies in  core  aspect  of  his
    claim, including how  he  obtained  the  documents  to  take  to  Congo
    Brazzaville, how often he went there, how he escaped from  prison,  who
    assisted him to leave DRC and how he did so.

51. The appellant now claims at paragraph 21 of his new  witness  statement
    that he was given documents in the home of a colleague, R, to  take  to
    Brazzaville by a family friend,  T,  and  "a  person  sent  by  Colonel
    Mosese". This is a different account to  that  provided  in  his  first
    asylum claim (see [33] and [34] above) where he went to the  office  of
    Colonel Mosese once a week or, alternatively,  obtained  the  documents
    from the Colonel in a restaurant.

52. The  appellant's  account  of  his  journeys  to  Brazzaville  carrying
    opposition materials is also highly  inconsistent.  He  now  claims  at
    paragraph 26 of the new statement that he was arrested  on  the  second
    attempt to carry documents to Brazzaville. In his asylum  interview  he
    referred at question 39 to being suspected  because  he  was  "crossing
    more often" and at question 40 that he was not worried  about  crossing
    the border "every month". In a statement  which  was  in  the  evidence
    before Judge Billingham he stated that he went "once a  week",  as  set
    out in [33] above. In his statement dated 21  October  2014  he  states
    that he went "approximately three times but on the  fourth  occasion  I
    was stopped".

53. The appellant's new evidence on  his  escape  from  detention  is  also
    significantly different. In the current statement at paragraph  36  the
    appellant states that when he escaped he was given a cleaner's  uniform
    by a cleaner. The cleaner asked him if he knew R and told the appellant
    that he used to be a driver for T's family and had known the  appellant
    when he was  very  little.  The  coincidence  of  the  cleaner  at  the
    detention centre knowing the appellant from an earlier part of his life
    is so notable that if it were true we did not find it credible that  he
    would not have mentioned it in any of his  earlier  accounts.  The  new
    account of the escape goes on at paragraph 37 to state that someone  he
    knew, R, and his brother-in-law, were waiting for him with  a  vehicle.
    He was transferred to a different vehicle with a different  driver  and
    got on a plane with the new driver who eventually brought  him  to  the
    UK.

54. The appellant gave a very different account of his escape in his asylum
    interview in which at questions 55, 57 and 58 he  stated  that  "people
    who were bringing food", not a cleaner, gave him a uniform. The fact of
    the person who helped him being responsible for food  was  integral  to
    his earlier account in his interview as it was  the  delivery  of  food
    which explained why the guards were prepared to unlock his  cell  door.
    The appellant stated at question 63 onwards of his  interview  that  he
    was "running in the street" and "saw a white man" who took him  to  his
    house where he stayed for one day and then left DRC by air. The account
    in the appeal before Adjudicator Billingham was essentially  the  same,
    although involving a warder's uniform, and running until he met  a  man
    who spoke Portuguese who  brought  him  to  the  UK.  That  is  a  very
    different account from that put forward in 2016.

55. The appellant's current account of his  escape  is  also  significantly
    different from that given in his  2010  appeal,  paragraph  20  of  the
    decision of May 2010 showing that it was his  evidence  then  that  "my
    father's close friend smuggled me out of the country".

56. There are other aspects of the appellant's evidence that  significantly
    undermine his reliability as a witness. We noted  the  very  discrepant
    evidence about his parents. The appellant claims now at paragraph 9  of
    the statement dated 30 September 2016 that his parents were killed in a
    bombardment in 1996 or 1997. The evidence concerning his  parents  from
    his appeal in 2010 is set out at [37] above. He  maintained  that  they
    had been killed. However, a cousin, OS, attended the  hearing  in  2010
    and stated that the  appellant's  parents  were  alive.  We  have  been
    provided with evidence from the appellants' brother, GB, in  a  witness
    statement dated 11 October 2016. He  states  that  their  parents  were
    killed by rebels in the east of DRC.  By way of the explanation of  her
    evidence at the hearing in 2010, he also states that OS was unwell  and
    has  "recently  been  diagnosed  with  epilepsy"  and  "her  memory  is
    terrible". We were also provided with a  statement  from  OS  dated  13
    October 2016 which maintains that she cannot remember what she said  in
    2010 but that "I cannot have intentionally said such a thing -  I  know
    his parents died many years ago."  The  statement  was  accompanied  by
    various medical reports confirming that OS has recently been  diagnosed
    with epilepsy.

57. It was not our view  that  a  recent  diagnosis  of  epilepsy  and  the
    subsequent statements of GB and  OS  were  sufficient  to  explain  her
    evidence in 2010 that the appellant's parents were alive. Her  evidence
    of the appellant's parents being alive was very clear.

58. Even if we accept that something went amiss with the evidence of OS  in
    2010 and accept the appellant's evidence then and that of  his  brother
    now that their parents were civilians who died in a bombardment in  the
    mid-1990s, the appellant gave a different version of what  happened  in
    the Pre-Sentence Report from 2009. Page 4 of that document states:

             "[SB] told me that he fled the war in the Democratic  Republic
             of Congo and arrived in England in 2002. He informed  me  that
             his father was a supporter of the opposing political party and
             was killed as were his brothers."

59. The appellant also attributed political reasons for the  death  of  his
    parents in his appeal in 2010. At paragraph 21  of  that  determination
    there is a record of a  witness  statement  from  the  appellant  which
    maintained that  "my  family  supported  the  opposition  party,  as  a
    consequence both my parents and a few members of my  family  was  (sic)
    killed."

60. Those statements about the appellant's family supporting the opposition
    to the Mobutu regime raise yet another conflict as the appellant claims
    now at paragraph 6 of the statement dated 30 September  2016  that  his
    two older brothers worked for the Mobutu regime, not the opposition, in
    "dodgy operations" such as an arson attack on  a  newspaper,  and  that
    they "disappeared", not that they were "killed".

61. One further discrepancy  of  note  is  that  the  appellant  refers  in
    paragraph 8 of his witness statement dated 30 September 2016 to a child
    he had in DRC with whom he is no longer in contact.  In  his  statement
    dated 9 May 2016, prepared by the same firm of solicitors  within  a  6
    month period, he states at paragraph 9 that he has "two adult  children
    in DRC" who he has not seen for twenty years but that his  cousins  who
    started going back to DRC  2-3  years  ago  "bring  me  news  of  those
    children".

62. Our conclusion from all that  we  have  set  out  above  was  that  the
    appellant continues to provide  inconsistent  and  unreliable  evidence
    even when assisted by his current, experienced immigration advisers. In
    summary, we did not find that the appellant's new evidence,  even  when
    assessed together with the medical any  psychology  reports  and  other
    documents considered below, were sufficient to show that we should  not
    follow the decisions of the two previous  Tribunals  in  rejecting  his
    account.

    Physical Medical Evidence

63. SB also relies on two  physical  medical  reports  in  support  of  his
    Article 3 ECHR claim. In his appeals in 2004  and  2010  he  maintained
    that he had been physically mistreated in DRC  but  identified  only  a
    scar on his leg as evidence of this. No medical evidence  was  provided
    in support of the appellant's account until after his second appeal  in
    2010.

64. The first medical report provided was  that  of  Dr  Katharine  Wrigley
    dated 15 October 2010. This report was prepared following an  interview
    with the appellant at the Dungavel Detention Centre on 14 August  2010.
    The appellant was examined by Dr Wrigley and a colleague, Dr  Catherine
    Harkin.  The examination took place over two hours.

65. The report states that the appellant provided the following account  to
    Dr Wrigley and Dr Harkin:

         "HISTORY

         H1:  Mr B states he was imprisoned by soldiers in DRC in 2001,  due
             to political activity in opposition to the ruling party.

         H2:  He states he was kept on a prison camp for eight months, where
             he was tortured, deprived of food and medical care,  and  kept
             in overcrowded, unsanitary conditions.  He states he witnesses
             the torture and  murder  of  many  other  prisoners,  and  was
             himself threatened with death on many occasions.  He was asked
             for information  about  other  people  within  the  opposition
             party, and believes the purpose of the camp was to  intimidate
             and gather information about the opposition.

         H3:  He describes the conditions of detention as overcrowded,  with
             poor ventilation, and an overwhelming atmosphere of fear.

         H4:  Methods of torture included beatings, burning with cigarettes,
             suspension, asphyxiation with burning chemicals,  exposure  to
             irritants (CS spray) and food deprivation, as well as insults,
             death threats,  and  witnessing  the  torture  and  murder  of
             others.

         H5:  He was beaten on a daily basis, including being beaten on  the
             head with rifle butts, was knocked unconscious  on  more  than
             one occasion.  He remembers recovering consciousness  to  find
             his mouth and nose full of blood, and soldiers  still  kicking
             him on the floor.

         H6:  He was punched, kicked and hit with metal bars  all  over  his
             body, including his genitals.  He described haematuria  (blood
             in the urine)  on  several  occasions.   He  believes  that  a
             genital injury sustained at that time resulted  in  him  being
             misdiagnosed with testicular cancer on arrival in the UK.   He
             was beaten  and  kicked  all  over  his  body,  including  the
             genitals, and had severe testicular pain,  difficulty  passing
             urine and haematuria.  On his arrival  to  the  UK  he  sought
             medical help for this and  states  he  was  misdiagnosed  with
             testicular cancer.  He was  treated  for  this  at  New  Cross
             Hospital, Wolverhampton, in March 2002.

         H7:  He was slapped and punched in the face, spat on and  insulted.



         H8:  He was burnt on the legs from cigarettes, kicked on his  lower
             legs by soldiers wearing boots, and  hit  with  a  metal  rod.
             Being beaten with this rod resulted in a  deep  wound  on  his
             left shin.  He was unable to keep it clean, or access  medical
             attention.  The wound became infected and took a long time  to
             heal, with frequent dehiscence  (spontaneous  opening  of  the
             wound).  This wound eventually healed in the UK, after he  was
             able to clean it regularly.

         H9:  He was whipped with cords, made of a material he finds hard to
             describe.  He thinks it contained a form  of  elastic.   Being
             whipped with this material caused severe pain,  and  sometimes
             split open the skin and underlying tissue.

         H10: He describes suspension torture, during which he was suspended
             from the wall in handcuffs, with his hands in handcuffs behind
             him, which were attached to a belt fixed  to  a  hook  in  the
             ceiling.  This arrangement meant that his  whole  body  weight
             was taken by his shoulders, which were pulled  backwards,  and
             at the same time he was beaten, interrogated and asked 'do you
             want to die now?'.  He spent hours at a time in that position,
             and describes intense pain during and after the  torture.   On
             being released from the suspension device, he describes  being
             unable to move his arms or stand up  for  several  hours,  and
             would either be allowed to fall to the ground and remain there
             by guards, or be carried back to his room.

         H11: He describes being beaten on the feet with  wooden  sticks  or
             clubs and metal rods.  His feet were very swollen and he could
             not walk on them due to pain after these  beating,  and  would
             have to crawl.

         H12: On one occasion he was cut in his abdomen with a bayonet,  and
             was denied medical treatment for this.

         H13: Prior to his imprisonment in DRC he was studying to be  a  car
             mechanic.  He had  no  history  of  occupation  or  automobile
             accidents.  He was not a sportsman or soldier."

66. Dr Wrigley goes on in her report to set out  the  appellant's  physical
    markings in paragraphs E1 to E14.  She describes a number of scars over
    his body. In the "Opinion" she gives her view on  causation.   This  is
    contained set out at O1 to O17, paragraphs O1 to O4 stating:

         "OPINION

         For a definition of the underlying terms, please see Appendix 1

         O1:   Mr  B  gives  a  clear  description  of  his  conditions   of
             imprisonment.

         O2:  He provides a clear account of torture using several  methods;
             food deprivation, exposure  to  irritant  chemicals,  beatings
             using  a   variety   of   weapons   and   positional   torture
             (suspension).

         O3:  He was  able  to  describe,  without  prompting,  the  medical
             sequelae of torture using  the  methods  he  describes.   This
             includes -

                  '(a) dwelling of the feet and difficulty walking following
                      falaka (beatings on the soles of the feet),

                   b) severe pain and immobility following suspension,

                   c) excess lacrimation (eye watering) following  exposure
                      to irritant gases,

                   d)  haematuria  and  pain  on  passing  urine  following
                      beatings to the genitals, and

                   e) delayed wound heating and  dehiscence  due  to  wound
                      infection as a result of not  being  able  to  access
                      medical care'.

        O4:  The duration of the torture and variety of methods used  which
              he described make it difficult for him to be certain  of  the
              mechanism of injury leading to some of his individual  scars.
              "

67. Dr Wrigley  goes  on  to  find  the  appellant's  numerous  scars  were
    variously "consistent", "highly consistent" or "typical" of  the  forms
    of mistreatment described by the appellant. The features identified  as
    "typical" and so having very few other possible explanations other than
    that given, were  an  abdominal  scar  stated  to  have  been  from  an
    untreated bayonet wound and marks on the soles of his  feet  stated  to
    have been caused by beatings.

68. Dr Wrigley's conclusions are that:

         "O16: Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all lesions  that
         is important in assessing the torture story. In this case,  due  to
         the number and wide distribution of scars, as well  as  some  scars
         which are typical of torture, his scarring is typical of torture.

         O17: I note that the rule 35 report submitted by Dr Lennox  accords
         closely with my findings".

    In the "Summary" she also indicates:

         "Examination of Mr Bushabu demonstrates many scars which are highly
         consistent with torture, and some that are typical of torture.  The
         overall number  and  distribution  of  scars,  and  range  of  scar
         appearances is typical of torture. I would not expect to  see  such
         an appearance (taken together) from any other cause, including road
         traffic, domestic, sporting or occupational accidents; nor is it at
         all likely that these lesions could be the  result  of  any  single
         episode of violence inflicted upon him."

69. Dr Wrigley provided a further report dated  13  October  2016  after  a
    meeting with the appellant on 6 October 2016 which  lasted  two  and  a
    half hours. In the main, the report confirms the earlier findings, some
    changes  being  noted  and  some  new  scars  being  identified,  these
    differences being attributed to there being more time available on  the
    second occasion and the second report being able to build on the  first
    report.

70. In her meeting with the appellant in October 2016, Dr Wrigley  observed
    the following presentation, recorded at paragraph 4.1:

         "He had reduced eye contact,  slow  movement  and  hesitant  speech
         during interview and examination, often pausing for  long  periods.
         This became more marked later in the interview, when  he  sometimes
         paused for around 20 seconds before answering a  question,  or  the
         question had to be repeated. He had reduced facial  expression  and
         appeared low in mood and blunted in affect."

71. Dr Wrigley sets out in both reports the correct approach for  preparing
    medical reports for legal proceedings and there was no dispute  at  any
    time about her qualifications  enabling  her  to  give  a  professional
    opinion. We accept that the appellant has the  scars  described  in  Dr
    Wrigley's reports. The contents of her  reports  are  potentially  very
    concerning indeed and we considered them very  carefully.  We  did  not
    find, however, that we could accept that the physical medical  reports,
    even when assessed together with the other evidence that was before us,
    showed that the appellant's claim of detention and  mistreatment  after
    being arrested carrying opposition documents was credible, even to  the
    lower standard. As above, we do not dispute his  scarring  but  do  not
    accept that the medical reports show even to the lower standard that it
    was incurred as he claims.

72. There are a number of reasons for this conclusion. Firstly, it  is  the
    appellant's account that he  arrived  in  the  UK  very  shortly  after
    escaping from detention. His scarring would have been  identifiable  as
    having been incurred very recently.  He told Dr Wrigley that one of his
    leg injuries did not heal until after he came to the UK (H9). As above,
    he has had almost continuous legal representation  in  his  immigration
    matters. He maintains that he was in pain and traumatised but he  could
    simply have shown his legal representatives or someone else what  would
    have been recently  incurred  scars  by  way  of  evidencing  what  had
    happened to him without having to comment further. No medical  evidence
    was provided until 2010, eight years after he came to the UK. We  found
    the appellant's account of how he incurred his scarring  is  undermined
    by the absence of any medical evidence over such an extended period  of
    time.

73. Secondly, in his asylum interview, at question 46, he was  specifically
    asked how he was treated in detention. He had  a  legal  representative
    present during the interview.  He showed only  a  "scar  on  his  right
    leg". We did not find it credible that if the  appellant  incurred  the
    scarring described by Dr Wrigley in the context he claims he would have
    referred only to one scar on his  right  leg  when  specifically  asked
    about mistreatment in  his  interview  with  his  legal  representative
    present.

74. Thirdly, the description of mistreatment that the appellant gave in his
    asylum interview was  significantly  more  limited  than  that  in  his
    meetings with Dr Wrigley. He stated in response to question 46:

         "I was taken out of the cell and was asked to lay down [?] the sun.
         I was handcuffed and my feet tightened. I was beaten. No toilet.  I
         had to do everything in the same place.

    This description was found by Adjudicator Billingham to be "vague".  It
    is undeniably so when compared to the account given to Dr  Wrigley  and
    relied on by the appellant in the appeal before us.  Nothing before  us
    indicates that he gave a more detailed account in his appeal in 2010 or
    2014 that was more consistent with what was said to Dr Wrigley. We  did
    not find it credible that if  the  appellant  was  mistreated  for  the
    reasons he claims, he would have said  so  little  in  support  of  his
    asylum claims in 2002 and 2010 when he could easily have referred to or
    shown far more extensive mistreatment or merely shown some of his other
    scars by way of evidence.

75. Fourthly, in her 2010 report at O1 and O4, Dr Wrigley stated that "Mr B
    gives a clear description of his conditions of imprisonment" and did so
    "without prompting".  There is no satisfactory explanation  of  why  he
    was able to give a "clear" account in October 2010 whilst in  detention
    but could not do so at any time previously, not even in his deportation
    appeal in May 2010 which was only 5 months before he saw Dr Wrigley and
    in which he had the assistance of legal advisers up until  the  day  of
    the hearing.

76.  Fifthly,  there  is  the  notable  difference   in   the   appellant's
    presentation in the two physical medical reports.  He  gave  a  "clear"
    account "without  prompting"  in  2010  but  in  October  2016  he  had
    difficulty in  answering,  hesitating  and  pausing  and  needing  some
    questions repeated. From  these  reports,  therefore,  the  appellant's
    psychological problems presented later rather than earlier and were not
    consistent with his claim to have been unwell since coming  to  the  UK
    and that the cause was his mistreatment for political reasons in DRC.

77. Sixthly, contrary to the statement at O17 in the summary of  the  first
    medical report, we did not find that the appellant's  account  provided
    to Dr Wrigley in 2010 "accords closely" with the Detention Centre  Rule
    35 report dated 7 July  2010.  The  Rule  35  report  states  that  the
    appellant reported:

         "... being tortured by  soldiers  in  the  Congo  -  March  2001  -
         December 2001 - states Government Party - imprisoned him because he
         was a member of the opposing government  Party  -  states  received
         beatings daily - Reports soldiers  beat  him  with  metal  poles  -
         causing injury - to the following areas ... "

    and then lists scarring on lower left leg, two scars on his right foot,
    scarring around left wrist from being handcuffed for periods of  up  to
    two days, scarring on his back from beatings with a mental pole, a scar
    on his abdomen from  being  attacked  by  soldiers  with  a  knife  and
    cigarette burns on his lower right leg.

78. The account of mistreatment the appellant  describes  in  the  Rule  35
    report is significantly less detailed as to the extent of his  scarring
    and forms of mistreatment than that provided to Dr Wrigley. It  is  not
    consistent. SB told Dr Wrigley that the marks on his wrists  came  from
    being handcuffed and suspended for "hours". The Rule 35 report does not
    refer to suspension but records that he stated that he was  "handcuffed
    for long periods  - (2 days).

79. We also noted that the Rule 35 report, like  Dr  Wrigley's  report  was
    provided only after the appellant  had  lost  his  appeal  against  the
    deportation order.  The appellant does not explain how he was unable to
    provide these details two months  earlier  in  support  of  his  second
    asylum appeal. We were concerned that the context  of  the  substantial
    additional detail on and degree of mistreatment that he describes  from
    July 2010 onwards  was  of  having  lost  his  deportation  appeal  and
    remaining in immigration detention, facing removal.

80. For all of these reasons, we did not find  that  the  physical  medical
    reports assisted the appellant in showing  that  the  findings  of  the
    first  two  Tribunals  were  no  longer  the  starting  point  for  our
    assessment. We did not find that the physical medical reports supported
    his claim to have incurred scarring  because  of  mistreatment  arising
    from his political activities in DRC.

81. One further matter concerned  us  regarding  the  appellant's  physical
    health. Shortly after coming to the UK the appellant had  an  operation
    to remove a testicle as it was wrongly thought that he  had  testicular
    cancer. He made a claim for medical negligence. We were shown  some  of
    the documents relating to that matter. The  appellant's  claim  now  is
    that he incurred a genital  injury  because  he  was  tortured  in  DRC
    because of his political activities and that after  coming  to  the  UK
    this injury was misdiagnosed as testicular cancer. If the appellant had
    been mistreated and incurred the injury to  his  left  testicle  as  he
    claims, we did not find it credible that he  would  not  have  informed
    medical staff of this and he misdiagnosis of cancer allowed to  proceed
    to the extent that he had unnecessary surgery.

82. If the appellant had indicated the cause of his injury was  torture  in
    DRC but had still been misdiagnosed with cancer this could be  expected
    to be a notable feature in the subsequent medical negligence litigation
    but it was not. The only reference in the materials before  us  to  the
    appellant attributing his testicular pain to mistreatment in DRC is  at
    [120] of the appellant's bundle in a letter dated 19 January 2006.  The
    letter refers to "his admission history/examination where  the  mention
    of the attention of the Congo police is detailed". We did not find that
    this brief reference was a sufficient indication that he  told  medical
    staff about the significant account of mistreatment he now puts forward
    which, in any event, concerns mistreatment by soldiers not police.

    Psychology Evidence

83. The appellant also relies on evidence concerning his mental  health  to
    distinguish the negative  credibility  findings  in  the  two  previous
    Tribunal decisions. We were provided with a psychology report dated  11
    October 2016 prepared by Dr Rachel Thomas. Dr Thomas  is  a  Consultant
    Clinical Psychologist who has worked in a specialist Trauma Unit at the
    Tavistock  Centre  and  is  now  Director  Elect  at  the  Clinic   for
    Dissociative Studies which also specialises  in  survivors  of  extreme
    trauma and abuse.  There was no dispute as to her having the  expertise
    to provide a psychology report.

84. Dr  Thomas'  report  was  prepared  following  an  interview  with  the
    appellant conducted on 1 October 2016  over  a  two  hour  period.   In
    paragraphs 4 to 32 Dr Thomas sets out the  appellant's  history,  based
    upon the documents that she had  been  provided  with  and  information
    provided by SB.  She then went  on  to  describe  his  presentation  as
    follows:

         "34. Mr P presented as a tired and drawn looking man who arrived on
             time for his appointment, at the same time as the interpreter.
              The contrast between him and the interpreter was  immediately
             striking.  They were both men of around similar ages,  stature
             and build and both of the same  cultural  and  ethnic  origin.
             The difference between them, however, could not have been more
             pronounced.

         35.   Whereas  the  interpreter  made  good  eye  contact,  gave  a
             greeting, spoke fluently and clearly, Mr B could barely  raise
             his head or make any eye contact,  shuffled  his  feet  as  if
             struggling to walk, moved very slowly and  laboriously,  seems
             dazed and confused and extremely emotionally flattened in  his
             entire demeanour.

         36.  Indeed, Mr B presented from the outset of  the  interview  and
             throughout as visibly depressed  and  traumatised.   He  spoke
             very softly, was visibly withdrawn  and  had  a  significantly
             flattened affect.  He was tearful intermittently.

         37.  Mr B's affect was, indeed, so flat that he  gave  monosyllabic
             answers  to  many  questions  and  often  required   follow-up
             questions in order to obtain more expansive answers.

         38.  His cognitive impairment, described further  below,  was  also
             especially marked and he often clearly could not take  in  the
             question posed, frequently needed it to be repeated, sometimes
             more than once and could take  a  minute  or  longer  in  some
             instances to be able to  formulate  any  response.   At  other
             times, he seemed even more disoriented and confused  in  this,
             seeming to 'come to' after a minute or more of silence  saying
             things such as 'what did you say?' or 'where are  we?'.   This
             was especially evident when more  emotionally  laden  subjects
             were under discussion.  I noticed a  marked  episode  of  this
             when asked about return to the DRC, about the emotional impact
             of being separated from his  UK  family  and  about  his  past
             torture experiences.

         39.  Towards the end of the interview it was evident  that  he  was
             really struggling to stay present at all and  he  acknowledged
             when I put it to him that, by that point, he was feeling quite
             overwhelmed   and   that   this   manifested   as    increased
             disorientation and confusion.  I was therefore able to end the
             interview shortly after this and Mr B had  a  few  minutes  to
             compose himself, have a drink of  water,  wash  his  face  and
             gather himself before he felt able to leave.  Even then, I had
             to check with him that he knew where he was going and  had  to
             provide  clear  directions  to  the  train  station  which   I
             repeated, even though this was very close by, to  ensure  that
             Mr B knew which way to go.  Even so, I was left unsure  as  he
             left that he would find his way easily.

         40.  Mr B also presented throughout the interview in  a  submissive
             and fearful manner, typical of a traumatised  individual.   He
             often kept his head bowed in a submissive  posture  and  spoke
             softly and in an evidently fearful manner."

85. Dr Thomas goes on to find at paragraph 42 as follows:

         "42. Mr  B  currently  presents  psychological  symptoms  of  Major
             Depressive Disorder secondary to his  past  and  current  life
             circumstances, with some significant  post  traumatic  traits.
             His  symptoms  are  severe,   placing   him   at   significant
             psychiatric risk and  he  also  shows  psychotic  features  of
             depression  which  are  an  indicator  of  the  severity   and
             chronicity of the condition.   These  symptoms  are  described
             further below."

86. The report goes on to indicate in paragraphs 43 to 76 a presentation of
    low mood,  tearfulness  and  lack  of  motivation,  sleep  disturbance,
    appetite disturbance, social  withdrawal,  suicidality  and  self-harm,
    impoverished attention, memory and concentration, escalated  suppressed
    anger,  non-medical  and  psychogenic  physical   symptoms,   psychotic
    symptoms and post traumatic traits.

87. Of particular note are the  comments  at  paragraphs  43  to  45  which
    consider how  long  the  appellant  may  have  suffered  from  a  major
    depressive disorder with psychotic features.   Dr  Thomas  comments  as
    follows:

         "43.  It  is  apparent  from  a  review  of  the   above-referenced
             documentation, that not only does Mr  B  meet  the  diagnostic
             criteria currently for a severe depressive disorder  but  that
             he may have done so from the point of his arrival in  the  UK.
             If this is the case, then this indicates that his disorder  is
             chronic in nature  and  has  manifested  for  fourteen  years,
             whether continually or relapsing and  remitting.   This  is  a
             significant period of time over which  to  be  psychiatrically
             unwell and may also partly account for some of  his  offending
             behaviour over this period.

         44.  Mr B's Screening Interview documents significant communication
             difficulties, which seem likely to have been  a  manifestation
             of his symptom of cognitive confusion and impairment based  on
             his depressed mood and observed in this assessment.

         45.  Mr B's  IRC  medical  records  from  2011-2012  also  document
             depressed mood and that he was prescribed with  Citalopram  40
             mgs at the time, which is a high dose of  this  antidepressant
             medication, indicating a severe episode.  This medication  was
             then changed to Amitriptyline."

88.  Dr  Thomas  comments  in  paragraphs  55  to  57  on  the  applicant's
    presentation of suicidality and self harm as follows:

         "55. Mr B acknowledged  experiencing  suicidal  ideation  and  said
             that, in 2010, he had come very close to making an attempt  on
             his life because he had felt so desperate at  this  time.   He
             said he remembered  at  the  time  feeling  'useless  with  no
             future'...'I just felt what's the point?'.

         56.  Mr B said that he had felt so concerned  that  he  would  harm
             himself at this time that he took himself to A  &  E  and  was
             seen by the duty psychiatrist  and  prescribed  antidepressant
             medication.

         57.  Mr B said that the main reason he has currently for not ending
             his life is the support and love he receives from Ms K and the
             love he has for his children.  He said that if he  was  to  be
             separated from them by being removed to the DRC that he  would
             choose to end his life in the UK rather than face this.   When
             describing this in interview, Mr B began to cry silently,  put
             his head in his hands and then could  not  speak  for  several
             minutes.  His cognitive impairment described below also became
             noticeably worse following this being discussed."

89. The cognitive impairment referred to in paragraph 57  is  described  in
    more detail by Dr Thomas in paragraphs 58 to 62:

         "58. Mr B displayed and described significant cognitive  impairment
             currently.   As  described  above,  he   clearly   had   great
             difficulty attending to my questions as posed to  him  by  the
             interpreter throughout the interview and often either  had  to
             ask for the question to be repeated or  answered  a  different
             question which had not been asked, such  that  it  had  to  be
             asked  again.   This  happened  on  at  least  five   separate
             occasions that I counted in the course of this assessment.

         59.  Even when he did manage  to  comprehend  and  respond  to  the
             correct question, Mr B's responses were extremely slow and  he
             was often silent for up to a minute before he answered.   This
             seemed to be due both to his extremely flattened  and  subdued
             depressive affect, but also seemed attributable to the  length
             of time it took him to process a question  and  formulate  his
             response.

         60.  These objective observations were supported  by  Mr  B's  self
             report.  He said in interview that he will often try  to  read
             something and find he has to quickly give  up  because  he  is
             taking in nothing he has read.  He  has  the  same  difficulty
             trying to watch and follow a  television  programme  and  said
             that 'my thoughts are always somewhere else'.

         61.  Mr B said that in conversation with people they always  notice
             (as I did in this interview as noted above), that he  is  very
             slow to respond to their questions.   He  said  that  this  is
             particularly difficult for friends  who  knew  him  before  he
             became unwell when, he said, he was never like this.  He  said
             that this is a very embarrassing experience for all parties.

         62.  Mr B also reported significant difficulties now with his short
             term memory, saying that he will regularly put things down and
             then forget what he has done with them.  He said that this has
             been the case ever since he left the DRC.  Mr B said  that  he
             had even recently forgotten his own  son's  birthday  recently
             and that his solicitor had to remind him.  Mr B said  that  he
             had felt very upset and ashamed about this."

90. Dr Thomas goes on in paragraphs 65 to 70 of the report to describe  the
    appellant's   psychotic   symptoms   which    consist    of    auditory
    hallucinations, specifically command hallucinations telling him  to  do
    things to himself.  For example, when he hears a  voice  saying  "stand
    up" he can find himself doing so.  The appellant  told  Dr  Thomas,  as
    recorded at paragraph 70, that he "has heard voices in this manner ever
    since being tortured in the DRC".

91. Dr Thomas states in paragraph 71 that the appellant does not reach  the
    threshold for a full diagnosis of post traumatic  stress  disorder  but
    considers that this may be due to the amount of time  that  has  passed
    since the  reported  cause  of  his  difficulties.   His  condition  is
    described as "far more chronic than acute".  As previously,  Dr  Thomas
    gives a view that he suffers from a depressive  disorder  with  "severe
    and  depressive  features  such  as  flattened  affect  and   cognitive
    slowing".  She refers to a number of significant post traumatic traits,
    however, including nightmares, flashbacks and fear response.

92. Dr Thomas then turns to her view as to the causation of the appellant's
    symptoms and states as follows:

         "Causation

         77.  It is my opinion that  the  current  psychiatric  symptoms  of
             Major Depressive Disorder with post traumatic traits displayed
             by Mr B are entirely caused by the cumulatively traumatic life
             events which occurred  to  him  in  the  DRC  and  which  have
             occurred since.  Specifically, I consider that  the  following
             are all relevant causal factors:

                  '(a)  Growing  up  in  an  unhappy  environment   with   a
                      significantly depressed mother;

                   b) His parents dying when he was still a minor;

                   c) The adult to whom his mother then entrusted his  care
                      after her death, sexually abusing him for a number of
                      years;

                   d) The experience of being apprehended, incarcerated and
                      tortured as an adult in the DRC due to his  political
                      activities.  This included  reported  experiences  of
                      daily  beatings  and  torture  including  suspension,
                      being burned and being deprived of food;

                   e) Living with physical disfigurements and injuries as a
                      result of the reported torture which have caused  him
                      lasting pain and distress, especially to his testicle
                      and the distress of  events  which  followed  surgery
                      related to this;

                   f) His unresolved immigration status in the UK with real
                      and present risk of being returned to the  DRC  where
                      he considered his life to be in significant danger.'

         78.  Although he has reported a history of mental  illness  in  his
             mother (depression) this seems to  have  been  environmentally
             created (his mother's unhappiness  due  to  being  recurrently
             bullied, it seems, by  her  in-laws)  rather  than  due  to  a
             biological disposition.  I am also satisfied  that  there  are
             not other causal events  with  as  much  significance  as  the
             above.  Although life events such as the breakdown of  Mr  B's
             relationship  with  SLK  in  the  UK  and   his   arrest   and
             imprisonment in 2009 were also distressing to him,  it  is  my
             view that these were events with which he would have been able
             to cope, if when upset  by  them,  had  he  not  already  been
             psychiatrically unwell due to the other, above-named  factors.
             There is also the question of whether he would  have  offended
             had he not been both without recourse to funds in the  UK  and
             psychiatrically unwell at the time, which it now seems  highly
             likely he was. "

93. As regards the plausibility of the  appellant's  presentation  and  his
    history Dr Thomas comments at paragraphs 90 to 97:

         "90. It is a common misperception that  it  is  easy  to  fabricate
             psychiatric disorder.  It is actually extremely  difficult  to
             do so across time and symptom  clusters  with  consistency  of
             affect.

         91.  I consider Mr B to  be  credible  psychiatrically.   His  self
             reported  symptoms  and  personal  history,  given   in   this
             interview, were consistently matched by his affect  throughout
             the consultation.  As described  above,  he  was  considerably
             flattened in  emotional  affect,  with  significant  cognitive
             slowing  and   difficulties   with   information   processing,
             submissive and fearful and  intermittently  tearful  from  the
             outset of the consultation and throughout.

         92.  Mr B also presented a considered  and  balanced  view  of  his
             psychiatric symptoms, not always presenting  the  most  severe
             possible.   For  example,  he  denied  any  current   imminent
             suicidal plan or intent despite ideation, on  account  of  his
             partner and children.  He also spontaneously volunteered  when
             he was not symptomatic (such as in  not  experiencing  certain
             post traumatic or psychotic symptoms).

         93.  It would be most unusual for someone attempting  to  fabricate
             psychiatric disorder for the purposes  of  gaining  asylum  to
             present such a balanced and considered view of  his  symptoms.
             Conversely, it would be expected that,  in  such  a  scenario,
             psychiatric symptoms would be reported extremely  readily  and
             in extremis.

         94.  Moreover, many of the symptoms that Mr  B  reported,  such  as
             poor  concentration  and  memory  and   sleep   and   appetite
             disturbance are not immediately obvious to  a  lay  person  as
             symptoms of psychiatric disorder.

         95.  In summary, therefore, I consider Mr B to  be  psychiatrically
             credible and have little doubt that  he  is  indeed  suffering
             from significant symptoms of psychiatric  disorder  consequent
             on the experience of cumulatively traumatic life events.

         96.  The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal question  Mr  B's
             credibility due to his provision of an inconsistent  narrative
             of  his  past  experiences  in   the   DRC.    As   it   seems
             psychiatrically plausible to assume that Mr B  was  likely  to
             have been significantly psychiatrically unwell ever since  his
             arrival in the UK, in my view this can  be  explained  by  his
             significant  cognitive  impairment  including  of   attention,
             concentration and memory caused by his depressive disorder.

         97.   I  consider  that  the  adverse  credibility  finding  should
             therefore be  reviewed  in  light  of  the  above  psychiatric
             evidence, with which  the  Tribunal  does  not  seem  to  have
             previously been provided."

94. Dr Thomas goes on to find that the appellant's health was such that  he
    should not be required to give evidence in support of his appeal and he
    did not do so.

95. The report then addresses the possible consequences for  the  appellant
    of being returned to DRC, stating as follows:

         "110.    Mr B is already significantly psychiatrically ill  with  a
              diagnosis  of  Major   Depressive   Disorder   (severe)   with
              significant post traumatic traits and, as described above,  is
              struggling to cope in the safety of the UK.  It can readily be
              seen, therefore, how removal from this country to one where he
              fears for his  life,  safety  and  welfare  will  most  likely
              precipitate a psychiatric crisis.  He is liable, in  my  view,
              to become fully symptomatic for PTSD at this time due  to  the
              acute nature of the situation if returned.

         111. I am not an expert on the provision of  psychological  therapy
              or medical intervention in the DRC, but I consider  that  even
              if suitable psychological, psychiatric and  medical  provision
              and support services were available there, that Mr B is likely
              to be far too psychiatrically unwell by this time and much too
              frightened and re-traumatised to access them.

         112. Mr B is not currently actively suicidal due to his partner and
              children (including his two stepchildren),  although  he  does
              still experience suicidal  ideation.   I  consider  that  this
              situation would also deteriorate rapidly in  the  event  of  a
              further negative determination and removal directions  to  the
              DRC where he would be separated from Ms K and the children who
              are British citizens and could not follow him.  Indeed,  Mr  B
              said that he could not guarantee that, in the event of  forced
              removal, he would not take his own life despite his  love  for
              his family due to the extent of his fear of what  would  await
              him there.

         113. I consider that  Mr  B's  increased  suicidal  risk  would  be
              present from the point of a further negative determination and
              removal directions being given and would increase to an  acute
              risk once there is evidence of deportation with no possibility
              of reversal (e.g. plane tickets bought,  being  taken  to  the
              airport).  As stated above, Mr B has stated  clearly  that  he
              would choose to end his life in the UK, despite his  love  for
              his family, rather than be removed to the DRC.

         114. I also consider, in the event of return to the DRC, even if he
              did not commit suicide prior to or following  arrival  in  his
              native country, that Mr B would also  be  too  psychiatrically
              unwell to work again or re-integrate into  Congolese  society,
              even if he is not captured and tortured again,  as  he  fears.
              If he is unable to work,  Mr  B  will  be  unable  to  support
              himself financially and is liable to quickly  become  homeless
              and  destitute.   Without  any  good  family  support  in  his
              country, his situation is likely to be extremely precarious.

         115. If returned to the DRC in his current  psychiatric  condition,
              again, assuming he did not end his life prior  to  removal,  I
              also consider that Mr B will also  be  vulnerable  to  further
              abuse  and/or  exploitation  and  that  his  ability  to  seek
              protection in response to any threats or risks will be  highly
              impoverished due to his current lack  of  trust  in  authority
              figures  and   his   degree   of   psychiatric   illness   and
              traumatisation."

96. Dr Thomas goes on at paragraphs 116 to 124 to set out  the  appellant's
    family situation and indicate that his relationships with  his  partner
    and his children are very important to him and that  his  children  are
    "my reason to live".  The appellant told Dr Thomas that if he  were  to
    be separated from his partner and his children that this would  "finish
    me".  As above, he referred to choosing to  end  his  life  in  the  UK
    rather than facing a separation.

97. We did not find we could accept Dr Thomas' report at its highest for  a
    number of reasons. She maintains that the appellant has been  suffering
    from a serious mental illness since his came to the  UK  and  this  can
    explain  his  evidence  in  his  earlier  appeals  and  is  a   partial
    explanation for his criminal offending. Firstly, as  with  the  medical
    evidence, it is provided many years after the appellant came to the UK,
    only after he was convicted of fraud, after  a  deportation  order  was
    made against him, after he had lost two appeals,  his  application  for
    revocation of the deportation order  was  refused  and  his  successful
    appeal against that decision was overturned. As  above,  the  appellant
    was in contact with lawyers and medical professionals  on  arrival  and
    for years afterwards. His claim of mistreatment was  litigated  in  the
    Tribunal before specialist  judiciary  on  two  occasions.  He  was  in
    contact with the Prison and Probation Services. If he had mental health
    problems over that extended period of time, particularly if  they  were
    of the severity Dr Thomas asserts, we did not  find  it  credible  that
    there was no reference to this issue at all from anyone, including  the
    appellant, until the Pre-Sentence Report in 2009.

98. That is additionally so as Dr Thomas' finds that the appellant's mental
    health  problems  have  been  present  since  his  arrival  in  the  UK
    (paragraphs 43, 44, 78 and 96) and would have been more serious earlier
    on (paragraph 71) rather than only being properly observed in 2016.

99. Secondly, we found diagnosis and prognosis  in  the  psychology  report
    were undermined by  there  being  no  other  evidence  at  all  in  any
    statement or report of the appellant  having  symptoms  as  serious  as
    suicidal ideation and command auditory hallucinations. We  accept  that
    the appellant was  diagnosed  with  depression  whilst  in  prison  and
    immigration detention and prescribed anti-depressants.  Nothing we were
    shown suggests that  his  presentation  at  that  time  or  until  2016
    reflected the degree of ill-health identified by  Dr  Thomas,  however.
    The  Pre-Sentence  Report  from  2009  specifically  states  that   the
    appellant did not have suicidal thoughts at that time. The  appellant's
    wife stated at the hearing that he had never talked of killing himself.



100. The appellant himself does not  mention  anywhere  other  than  in  his
    interview with Dr Thomas that he has experienced suicidal  ideation  or
    command auditory hallucinations, not even in his  most  recent  witness
    statement prepared by his  current  legal  advisers.   It  is  only  at
    paragraph 13 of the current witness statement that the appellant refers
    for the first time to having mental health problems at all, stating:

         "I recognise that my own psychological  health  is  not  great.   I
         think too much about the past.  I would like a normal life  and  to
         stop worrying about my status.  My problem is what happens to  lots
         of people who have lived through things which stay in  their  head.
         If certain things have happened to you they just remain  there  and
         it is difficult to banish them from your thoughts.   I  don't  have
         enough distractions."

    We did not find this to be  consistent  with  the  seriousness  of  the
    symptoms described to Dr Thomas such as suicidal thoughts  and  command
    hallucinations.

101. Thirdly, at paragraph 44,  Dr  Thomas  comments  that  the  appellant's
    responses in his screening  interview  "seem  likely  to  have  been  a
    manifestation of his symptoms of  cognitive  confusion  and  impairment
    based on his depressed mood and observed in this interview".  We  found
    it difficult to accept that symptoms observed in a two  hour  interview
    in 2016 could be a reliable explanation for responses  given  14  years
    earlier, the appellant never having identified  such  a  problem  until
    2016. In addition, there is no specific reference by Dr Thomas to which
    responses indicated that the appellant was struggling to give  evidence
    in his screening interview and we could not identify  any  that  showed
    "cognitive confusion and impairment".

102. Fourthly, we could not reconcile easily the appellant's  difficulty  in
    giving his evidence in the meeting with Dr Thomas in October  2016  and
    his presentation in his meetings with Dr Wrigley and Ms Finch  in  2016
    with the statement by Dr Wrigley in 2010 that he gave a "clear" account
    with no suggestion of anything like the  presentation  noted  in  2016.
    This suggested a later onset of a mental health problem  not  one  that
    arose, in part, from experiences  and  mistreatment  in  DRC  prior  to
    arrival.

103. Fifthly, paragraphs 55 to 57 of the report  sets  out  the  appellant's
    description of an occasion in 2010 when he was suicidal and went to A &
    E and saw a duty psychiatrist. There are no medical records to  confirm
    this  event.  As  above,  the  Pre-Sentence  Report  from  2009  states
    specifically that that the appellant did not express suicidal ideas  at
    that time. Again, the psychology report does not include  any  analysis
    of these aspects of the evidence.

104. Sixthly, Dr Thomas asserts at 77(b) that one of the  causative  factors
    is the appellant losing his parents "when he was  still  a  minor.  The
    appellant has only ever referred to his parents dying in the  mid-1990s
    or 1996 or later. He became an adult in 1992.

105. For all these reasons we did  not  find  that  Dr  Thomas'  report  was
    capable of showing that the appellant has had  mental  health  problems
    that should lead us to distinguish the findings  of  the  two  previous
    Tribunals or that it could support the appellant's claim of his history
    in DRC. That is so even when the report is considered together with the
    appellant's evidence, the physical medical evidence and our  acceptance
    of the appellant's scarring.

    Other evidence of mental illness

106. Our assessment of whether the evidence  indicated  that  the  appellant
    had mental health problems that could explain the earlier  shortcomings
    in his evidence included consideration of the Pre-Sentence Report (PSR)
    from 2009, prepared after he was convicted of fraud. It  is  the  first
    reference in the materials before us to  the  appellant  having  mental
    health problems. We have already also referred to it at [58] above when
    considering the appellant's 2016 evidence about his parents and at [97]
    when considering Dr Thomas' evidence.

107. Regarding the appellant's mental health, the PSR indicates that:

         "SB described significant problems with his health in  relation  to
         having his left testicle removed in 2002 due to testicular  cancer.
         The defendant explained that he had been unwell for some  time  due
         to his medical problems which had been exacerbated by depression."

    and goes on:

         "SB described significant problems with his health in  relation  to
         having his left testicle removed in 2002 due to testicular  cancer.
         It appeared from the interview that the defendant has also suffered
         with depression and has been described  antidepressants.   Although
         SB was tearful at times during the interview he  did  not  disclose
         any thoughts of suicide or self-harm."

108. We also noted later on the same page that:

         "Although SB did not demonstrate any  discriminatory  attitudes  it
         was felt during the interview that there were  times  when  it  was
         very difficult to elicit information from the defendant.  There  is
         no evidence to suggest that  the  defendant  is  anti-totalitarian,
         although the court will be aware that  his  claim  for  asylum  was
         refused on 03/03/2004 and I understand he may be deported."

    The report goes on to state that:

         "During the course of the assessment it has  been  identified  that
         there are concerns about coping in custody.  Although  SB  did  not
         report any imminent concerns related  to  suicidal  self-harm  this
         should be reviewed should he remain in prison."

    The PSR certainly identifies symptoms of depression but  they  are  not
    linked by the appellant to mistreatment in DRC or stated to be  of  the
    degree identified by Dr Thomas in 2016.

109. We also noted that in her  October  2010  report  Dr  Wrigley  set  out
    information from the detention centre records that the appellant had:

         "a history of depression and poor sleep, and was treated with  40mg
         citolopram for this in prison.  This was stopped in  Dungavel,  and
         he was started on amitriptyline, which  was  then  stopped  due  to
         concerns about ankle swelling. He has been referred for counselling
         by health centre staff."

110. There is therefore as second source suggesting that the  appellant  was
    suffering from depression in 2009. We now have evidence in 2016  of  Dr
    Thomas, Dr Wrigley, Ms Finch and  the  appellant's  partner,  SLK,  her
    mother, TM, and his brother who all to a greater or lesser extent  note
    symptoms of depression or some form  of  mental  disorder  now  in  the
    appellant. We did not find that these symptoms, the main  manifestation
    of which is in 2016, could be attributed to his account of mistreatment
    in DRC for all of the reasons set out above. Put simply, they were  not
    mentioned by the appellant on arrival or at all until 2009,  they  were
    not noted by anyone including medical professionals,  before  2009  and
    the appellant did not link his mental health problems to events in  DRC
    until his evidence in 2016. The  evidence  before  us  shows  a  mental
    health  problem  first  occurring  in  2009  and  become  more  serious
    thereafter, not a disorder that arose from experiences and mistreatment
    in DRC prior to coming to the UK.

111. As a result of all these matters, we accepted  that  the  appellant  is
    currently suffering from a mental disorder but were uncertain as to the
    cause, diagnosis and prognosis. Dr Thomas found that  he  has  a  Major
    Depressive Disorder but we have set out above the reasons why we cannot
    accept her report at its highest.  Dr Thomas'  report  raises  concerns
    about an increased risk of self-harm or suicidal thoughts or  behaviour
    if removal is initiated and inability of the appellant to access mental
    health treatment in DRC on return. As above, however, the appellant has
    not elsewhere expressed thoughts of suicide and  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate he has ever self-harmed or, for example, formulated a specific
    plan of how he might go about an attempt to kill himself.  We  did  not
    find that the current and future risks of self-harm  identified  by  Dr
    Thomas were made out.

112. We therefore did not find that the evidence of a  mental  disorder  was
    sufficient to make out a medical claim or risk of suicide under Article
    3 ECHR. It is well established that the threshold for such  a  case  is
    high. The evidence relied on to support a risk of suicide either in the
    UK or on return to DRC is contained only in the report  of  Dr  Thomas'
    which we have found not to be  sufficiently  reliable.   There  is  the
    additional  matter  that  the  appellant  has  been   almost   entirely
    untreated,  antidepressant  medication  being  stopped  in  immigration
    detention in 2010, the appellant indicating  at  paragraph  41  of  his
    statement dated 30 September 2016 that he did not take  antidepressants
    for long as  he  did  not  want  to  become  addicted  to  them.  Where
    appropriate treatment has never really been tried,  the  argument  that
    the appellant would be at risk on return to DRC on medical  grounds  is
    further undermined.

113. Dr Thomas also maintains that the appellant would become so  unwell  on
    return to DRC because of his distress at being returned and  separation
    from his family in the UK that he would not  be  capable  of  accessing
    treatment there. As above, we are unable to take her prognosis  at  its
    highest and it is, in any event, based on observation of the  appellant
    when he has not taken anti-depressant medication  which  could  improve
    and stabilise his health now and in the future. It was not suggested to
    us that anti-depressant medication could not be obtained  in  DRC.  The
    evidence before us suggested that the appellant could expect  a  degree
    of support to access medication. The appellant indicates at paragraph 9
    of his statement dated 9 May 2016 that he has cousins who, for the last
    two or three years have travelled to DRC and bring him back news of his
    adult children there. In his witness statement dated 30 September  2016
    he refers at paragraph 42 to a  cousin  contacting  people  in  DRC  to
    assist him in obtaining documents. He would have  some  links  enabling
    him to access basic medication on return, therefore, and, as above, has
    the option of accessing treatment now  to  assist  in  stabilising  his
    health prior to and after departure.

114. For completeness sake, in response to arguments made  in  paragraph  14
    of Mr Lane's skeleton argument, we  should  also  indicate,  where  the
    appellant's account of events in DRC is so unreliable,  including  that
    on how he left DRC, that we did not find that he left the country using
    fraud or otherwise illegally. We do not accept that the evidence before
    us supports a claim that he has an unexecuted prison sentence  in  DRC.
    The appellant maintained in  his  appeal  in  2010  that  he  had  been
    provided with an arrest warrant. This document has never been produced.
    His evidence as to its existence is not reliable. We did not find  that
    he had shown that he came within any of the risk categories  identified
    in BM and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00293 (IAC).

115. For all of these reasons, we did not find that the appellant had  shown
    a real risk of serious mistreatment on  his  return  to  DRC  from  the
    authorities or other agents on his return or that he would be  at  risk
    of self-harm or suicide such  that  Articles  2  or  3  ECHR  would  be
    breached.

Article 8

116. As this is an appeal against refusal  to  revoke  a  deportation  order
    there are particular legislative provisions which we  must  apply  when
    considering the appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR.

117. The decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order was made a  week
    before the Immigration Act  2014  introduced  changes  to  the  primary
    legislation and Immigration Rules applicable in deportation  cases.  We
    must apply the law in force now, however; YM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1292 applied.

118.  Firstly,  we  must  take  into  account  the   provisions   concerning
    deportation in Part 13 of the Immigration Rules, the relevant  sections
    of which are attached in Appendix B. Following ZP (India) v SSHD [2016]
    4 WLR and IT (Jamaica) v SSHD (2016] EWCA Civ 932, in what  is  a  pre-
    deportation revocation appeal, paragraph 390A applies as  well  as  the
    provisions of paragraph 390. Paragraph 390A  calls  for  an  assessment
    under paragraphs  398-399A.  Of  particular  importance  here  are  the
    provisions of 399(a)(i)(b) which again raises the question  of  whether
    the appellant's removal will be "unduly harsh" for the children of this
    family. We are not required to conduct an  assessment  under  paragraph
    399(b) as the appellant formed his relationship with SLK when he was in
    the UK illegally.

119. We also applied the guidance in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  617
    on  the  factors  to  be  taken  into  account  in  an  "unduly  harsh"
    assessment, the summary at [26] stating:

         "The expression "unduly harsh" in section 117C (5) and Rule  399(a)
         and (b)  requires  regard  to  be  had  to  all  the  circumstances
         including the criminal's immigration and criminal history."

120. Also, after the hearing before us  on  19  October  2016,  the  Supreme
    Court provided guidance  on  the  correct  approach  to  Article  8  in
    deportation appeals in Hesham Ali v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60.  From  that
    case, we take the principle that we must make our own assessment of the
    proportionality of deportation and whether an  Article  8  ECHR  breach
    would arise, notwithstanding the statutory provisions we have  set  out
    above. Within that  assessment,  however,  we  must  give  considerable
    weight to the Immigration  Rules  as  the  authoritative  statement  of
    policy of the respondent, endorsed by Parliament but falling  short  of
    being law or a "a complete code" within the Article 8 context.

121. The provisions of s.117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 are also  relevant.  They  are  attached  at  Appendix  B.  Of
    particular importance here is Exception 2 set out  in  s.117C(5)  which
    provides that the public interest requires SB's deportation  unless  he
    can show that he has:

         " ... a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying
         partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
         qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner
         or child would be unduly harsh."

122. There is no dispute here that SLK and the three children of the  family
    fall to be considered under this provision as they are all British  and
    the respondent accepted that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with them.

123. The case of IT (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 932  provides  guidance
    on the correct application of s.117C in a revocation case. IT (Jamaica)
    provides that in a s.117C assessment of whether the appellant's removal
    would be unduly harsh for SLK, the test is,  summarised  at  [3],  that
    "very compelling reasons for revoking a deportation order before it has
    run its course or, at [56], that "very compelling reasons must be shown
    to displace the public interest in deportation.

124. We have indicated above that the appellant is an unreliable witness  as
    regards his history in the DRC. We also found that to an extent he  was
    also an unreliable witness regarding his family life in  the  UK.  This
    has already  been  noted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shanahan  at
    paragraph 24 of the decision dated 1 December 2014. In his attempts  to
    show that he should  not  be  deported,  the  appellant  maintained  in
    questionnaires dated 19 October 2011 and 13 June 2012 that he was in  a
    relationship with TLN and lived with her  and  their  son  TNB.  Before
    Judge Shanahan, however the appellant maintained that he had been in  a
    relationship with SLK and her children since 2011.

125. Also, in his witness statement dated 30 September  2016  the  appellant
    states at paragraph 44 that he was told by TN before he went to  prison
    in 2009 that her child, TBN, was not his. He indicates that he did  not
    live with them after he was released from detention which was in August
    2011. That is obviously not at all consistent with the  information  he
    provided in his questionnaires dated 19 October 2011 and 13 June 2012.

126.  There  further  inconsistent  evidence  as   to   when   the   current
    relationship began. SLK indicates in the December 2013 bail application
    that the relationship began 2 � years earlier,  so  approximately  June
    2011. In a questionnaire dated 29 April 2014 the  appellant  refers  to
    SLK as his partner, stating at question 26 that they had been  together
    since  approximately  August  2011.  In  the  current  statement,   the
    appellant states that he started a relationship with SLK at the end  of
    December 2011. SLK's statement dated 10 May 2016 and her oral  evidence
    also referred to the relationship starting at the end of 2011.

127. We found that these matters raised further concerns  about  the  weight
    we could place on the appellant's evidence and his assertions about his
    commitment to his current family life. The Tribunal has  already  found
    in the May 2010 decision at paragraph 42 that SB "has shown that he  is
    capable of manipulating people and the situation he finds  himself  in,
    in order to meet his own ends."

128.  Against  those  concerns,  however,  there  is  no  dispute  that  the
    appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  now  with  SLK's
    twins, a boy, X and a girl, Y, currently aged 8 years old and  with  Z,
    the child the appellant and SLK have had together. The  seriousness  of
    his relationship with SLK is somewhat less clear as the appellant moved
    out of the family home in September 2016. We accepted that  the  weight
    of the evidence indicated that SB and SLK are still a couple,  however,
    and that SB provides regular support to SLK and the children.

129. We turned first to  the  assessment  under  paragraph  399(a)(i)(b)  of
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the three children if they were to
    remain in the UK without the appellant, there being no  dispute  before
    us that the children could not be expected to go to DRC.

130. We were assisted in our assessment by the indication from Mr Mills  for
    the respondent that it was not  disputed  the  appellant's  deportation
    would be difficult or even harsh for  the  children  in  light  of  the
    evidence in the social work report, witness statements of SB,  SLK  and
    her mother, TM, and the oral evidence from SLK, her mother and GB,  the
    appellant's brother. The respondent's position was  that  the  evidence
    did not show "undue" hardship and that this was additionally  so  where
    the appellant's character and immigration and criminal history  had  to
    be taken into account in the assessment.

131. We considered carefully the social work report of  Mr  Horrock's  which
    is dated 21 May 2016 in order to decide whether it  showed  that  there
    would be undue hardship for the children if the appellant  were  to  be
    deported. We found the report to be an important part of  the  evidence
    in support of the Article 8 claim notwithstanding that it pre-dated the
    appellant moving out of the family home in September 2016.  The  report
    confirms the appellant's  regular  and  important  involvement  in  the
    upbringing of the three children.  At 3.13 it sets out  SLK's  concerns
    about the impact on the children if the appellant was sent back to  the
    DRC.  Her comments were as follows:

         "SLK said that if SB had to go back to the DRC, the children  would
         be devastated, he is part of their  lives.   They  would  miss  him
         terribly.  He is the only father they have known.  She  also  needs
         him."

132. The report goes on to describe SLK having panic attacks because of  her
    concern  at  having  to  deal  with  the  financial  difficulties,  the
    uncertainty  of  the  appellant's   immigration   situation   and   the
    behavioural problems of X.

133. At 3.17 SLK informed Mr Horrocks that she did not think that she  would
    be able to manage if the appellant was  returned  to  the  Congo.   She
    informed him that:

         "Her family helps and supports her, but they have their own  lives.
         She would be concerned that if she was  unable  to  cope  with  the
         children, that they could  be  removed  from  her  care  by  social
         services."

134. At 3.22 of the report the appellant  gives  his  views  on  what  would
    happen if he were returned to the Congo.  He stated that  the  children
    would miss him greatly and that SLK "suffered greatly when  he  was  in
    prison".  He did not think that she would be able to  manage  to  bring
    the children up on her own as he was the one who was  able  to  control
    and discipline the children in the main.

135. Mr Horrocks was able to meet with SLK's mother, TM.  She  told  him  as
    follows:

         "3.23    Mrs M is the mother of SLK and she visits the  home  about
              five times per week and speaks to her  daughter  on  a  daily
              basis.  She visits the house each Friday evening to  see  the
              children.  Mrs M said that SB has a close  relationship  with
              all members of her family and recently  he  has  become  very
              close to her son, R and they do a lot together.  On  the  day
              of my visit they had been out together  in  the  morning.   R
              comes to the house with his children and partner  for  dinner
              each Sunday.  C [a sister of SLK] also  comes  to  the  house
              together with her son a regular basis,  often  together  with
              her mother.  CA [another sister] visits sometimes or they  go
              to visit her, but she lives further away.  Mrs M has also met
              SB's brother and his  partner  and  children,  she  got  into
              trouble when she didn't come to visit the  family  when  SB's
              sister was there from London, RB had very much wanted to meet
              with her and was disappointed.  She had also met a cousin  of
              SB.  Even her own father, SLK's grandfather gets on well with
              SB.

         3.24 Mrs M said that as an extended family they are  a  very  close
              unit and SB is a member of the family.  He even calls her mum
              and comes to her and asks for advice if he has  a  tiff  with
              SLK.  If he was returned to  the  Congo  SLK  would  struggle
              greatly and it would break her heart because  she  loves  him
              very much.  It would affect her emotionally and she found  it
              very hard when he went to prison.  It would  also  break  the
              children's hearts.  It would be a devastating thing  for  all
              of them, perhaps worst of all for X, who would  crack  up.  Z
              would also suffer greatly. There would be  huge  tensions  in
              the family and X would blame his mother for [SB] leaving. The
              two of them are both very emotional and that could lead to  a
              breakdown of the family and the intervention of  social  care
              services."

136. Mr Horrocks also interviewed  X's  class  teacher  and  Family  Support
    Worker. They confirmed his behavioural problems and the  school's  view
    that he should have  a  special  needs  assessment.  He  had  not  been
    observed to be aggressive but struggled with change, wanted one to  one
    attention, found it hard to follow instructions, was emotionally up and
    down could clash verbally with other boys.

137. Mr Horrocks was able to observe the family in  their  home  on  16  May
    2016.  He noted a change in the behaviour of Z when SB came  home,  the
    child having had minimal interaction with his mother prior to that.   Z
    became very close to SB as soon as he arrived and Mr Horrocks' view was
    that Z "relates to his father more closely than  he  does  towards  his
    mother".

138. Mr Horrocks also made a comment concerning SLK as follows in  paragraph
    3.41:

         "3.41    My observations of SLK's  parenting  capacity  also  raise
              concerns in terms of  her  abilities  to  provide  consistent
              boundaries and appropriate discipline.  The children  of  the
              family are significantly overweight as is she.  Z was  bought
              a sausage from the chip shop by his grandmother, but prior to
              eating  the  sausage  his  mother  allowed  him  to  eat  two
              lollipops.  He then sat on the floor and dipped  the  sausage
              into ketchup leaving half of the food on  the  floor.   There
              was no  monitoring  or  encouragement  of  the  child  whilst
              eating.  SLK also acknowledges that  X's  behaviour  provokes
              her to shouting that she struggles to remain calm."

139.  The  children  informed  Mr  Horrocks  of  their  concerns  about  the
    appellant being removed to the Congo, those remarks being  set  out  in
    paragraph 4.3.  Y said that life would not be normal if SB went back to
    Africa and she would feel anxious and scared.  X said that "without his
    dad it wouldn't feel the same.  He would stay upstairs until his  daddy
    came back or he would go  to  Africa  with  him".   As  previously,  at
    paragraph 4.4 Mr Horrocks reported Z being much closer  to  his  father
    physically than his mother.

140. In Mr Horrock's view, the distress  of  the  children  and  significant
    disruption to their lives caused by the absence of the appellant  would
    be compounded because of the behavioural  problems  of  X  who  appears
    likely to receive a diagnosis of an autistic spectrum disorder or ADHD.
    As reported by Mr Horrocks at paragraph 4.17, X "reacts badly to change
    and even relatively minor issues can cause his  behaviour  problems  to
    escalate."

141. Mr Horrocks comments again in paragraph 4.21 on SLK's  difficulties  in
    parenting stating that she is:

         "A very emotional  individual  and  struggles  with  her  parenting
         capacity in terms of discipline and appropriate boundaries.   SLK's
         mental health difficulties and limited parenting capacity will have
         impacted  negatively  on  the  children's  emotional  and  physical
         development."

142. At paragraph 4.22 Mr Horrocks states that:

         "4.22    In the event that SB was returned to the Congo  all  three
              children  of  this  family  would  suffer  from   significant
              distress and trauma at the loss of their  father,  a  primary
              carer and a secure attachment figure.  This will  cause  harm
              to their emotional development and for  X  it  is  likely  to
              cause his emotional and behavioural difficulties to escalate,
              linked to his difficulties in managing change.  This in  turn
              would have a negative impact on his abilities  to  focus  and
              concentrate at school and increase  his  difficult  behaviour
              and lead to further problems in  his  interactions  with  his
              fellow pupils and make him more prone to  bullying.   X  will
              suffer from harm to his educational and social development as
              a  result.   Y  already  suffers  from  low  self-esteem  and
              confidence and the loss of her father would in all likelihood
              exacerbate these feelings, with  a  knock-on  effect  on  her
              educational development.

         4.23 SB is a key member  of  this  family  unit  and  his  presence
              provides a sense of stability and  security  for  all  family
              members.  SLK is an emotionally vulnerable individual, with a
              history of unresolved mental health issues, linked to traumas
              in her life.  She struggles to manage her own experiences  of
              trauma  as  well  as  the  difficulties  which  confront  her
              currently such as her  partner's  immigration  problems,  X's
              condition and the family  finances  as  well  as  her  mental
              health.  When SB is present in the house SLK does not  suffer
              from panic attacks.  Historically, SLK has not complied  with
              the support offered by her GP to address  her  mental  health
              difficulties.  She refuses medication and  lacks  self-esteem
              to take part in group therapy.  The most likely outcome of SB
              being  returned  to  the  Congo  would   be   a   significant
              deterioration in her mental health, this in turn  would  lead
              to her becoming more emotional and she  would  struggle  even
              more to manage X's behavioural difficulties, which will  lead
              to further confrontation and verbal and physical  aggression.
              There was a risk that at some point SLK would  no  longer  be
              able to manage all of the demands on her and that this  could
              lead to the intervention of social care services  because  of
              concerns in respect of all three children.   The  possibility
              of  the  children  requiring  alternative  care  arrangements
              cannot be excluded."

143. At 5.2 Mr Horrocks concludes that:

         "In the event that [SB] was removed from the UK,  the  children  of
         this family and SLK would suffer great trauma and distress and they
         would be devastated by their loss. This would  cause  the  children
         emotional harm and in all likelihood would cause  further  harm  to
         the educational development of both X and Y as well as harm to  X's
         social development. The additional  consequences  of  SB's  removal
         would be SLK's mental health, which would  impact  on  her  current
         difficulties in providing appropriate discipline and boundaries and
         cause  further  tension  in  how  she  is  able   to   manage   X's
         emotional/behavioural  difficulties.  There  is  in  my  opinion  a
         likelihood that there would be a significant deterioration  in  the
         overall family functioning, which in turn  could  bring  about  the
         involvement of social care services. In the absence of SB from this
         family home, I would be concerned about the  overall  viability  of
         this family unit and the abilities of SLK to provide long term care
         for her three children."

144. Mr Horrocks concludes at 5.3 to 5.6 that it is in  the  best  interests
    of the three children and SLK for SB to remain in the UK.  We  accepted
    that must be so here. We also take from the report of Mr Horrocks  that
    there are factors here going beyond the normal difficulties that can be
    expected when a father is separated from  his  family  by  deportation.
    SB's  deportation  will  have  a  heightened  impact  because  of   X's
    behavioural problems which he manages better than SLK. Z is  closer  to
    his father than his mother. The family will be in additional difficulty
    because of the limitations of SLK as a parent, Mr  Horrocks  and  SLK's
    mother raising concerns about the possible need for the intervention of
    Social Services.

145. The situation has changed a little since Mr Horrocks wrote  his  report
    in May 2016. In his statement dated 30  September  2016  the  appellant
    sets out the recent change in  his  relationship  with  SLK.   At  [43]
    onwards he states:

         "43.  My  family  situation  is  complex.   In   August   2016   my
             relationship with SLK broke down.  Following  a  holiday  that
             she had with her mother and the children  she  turned  against
             me.  I think she was influenced in this by  her  mother.   She
             abused me verbally and taunted me on  account  of  my  missing
             testicle.  I felt very hurt and was also scared that if I went
             to the house she might make an allegation against me and cause
             terrible problems for me.  I therefore stayed away for  a  few
             days.  However, she begged me to return to help look after the
             children  and  because  the  children  were  missing   me   so
             desperately and therefore I now go three days per week to look
             after the children.  However I do not stay there.  I have  not
             been able to get legal advice on  the  position  because  this
             would not be legally aided and I have  no  money  to  pay  for
             advice.  In any event,  at  the  moment  SLK  and  I  are  co-
             operating in looking after the  children.   The  children  are
             very relieved to be with me and are mostly very happy  when  I
             am looking after them."

146. SLK provided a  further  statement  dated  14  October  2016  and  gave
    evidence which confirmed that SB had moved out of the family  home  but
    saw the children regularly. In that statement, we noted also  that  she
    disputed the comments of Mr Horrocks on her mental health, as  she  did
    in her oral evidence. She also indicates  in  the  statement  that  X's
    behaviour had got "significantly worse" since SB had moved out and  she
    was being called into school more often. Following  a  recent  incident
    when he pushed a supervisor and other incidents of physical and  verbal
    abuse, the school was considering involving the police. She  considered
    that  she  and  SB  were  still  a  couple  and  believed  that   their
    relationship would settle down  after  his  immigration  situation  was
    resolved.

147. We did not find that the appellant moving out in September 2016  was  a
    factor that affected materially the seriousness of  the  situation  for
    the children here were he to be deported. He has remained an  important
    figure in their lives. Although SLK's evidence about the  deterioration
    in X's behaviour after the appellant  left  the  family  home  was  not
    supported by evidence from the school or other source, we accepted that
    a change of that kind would be likely to affect X and that SLK is  less
    able to deal with behaviour than the appellant.

148. There was significant evidence before us, therefore, that  there  would
    be  additionally  serious  consequences  for  these  children  if   the
    appellant were deported and that their situation certainly approached a
    level of hardship, if not undue hardship.

149. There were aspects of the evidence, however, that  we  concluded  could
    reduce the difficulties for the family in the absence of the appellant,
    however, in particular notable support from the family of SLK and  also
    support from SB's family.

150. We have set out at [135] the evidence given to Mr Horrocks by TM as  to
    her quite extensive  involvement  and  that  SLK's  siblings,  how  the
    extended family is a "close unit" and refers to  the  positive  contact
    between the families of the appellant and SLK.

151. At paragraph 14 of her statement dated 10 May 2016, SLK states:

         "14. I have a fairly large extended  family.   I  have  my  mother,
             three  sisters  and  one  brother  and  also   a   number   of
             stepbrothers and sisters.  Both of  my  parents  married  more
             than once.  I am closest to my mother and we live near her and
             see her three or four times per week.  She  likes  SB  and  is
             scared he might be sent back.  She is very worried  about  the
             impact on the kids and on me.  She is unwell - she has  worked
             all her life and done backbreaking jobs and has a problem with
             her spine which causes a lot of pain.  She is  on  painkilling
             medication.  She is also medicated for arthritis.  I can't ask
             her to help with childcare - she couldn't do  it.   The  twins
             sometimes stay with other relatives (including granddad who is
             in his 70s, who is happy  to  have  them  from  time  to  time
             overnight, but finds X very hard work), but Z refuses to  stay
             with anybody apart from me or his dad."

152. We noted the comments about her  mother's  physical  difficulties,  but
    weighed that against the evidence  set  out  at  [135]  above  that  TM
    remained closely involved, as  did  SLK's  siblings.  Further,  at  the
    hearing, SLK stated that her grandfather had become more involved since
    SB had moved out. That indicated to us that SLK's  family  continue  to
    assist her practically and morally and have acted to assist to fill the
    gap after the appellant left the family  home  in  September  2016.  At
    paragraph 17 of her  statement,  SLK  also  commented  on  the  support
    offered to her by R, the appellant's sister, stating:

         "I am in contact a great deal with his sister  Rose  who  lives  in
         London. I phone her sometimes when he breaks down  because  I  want
         him to talk to somebody else who knows him well and cares. She is a
         lovely person. He has other relatives here I talk to and see."

153. The appellant's brother, GB, is also involved, living  locally  and  he
    has shown practical support in providing accommodation to the appellant
    after he moved out.

154. We also bore in mind that, although  the  circumstances  are  now  more
    difficult because of X's behaviour and there being a third  child,  SLK
    managed as a single parent to her twins before meeting  the  appellant.
    With the support of her family, she also coped whilst the appellant was
    in detention and she was heavily pregnant with Z.

155. We concluded that although  the  situation  will  undoubtedly  be  very
    difficult for SLK and the children if the  appellant  is  deported,  it
    will not be a situation where the family will necessarily break down or
    Social Services will have  to  intervene.   Mr  Horrocks'  professional
    opinion that this was a "possibility" that "cannot be excluded" did not
    indicate to us that his view  was  that  this  was  a  likely  outcome,
    particularly when considered in the context of the  longstanding  wider
    family support and the evidence that the family members on  both  sides
    had acted to assist when SB moved out.

156. We must also weigh the appellant's immigration and criminal history  in
    order to establish if the "unduly harsh" test in paragraph 399(a)(i)(b)
    was met. We have indicated above that the appellant has been a  notably
    unreliable witness in his immigration matters, providing  significantly
    inconsistent evidence on both his history in DRC and  his  family  life
    here.  He has been here illegally throughout and been an  absconder  at
    times.

157. We also found that the appellant's approach  to  his  criminal  conduct
    was a significant factor which weighed against him.   The  offence  for
    which he was convicted involved multiple thefts of DWP benefit  cheques
    and also individual bank cards. The sentencing remarks indicate that:

         "The method is then, having obtained stolen  cheques,  for  a  post
         offices unique code to be obtained  and  then  the  stolen  cheques
         manipulated to tally with the name and address on the bankcard  and
         to be used at local post offices.  It  is  a  sophisticated  fraud,
         since the manipulation or altering of the cheques is a skilled task
         ... ."

158. The appellant was involved in  this  latter  part  of  the  fraud,  the
    sentencing judge indicating:

         "[SB], you are quite high up in the organisation of the  conspiracy
         as well, though I am not by that stating that you yourself were  an
         organiser. But you did go and obtain the  post  office  codes.  You
         recruited persons  to  present  the  cheques  and  you  transported
         them.".

159. In the PSR the appellant is recorded as stating that "he did not  think
    to question where the cheques had come from" and that "he did not  know
    until after the event that the giro cheques were stolen." Those remarks
    are not consistent with what was said by the sentencing judge about his
    involvement.

160. A further matter that weighs heavily  against  the  appellant  is  that
    even after being served with a deportation order on 1 February 2010 and
    losing his deportation appeal, he  went  on  to  offend  again.  On  18
    December 2013 he was convicted  of  three  counts  of  handling  stolen
    goods. He was given only a suspended sentence of 8 months but we  found
    that this further criminality in a context of having already  lost  his
    deportation appeal was very concerning.

161. Further, the appellant again sought to avoid proper responsibility  for
    that offence. In his statement dated 30 September 2016,  the  appellant
    states:

             "I had no knowledge that the goods I was  buying  were  stolen
             (they were being sold in broad daylight) but I pleaded  guilty
             on the advice of my lawyer, making it clear  that  I  did  not
             know they were stolen."

    If the appellant had genuinely had no knowledge  that  the  goods  were
    stolen that was a ground of defence  not  something  to  be  raised  in
    mitigation. His claim that he was nonetheless advised to  plead  guilty
    is not consistent with what is really an assertion of his innocence.

162. It was our conclusion that the  appellant's  immigration  and  criminal
    history, correctly characterised by Mr Mills as "appalling" meant  that
    the significant difficulties we have identified above for SLK  and  the
    appellant's children if he is deported could not  be  characterised  as
    "unduly harsh". In reaching that conclusion we took  into  account  our
    acceptance of the appellant's untreated mental health problems and that
    he is returning to DRC which is a less stable, developing country where
    we accept life may well be more difficult for the appellant than in the
    UK. It remained our conclusion that the  appellant  could  not  benefit
    from paragraph 399(a)(i)(b) of the Immigration Rules.

163. A wider Article 8 assessment remains to be made, however, in which  the
    Immigration Rules are an important feature but not a  complete  answer.
    Part of that consideration is an  assessment  of  whether  the  "unduly
    harsh" exception in s.117C is shown to have been met, in which case  it
    is not in the public interest does not  require  deportation.  However,
    following IT (Jamaica) the threshold for this  assessment  is  no  less
    than  that  under  399(a)(i)(b)  and  is  that  of   "very   compelling
    circumstances". In an assessment under s.117C of whether there would be
    undue harshness for the children, we cannot  find  in  the  appellant's
    favour under s.117C where we have not done so under 399(a)(i)(b).

164. The only factor that might make a difference in this  wider  assessment
    is that undue harshness for SLK also falls to be considered as part  of
    the s.117C and wider Article 8 assessment. A great deal of the  concern
    raised in the evidence for SLK if the appellant is  deported,  however,
    revolves around the children and whether she will cope  and  manage  to
    keep the family unit together. We have found above that  this  will  be
    difficult but cannot be said to  be  unduly  harsh  because  of  family
    support, additionally so because of  the  appellant's  immigration  and
    criminal history. Where the appellant has lived with her for 3  years',
    she has had a child with him and he has clearly been a  very  important
    part of her life during those  years,  we  accept,  as  stated  by  her
    mother, that SLK would "devastated".  It  is  our  ultimate  conclusion
    that the family will be in unenviably difficult  circumstances  if  the
    appellant  is  deported  but  not  "unduly  harsh"  circumstances,   in
    particular  because  of  family  support,  additionally  so  after  the
    appellant's conduct is also taken into account. We did  not  find  that
    inclusion of SLK's circumstances materially altered the balance in  the
    wider Article 8 proportionality assessment.

165. For all  of  these  reasons  we  did  not  find  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would result in a breach of Article 8 ECHR.



Notice of Decision

166. The appeal is re-made as refused on all grounds.

Signed: [pic]                                    Dated:  19 January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
              APPENDIX A - ERROR OF LAW DECISION - 6 MARCH 2015

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01615/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2015                              |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SB
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Azmi, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shanahan promulgated on 1 December 2014 which allowed  the  deportation
    appeal of the appellant on Article 3 grounds.

 2. For the purposes of this determination I  refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent and to SB as the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant or his wife and children. This direction applies to,
    amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction
    could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order  to
    avoid a likelihood of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the
    contents of his protection claim and to his children.

 4. SB is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).

 5. He came to the UK in 2002 using  a  false  document.  He  has  remained
    unlawfully since then.

 6. He claimed asylum on 16 March 2002 but this was refused and his  appeal
    rights were exhausted as of 8 November 2004.

 7. He then became an absconder, coming to the attention of the authorities
    in July 2006 and making a fresh asylum and human rights claim in 2007.

 8. The appellant was convicted on 4 March 2009 of  conspiracy  to  defraud
    and sentenced on 17 July 2009 to 27 months' imprisonment.

 9. Following that conviction, the  respondent  made  a  deportation  order
    against the appellant on 1 February 2010.

10. The outstanding asylum claim refused on  4  February  2010.  He  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 29 September 2010 but  submitted  a  further
    fresh claim on 21 October 2010 which was refused on 8 November 2010.

11. On 15 December 2010 he made further representations and did so again on
    21 October 2011.

12. On 18 December 2013 he was convicted of 3  counts  of  handling  stolen
    goods and  on  6  January  2014  sentenced  to  8  months  imprisonment
    suspended for 18 months.

13. On 22 July 2014 the respondent made a decision to refuse to revoke  the
    appellant's deportation order. It is that decision which gave  rise  to
    these proceedings.

First-tier Tribunal Decision

14.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  upheld  the  s.72  certification   of   the
    appellant's asylum claim; see [27].

15. The Article 3 claim was allowed as it  was  found  that  the  appellant
    would face a real risk of serious harm on return as  a  result  of  his
    profile as a deportee and the adverse approach of the  DRC  authorities
    to such persons. The First-tier Tribunal found that  to  be  so  having
    relied on the case of P & R v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879; see [29] to [32].

16. The Article 8 claim was not considered where  the  appeal  was  allowed
    under Article 3. That claim was based on the family life the  appellant
    has with a partner and two British children and his private life.

Error of Law

17.  The  respondent's  challenge  here  is  a  straightforward  one.   The
    respondent referred in paragraphs 87 and 88 of her  refusal  letter  to
    the case of P & R v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879.  Those  paragraphs  set  out
    that since that decision of the High Court, the respondent had "sourced
    further information regarding the safety of returning foreign  national
    offenders" which undermined P & R. This evidence included:

         "... confirmation from the Direction  Generale  de  Migration  that
         they have no interest in returned foreign  national  offenders  (or
         failed  asylum  seekers)  unless   there   are   criminal   matters
         outstanding in the Democratic Republic of Congo."

18. Paragraph 88 of the refusal letter refers to the  respondent's  Country
    Policy Bulletin dated 22 October 2014  "which  updates  the  policy  on
    return to the Democratic Republic of Congo." It  was  the  respondent's
    case that:

         "... foreign national offenders (or failed asylum seekers) do  not,
         on the basis of their conviction in the UK, face any risk of  their
         Article 3 rights being breached if returned."

19. Judge Shanahan did not address at all the respondent's position on P  &
    R or the evidence relied on that post-dated that decision as  contained
    in the Country Policy Bulletin dated 22 October 2014.

20. That document at 4.12 to 4.13 sets out evidence from a meeting  with  a
    DRC official on 15 January 2014 to the effect that returnees to DRC are
    not detained and there being interest only in those who return "with an
    outstanding arrest warrant in the DRC."

21. At 4.14 to 4.18 the Country Policy Bulletin sets  out  the  information
    obtained by FCO officials from meetings with DRC officials in  Kinshasa
    in September 2014. Again, the information suggested that there  was  no
    adverse interest in deportees on return.

22. There is more material evidence in other parts of  the  Country  Policy
    Bulletin but suffice to say, the new evidence  in  the  Country  Policy
    Bulletin post-dating that which was before the High Court in P &  R  is
    clearly material and  was  not  addressed  at  all  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

23. I am satisfied that this was a material error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the Article 3 claim must be  set
    aside and re-made. It also means that the as yet unconsidered Article 8
    claim may have to be addressed.

24. The parties were in agreement that  the  re-making  should  take  place
    after the  Country  Guidance  case  being  heard  concurrently  on  the
    specific issue of risk on return in DRC to deportees.

25. The appeal will therefore be re-listed before the Upper Tribunal  after
    that Country Guidance decision has been issued.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law and is set aside to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.



Signed: [pic]                                Date: 5 March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                              APPENDIX B - LAW


Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002



         117A Application of this Part

               (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal is
                    required to determine whether a decision made under the
                    Immigration Acts-

                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private
                        and family life under Article 8, and

                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

               (2)    In considering the public interest question, the
                    court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                    (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in
                        section 117B, and

                    (b)    in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                        criminals, to the considerations listed in section
                        117C.

               (3)    In subsection (2), 'the public interest question'
                    means the question of whether an interference with a
                    person's right to respect for private and family life is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
               cases

               (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
                    in the public interest.

               (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of the United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are able to speak English, because
                    persons who can speak English-

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

               (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of the United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons-

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

               (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
                        that is established by a person at a time when the
                        person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

               (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life
                    established by a person at a time when the person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

               (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to
                    deportation, the public interest does not require the
                    person's removal where-

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
               foreign criminals

               (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                    interest.

               (2)    The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                    criminal, the greater is the public interest in
                    deportation of the criminal.

               (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not
                    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                    or more, the public interest requires C's deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

               (4)    Exception 1 applies where-

                    (a)    C has been lawfully resident in the United
                        Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the
                        United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                        integration into the country to which C is proposed
                        to be deported.

               (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and
                    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a
                    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                    qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on
                    the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

               (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four
                    years, the public interest requires deportation unless
                    there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
                    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

               (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to
                    be taken into account where a court or tribunal is
                    considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                    to the extent that the reason for the decision was the
                    offence or offences for which the criminal has been
                    convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

               (1)    In this Part-

                    'Article 8' means Article 8 of the European Convention
                    on Human Rights;

                    'qualifying child' means a person who is under the age
                    of 18 and who-

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                        period of seven years or more;

                    'qualifying partner' means a partner who-

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the
                        meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section
                        33(2A) of that Act).

               (2)    In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person-

                    (a)    who is not a British citizen,

                    (b)    who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of
                        an offence, and

                    (c)    who-

                        (i)    has been sentenced to a period of
                             imprisonment of at least 12 months,

                        (ii)   has been convicted of an offence that has
                             caused serious harm, or

                        (iii)  is a persistent offender.

               (3)    For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person
                    subject to an order under-

                    (a)    section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity)
                        Act 1964 (insanity etc),

                    (b)    section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland)
                        Act 1995 (insanity etc), or

                    (c)    Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern
                        Ireland) Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been
                        convicted of an offence.

               (4)    In this Part, references to a person who has been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain
                    length of time-

                    (a)    do not include a person who has received a
                        suspended sentence (unless a court subsequently
                        orders that the sentence or any part of it (of
                        whatever length) is to take effect);

                    (b)    do not include a person who has been sentenced to
                        a period of imprisonment of that length of time
                        only by virtue of being sentenced to consecutive
                        sentences amounting in aggregate to that length of
                        time;

                    (c)    include a person who is sentenced to detention,
                        or ordered or directed to be detained, in an
                        institution other than a prison (including, in
                        particular, a hospital or an institution for young
                        offenders) for that length of time; and

                    (d)    include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment
                        or detention, or ordered or directed to be
                        detained, for an indeterminate period, provided
                        that it may last for at least that length of time.

               (5)    If any question arises for the purposes of this Part
                    as to whether a person is a British citizen, it is for
                    the person asserting that fact to prove it.



The Immigration Rules


         Revocation of deportation order


         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
         considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
         following:


             (i) the grounds on which the order was made;


             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;


             (iii) the interests of the community, including the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;


             (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any
             compassionate circumstances.


         390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.


         391. In the case of a person who has been deported following
         conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation of a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:


             (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than
             4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the
             deportation order, or


             (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
             years, at any time,
             Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to
             the Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol
             Relating to the Status of Refugees, or there are other
             exceptional circumstances that mean the continuation is
             outweighed by compelling factors.


         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
         information coming to light which was not before the appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of time since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.
         ...


         Deportation and Article 8


         A398. These rules apply where:
         ...


             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
             against him to be revoked.


         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and


         ...


             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months...
             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
             other factors where there are very compelling circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if


         -


             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
             the UK, and


                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or


                  (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                  immigration decision; and in either case


                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and


                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or


             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and


                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration
                  status was not precarious; and


                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.


