
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01587/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 March 2014                              |On 26 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SH

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Pipe, instructed by J M Wilson


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    dated 25 October 2013 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sommerville and Dr J
    O de Barros which allowed the respondent's appeal on Article 8  grounds
    against a decision to make a deportation order against her.

 2. Ms H is a citizen of Bosnia Herzegovina and was born on 1 May 1990.

 3. For the purposes of  this  determination,  I  refer  to  Ms  H  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. This appeal concerns not only Ms H but her three  young  children.   In
    order to prevent the likelihood of any serious harm  arising  to  those
    children, further  to  the  anonymity  order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I make an anonymity order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding  publication  of  any
    information regarding the proceedings which would  be  likely  to  lead
    members of the public to identify the appellant or other members of her
    family and thereby the children.

 5. The undisputed background to this matter is that the appellant came  to
    the UK at the age of 15 in 2005, made an unsuccessful asylum claim  but
    on 14 June 2011 was granted discretionary leave to  remain  until  June
    2014.

 6. The appellant formed a relationship with DR,  a  Serbian  national  who
    also has discretionary leave to remain. The couple have three children,
    L born on 13 March 2006, V born on 24 April  2007  and  A  born  on  13
    February 2010.

 7. On 14 January 2006 the appellant was cautioned in relation to theft. On
    21 September 2006 she received a 9 month referral order in relation  to
    an offence of theft against a person. On 24 April 2007 she received a 3
    month referral order for theft  consecutive  to  the  earlier  referral
    order. On 30 November 2007 she  was  given  5  concurrent  terms  of  4
    months' imprisonment in a Young Offenders Institution for 3  counts  of
    theft and burglary. On 27 April 2010 she was  sentenced  to  18  weeks'
    imprisonment for theft and failing to surrender to custody.

 8. On  25  February  2012  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  20  months'
    imprisonment for theft.

 9. Notwithstanding this history of offending, in summary,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the appeal as it found that the best interests of  and
    damage to the children  were  the  appellant  deported  outweighed  the
    public interest in her deportation.  The respondent conceded  prior  to
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal that the children could  not
    be expected to go to Bosnia with the appellant.

10. Paragraph a. of the respondent's grounds argue that that the First-tier
    Tribunal  placed too much weight on the appellant's  family  life  with
    her children and on the best interests of the children. The panel  also
    engaged insufficiently with the appellant's criminality.

11. Paragraph b. of the grounds maintains that that the  appellant's  index
    offence was "serious and despicable", that the appellant has a  history
    of offending and was assessed as being at a  medium  to  high  risk  of
    reoffending. The public interest lay in preventing  further  offending,
    in deterring others and in expressing condemnation  for  such  offences
    required deportation. The children could be cared for by  their  father
    and other relatives as they were whilst the appellant was in detention.
    There was a clear and pressing need  for  the  public  interest  to  be
    realised through the deportation of the appellant and such  an  outcome
    was proportionate.

12. Paragraph c. of the grounds argues that the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave
    inadequate reasons for finding it disproportionate for  the  father  to
    care for the children if the appellant were deported.

13. The panel  cannot  be  said  to  have  failed  to  identify  and  weigh
    appropriately the public interest factors in this matter. Her  offences
    were set out in full; see [9]. The Tribunal directed itself at [24]  to
    the presumption in favour of deportation and to the need  for  "a  very
    strong claim indeed" to defeat the public interest in  deportation,  SS
    Nigeria v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 cited.

14. Having taken into account the high threshold for a  deportation  appeal
    to succeed,  the First-tier Tribunal next addressed the best  interests
    of the children at [25], correctly applying the dicta of ZH  (Tanzania)
    (FC) the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC  4.  Mr
    Smart maintained that the panel placed too much weight  on  the  social
    work report where it did not contain the opinions of the  children.  It
    is difficult to see how much weight  could  have  been  placed  on  the
    opinions of the children, the oldest being only 7 at the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. It is also difficult to see how
    the best interests of the three young children here would not have been
    found to be in their mother remaining with them in  the  UK,  it  being
    undisputed that she remains their primary carer, even had there been no
    professional evidence on the point. Also, as set out at  [43],  it  was
    not the  social  work  report  which  the  panel  found  of  particular
    importance but the oral evidence they heard from the father, DR, as  to
    the difficulties he and the children  would  face  were  the  appellant
    deported.

15. The assessment of the weight to be afforded to the  appellant's  family
    life and the best interests of the children was also properly  made  as
    it was conducted against the other factors relevant to  deportation  as
    identified in Uner v The Netherlands (2007) 45 EHRR 14;  see  [28]  and
    following. Those factors  included  weighing,  first,  the  nature  and
    seriousness of the offence, including the  remarks  of  the  sentencing
    judge in line  with  Masih  (deportation  -  public  interest  -  basic
    principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046  (IAC).  I  did  not  accept  Mr
    Smart's submission that the panel failed to properly  reflect  at  [29]
    the seriousness of the offence and the sentencing  judge's  view.  They
    refer in terms to the appellant being a "serial thief", to her criminal
    history, to the vulnerability and distress of the victim, the  view  of
    the criminal courts that the offence was "serious and despicable", that
    the appellant had failed to respond to previous convictions. They  went
    on to  indicate  at  [30]  that  they  took  the  appellant's  risk  of
    reoffending as "a significant factor" and correctly identified at  [31]
    the wider public interest beyond the particular individual reoffending.



16. In short, it was  my  judgement  that  the  grounds  amounted  only  to
    disagreement with the decision of the panel and with  the  weight  that
    they gave to the competing factors in this appeal. Having set  out  and
    applied the guidance from case law on the correct approach to Article 8
    in automatic deportation cases, including the weight to be afforded  to
    the public interest, the final proportionality assessment was a  matter
    for the First-tier Tribunal. The conclusions were  reasoned,  addressed
    the relevant factors, did not rely on irrelevant  factors  and  it  was
    open to the panel to conclude at [44]  that  this  was  a  sufficiently
    strong claim to succeed.

17. Notwithstanding my conclusion, I indicated at the hearing and requested
    that Mr Pipe communicate to those instructing him  and  thence  to  the
    appellant  who  was  not  present,  that  it  applies   only   to   the
    circumstances as they were before  this  First-tier  Tribunal.  If  the
    appellant reoffends, given her  criminal  history  thus  far,  she  can
    expect that  further  custodial  sentences  will  be  considered  where
    permitted  by  statute,  that  the  respondent   will   readdress   her
    deportation and, in the event of further deportation proceedings,  that
    a future Tribunal may make a  different  decision,  regardless  of  the
    difficulties her children will face.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                          Date: 24 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
