
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW/CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01431/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 10th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     MB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  brought  with
    permission against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes)
    promulgated on 24th February 2015 dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 14th July 2014 to make a deportation order  in
    respect of him.



The Background

 2. Since an anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal, which
    I have decided to continue, I shall refer to the  Appellant  simply  as
    MB.  He is a national of Jamaica and was born, in that country, on 19th
    February 1976.  He entered the UK on 19th May 2001 as a visitor and was
    given temporary admission, presumably on that basis,  until  17th  June
    2001.  It seems he was required to report to the Home  Office  but  did
    not do so and that he subsequently remained in the UK, for a period  of
    time, unlawfully.  On 7th June 2002 he married a British citizen whom I
    shall refer to as AB.  On 9th May 2005 he made an application for leave
    to remain on the basis of that marriage.  This was granted on 29th June
    2005, on a discretionary basis, for a period of three years.   On  27th
    February 2007 he was granted a further three years discretionary leave,
    again on the basis of the marriage, and on 14th May 2010  he  submitted
    an application for indefinite leave to remain, again, on the  basis  of
    that marriage.  That was granted on 8th June 2010.

 3. The Appellant and AB have two children of their  union.   Their  eldest
    child, a daughter, was born on 12th July 2002 and the youngest, a  son,
    was born on 11th July 2003.  Their daughter is, therefore, now aged  13
    years and their son is now aged 12 years.  Currently, the four of  them
    reside together as a family unit.  The son has health difficulties.  In
    a witness statement of 11th August 2014, AB has explained that  he  has
    brain damage and autism, that he attends  a  special  school  and  that
    there is, in existence in  respect  of  him,  a  statement  of  special
    educational needs.

 4. The Appellant was  arrested  in  connection  with  drugs  offences  and
    pleaded guilty to supplying class A drugs on  two  separate  occasions.
    On 29th July 2013 he was sentenced, for these offences, to a  total  of
    three years imprisonment.  That sentence was, in fact, made up of three
    years, to run concurrently, with respect to each offence.  He  has  now
    served what he was required to serve  of  that  sentence  and  has  his
    liberty.  There is no suggestion that he has subsequently offended.  As
    to prior offending, the record shows that he was fined  for  possession
    of cannabis in January of 2007 and was cautioned, as  I  understand  it
    for possession of the same drug, in  October  of  2006.   There  is  no
    suggestion that these earlier  matters  did  or  should  have  had  any
    bearing upon the decision to deport him.

 5. The trigger for the decision to deport was, of  course,  the  offending
    relating to class A drugs.  When the sentence was passed it was  noted,
    in the sentencing remarks that  an  aggravating  factor  was  that  the
    Appellant had taken his son with him on one of the  occasions  when  he
    was selling  drugs.   The  sentencing  judge,  though,  did  take  into
    account, as mitigation, the Appellant's having pleaded guilty at a very
    early stage and his family circumstances being the health  problems  of
    his son and what was then said to be the ill-health of AB although that
    matter has  not  subsequently  been  relied  upon  in  the  deportation
    proceedings so it was, perhaps, only a temporary factor.

 6. The Respondent's decision to deport was, as noted, taken on  14th  July
    2014.  The Respondent's reasoning was explained in a  detailed  "Notice
    of Decision."  Essentially, though, it was said  that  the  deportation
    was justified by the offending and that any  Article  8  considerations
    were not sufficient, as considered within the scope of the  Immigration
    Rules, to displace the public interest in his deportation.

The Legal Framework

 7. There have been significant and quite regular changes to the applicable
    legal regime both  in  the  context  of  primary  legislation  and  the
    Immigration Rules.  Against that background it is perhaps worth  taking
    some time to set out the content of the  relevant  provisions  as  they
    were when the Appellant's  appeal  was  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. The starting point is Sections 32 and 33 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007.
    Here, the relevant provisions provide as follows:

         "32. Automatic deportation

             (1)  In this Section 'foreign criminal' means a person -

                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
                      and

                  (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

             (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to  a  period
                  of imprisonment of at least twelve months.

             ...

             (4)  For the purpose of Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
                  1971 the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to
                  the public good.

             (5)  The Secretary of State must make a deportation  order  in
                  respect of a foreign criminal (subject to Section 33) ...

         33.  Exceptions

             (1)  Section 34(4) and (5) -

                  (a)  Do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  Section
                      applies (subject to sub-Section (7) below), and

                  ...

             (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign  criminal  in
                  pursuance of the deportation order would breach -

                  (a)  A person's Convention rights, or

                  (b)  The United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee
                      Convention."

 9. Pausing there, it has not been claimed by or on behalf of the Appellant
    that he is a refugee but it has been claimed that his deportation would
    breach Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

10. Turning now to the  Immigration  Rules,  these  contain  the  following
    presumption:

         "396.    Where a person is liable to  deportation  the  presumption
                shall be that the public interest requires deportation.   It
                is in the public interest to deport where the  Secretary  of
                State must make  a  deportation  order  in  accordance  with
                Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007."

11. There are then the  following  Rules  which  are  largely  relevant  to
    Article 8 considerations;

         "397.    A deportation order will  not  be  made  if  the  person's
                removal pursuant to the order would be contrary to the  UK's
                obligations under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights
                Convention.  Where deportation  would  not  be  contrary  to
                these  obligations,  it  will   only   be   in   exceptional
                circumstances that the public  interest  in  deportation  is
                outweighed.

         Deportation and Article 8

         A398.    These Rules apply where:

                (a)    A foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention; ...

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)     The  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least four years;

                (b)     The  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than four years but at least twelve months; or

                (c)     The  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law,

                the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
                whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,
                the public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed
                by  other  factors   where   there   are   very   compelling
                circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
                399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
                if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the seven  years  immediately  preceding  the
                        date of the immigration  decision;  and  in  either
                        case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported;

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported or the person  has  a  genuine  and
                             subsisting relationship with a partner  who  is
                             in the UK and is a British citizen  or  settled
                             in the UK and

                             (i)    the relationship was formed  at  a  time
                                 when the person (deportee) was in  the  UK
                                 lawfully and their immigration status  was
                                 not precarious; and

                             (ii)    it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  that
                                 partner to live in the  country  to  which
                                 the person is to be deported,  because  of
                                 compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                                 those  described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                                 Appendix FM; and

                             (iii)   it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  that
                                 partner to remain in the  UK  without  the
                                 person who is to be deported."

12. There is then Section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 to be borne in mind.  Section 117A states, in effect,  that  a
    court or Tribunal when considering Article 8 arguments based on private
    and family life must have regard to, in all cases,  the  considerations
    listed in Section 117B and, in all cases, concerning the deportation of
    convicted offenders who are not British  citizens,  the  considerations
    listed in Section 117C.

13. Turning to those then, the relevant parts are as follows:

         "117B.   Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
         all cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English -

                    (a)    are less of a burden on tax payers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons -

                    (a)    are not a burden on tax payers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to -

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner

                    that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's deportation where -

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         "117C    Article 8: Additional considerations and  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

                (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                    interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                    criminal, the greater is the interest in deportation  of
                    the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not
                    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                    or more, the public interest  requires  C's  deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

                (4)    Exception 1 applies where -

                    (a)    C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                        Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
                        United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  C's
                        integration into the country to which C is proposed
                        to be deported.

                (5)    Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a
                    genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
                    qualifying child, and the effect of C's  deportation  on
                    the partner or child would be unduly harsh.  ..."

14. So there are now a considerable number of  matters  to  be  taken  into
    account.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

15. The Appellant's appeal was heard on 2nd February 2015.  Although it  is
    not expressly said so it seems that both he and AB gave oral  evidence.
    Both the Appellant and the Respondent were represented.

16. In its determination the First-tier Tribunal  summarised  the  relevant
    legal provisions and the  factual  background.   Its  analysis  of  the
    competing arguments and its reasoning which led to its dismissal of the
    appeal may be found from paragraphs 18 to 30.  It said this;

         "18. So far as  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his  wife  is
             concerned  the  evidence  shows  that  it  is  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship.  However it was formed at a time when
             the Appellant was in the UK illegally, in  fact  he  had  lost
             contact with the Home Office by not reporting.  He was in  the
             UK unlawfully and his status was precarious,  accordingly  the
             Appellant cannot bring himself within paragraph 399(b)(i)  and
             the other exceptions do not arise for  considerations  as  the
             Appellant has to satisfy all of the requirements.

         19.  The Appellant cannot satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph
             399A of the Immigration Rules as he has not lived for most  of
             his life in the UK.  Again the requirements are cumulative but
             in any case he grew up and lived  for  most  of  his  life  in
             Jamaica, he has relatives  there  including  his  parents  and
             brother and support, albeit limited, would be  available.   It
             could not  be  said  that  there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to his re-integration.

         20.  This case principally turns on whether the Appellant can  show
             that  he  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399(a)  and
             effectively on whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             Appellant's children to remain in the  UK  without  him.   The
             children are British and have lived here for the bulk of their
             lives but they have  visited  Jamaica  occasionally.   In  the
             discussion below I have concentrated more on  the  Appellant's
             son as it appears that he has the greater needs.  That is  not
             to say that the Appellant's daughter would  not  benefit  from
             his presence, I accept she would and that  she  is  struggling
             without him as a permanent presence in  the  family  home  and
             that she has not adapted to senior school well.

         21.  The Appellant has been separated from his  wife  and  children
             since he was detained following his arrest.  It is clear  from
             the sentencing remarks that the Appellant spent some  time  on
             bail whilst subject to an electronic tag.  However since  June
             2013 he has been in prison of one sort of another and  contact
             with his family has been necessarily heavily  restricted.   If
             deported it also obvious that there would be  further  serious
             restrictions  on  his  contact  with  his  family  and  whilst
             revocation of the deportation order could be sought but  would
             necessarily follow.

         22.  By the fact of his  imprisonment  there  has  already  been  a
             significant interference on the Appellant's family life and  a
             heavy burden has been placed on his wife in the need  to  care
             for their children in his absence and the  emotional  distress
             that his absence has caused to them.  There is  no  suggestion
             that the interference brought about by his conviction could be
             regarded as being disproportionate despite the burden  it  has
             placed on his family.

         23.  A professional assessment of the Appellant's  son  would  have
             assisted in this matter but I have to make the decision on the
             information that is available.  It is not ideal and  I  accept
             that it has  been  deeply  upsetting  and  difficult  for  all
             concerned.  There is a difficulty in this case in relation  to
             the children's best interests.  Ordinarily it is in  the  best
             interests of children to be cared for by  both  parents  in  a
             stable  and  loving  environment  where  their  interests  are
             properly considered and their needs are met,  particularly  if
             their needs are greater than the usual.

         24.  That clearly has not happened in this case where the Appellant
             spectacularly failed his son by drug dealing  and  taking  him
             along to one of the deals.  It could not, on  any  view,  have
             been in his son's best interests for his father to be involved
             in drug dealing let alone for him to be present.  Claims  that
             their son's best interests are met by the Appellant  remaining
             in the UK  are  severely  undermined  by  what  he  did.   The
             Appellant was aged 36 at the  time  and  old  enough,  if  not
             mature enough, to appreciate the seriousness of  what  he  was
             doing.

         25.  The Appellant states that at the time he was trying to clear a
             credit card debt, no evidence of that debt has been  produced.
             I  do  not   underestimate   the   pressure   that   financial
             difficulties can  cause  but  that  is  not  mitigation.   The
             Appellant also stated that he has attended courses  in  prison
             and has learnt from his mistakes.  Given that he  had  managed
             to avoid committing offences for so long it  is  difficult  to
             see why the Appellant would need imprisonment and courses when
             inside to tell him what was blatantly obvious, not  only  that
             selling drugs was a serious offence but that  taking  his  son
             seriously aggravated the situation and was the opposite of his
             best interests.

         26.  The question is whether, in all the  circumstances,  the  best
             interests  of  the  Appellant's  children  and  his   son   in
             particular,  are  such  that  the  public  interest   in   the
             Appellant's    deportation    is    outweighed    and     made
             disproportionate?  To ascertain whether  it  would  be  unduly
             harsh for them to remain in the UK  without  him  requires  an
             assessment of their  needs,  hampered  by  the  absence  of  a
             professional report relating to  his  son,  against  what  the
             Appellant, his risk of re-offending and in the context of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.



         27.  The regime that applies to  deportation  is  now  considerably
             stricter than it  had  been.   The  presumption  is  that  the
             Appellant  should,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  events,  be
             deported.  His offending was serious and  was  committed  with
             aggravating features.  The Appellant showed himself unable  to
             appreciate his son's best interests or to act  upon  them  and
             has brought about his removal from  the  family  home  to  the
             detriment of his wife and children.

         28.   The  Appellant's  behaviour,  the  public  interest  in   the
             deportation of foreign national criminals  and  the  deterrent
             effect and effect of the Rules that now apply  in  these  case
             lead me to find that the Appellant  has  not  shown  that  the
             exceptions to the automatic deportation  provisions  apply  in
             his case.

         29.   In  making  this  decision  I  do   not   underestimate   the
             difficulties this will cause  for  the  Appellant's  wife  and
             children.  Contact can be maintained and the family can  visit
             the Appellant in Jamaica, a country they have visited  in  the
             past.  The evidence does not show that they could not live  if
             they chose, I accept that their circumstances  would  be  more
             difficult than in the UK but not to the extent that  it  would
             be unjustifiably harsh for them to do so.

         30.  I have considered the Appellant's situation mainly in relation
             to his  son's  best  interests  as  his  needs  are  the  most
             significant and if the Appellant could not succeed in relation
             to his son's position then he would not be able to succeed  in
             relation to his daughter's or wife's circumstances.  There  is
             nothing in the evidence that  would  justify  considering  the
             Appellant's case, or those of  his  family,  under  Article  8
             outside the Rules and I decline to do so."

17. That is why, therefore, the appeal failed.

The Proceedings Before the Upper Tribunal

18. The Appellant, through his representatives, applied for  permission  to
    appeal.  The grounds were, in summary, to the effect  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in failing to consider  whether  the  Appellant
    fell within Exception 2 of Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002; had failed to adequately consider the situation of
    the children, particularly the Appellant's  son  and  had  inadequately
    reasoned its conclusions as to that; and had failed to consider Article
    8 of the ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.

19. Permission was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  24th
    March 2015.  The salient part of that grant reads as follows;

         "On 29th July 2003 A was sentenced to three years imprisonment  for
         supplying  controlled  drugs  of  class  A:  he  had  no   previous
         convictions.  The NOMS Report described him as being at low risk of
         serious harm to the public with a low risk of re-offending.  A  has
         been granted ILR and has two British children, a daughter  aged  12
         and an 11 year old disabled son.  Consequently, it is arguable that
         the judge's comments at [18] that  A  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
         unlawfully and with a precarious status are  inaccurate.   However,
         there is scant evidence of a  balancing  exercise,  no  mention  of
         proportionality and he does not deal with paragraph 117A-D save for
         a reference in [8]."

20. Pausing there, what is said in the grant about the Appellant having  no
    previous convictions is not,  strictly  speaking,  correct  though  the
    earlier convictions, referred to above, did not  play  a  part  in  the
    decision to make a deportation order.  As to the accuracy of the First-
    tier Tribunal's comments at paragraph 18 of its determination, it seems
    to me that what it was saying there was simply  that  the  relationship
    with AB had been formed when the Appellant was in the UK illegally.  It
    seems to me that that must be right because he did not have any  lawful
    status as at the time the two married.  I do not think, therefore, that
    what the First-tier Tribunal said was inaccurate and Mr Sharif did  not
    seek to argue before me that it was.

21. Leading on from the grant of permission there was a hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Representation was as indicated.

22. Mr Sharif, for the Appellant, relied on all three of his grounds though
    the third was adjusted somewhat.  He contended there ought to have been
    a full consideration as to the Section 115C(5) exception and  this  was
    lacking in the determination.  As to the second ground, the  First-tier
    Tribunal had recognised that there was a difficulty with respect to the
    children and had said that this called for a proper  assessment  as  to
    their needs but had then failed  to  carry  out  any  such  assessment.
    Whilst there was not an expert report about the children's needs  there
    was information in the witness statements and documents which it failed
    to consider.  As to the third ground, it was right  to  say  that  with
    respect to Article 8 in the context  of  deportation,  the  Immigration
    Rules provided a complete code such that whilst what was  suggested  in
    this ground was not technically correct, there was an absence of a full
    consideration  of  the  relevant  circumstances  in  the   context   of
    proportionality, and particularly in relation to the relationship  with
    AB, within the Rules.

23.  Mr  Mills,  for  the  Respondent,  submitted  that  the  Section  117C
    provisions  are  reflected  in  the  Immigration  Rules   relating   to
    deportation such that if the Appellant failed under the Rules, which he
    did, he would necessarily fail with respect to 117C arguments so  there
    had been no error in failing to  specifically  address  the  exemption.
    The First-tier Tribunal's consideration of the children's situation had
    been hampered by a lack of evidence of their needs.  A decision  should
    not be set aside on the  basis  of  a  failure  to  provide  sufficient
    evidence where it could have been provided and  the  burden  does  rest
    upon an Appellant.  In any event it had been accepted that  the  family
    had coped  whilst  the  Appellant  had  been  in  prison.   As  to  the
    Appellant's relationship the First-tier Tribunal had been required,  by
    the Rules and primary legislation, to attach only little weight to  it.
    Essentially,  what  was  being  said  was  that  the  only  potentially
    persuasive element of the case was the arguments  surrounding  the  son
    and if those were not sufficiently persuasive then the lesser arguments
    surrounding AB and the Appellant's daughter were bound to fail.

Discussion

24. As to the first ground, it is clear that the intention  behind  Section
    117C is that the various matters contained therein are to be taken into
    account by Courts or Tribunals when  considering  the  public  interest
    within the Immigration Rules.

25. The First-tier Tribunal did consider, amongst other things, whether the
    relationship the Appellant has with AB fell  within  paragraph  399(b).
    It clearly concluded that it did not.  It is  apparent,  from  what  it
    said at paragraph 18 of the determination that  it  had  concluded  the
    requirements in 399(b)(i) was not met because the relationship had been
    formed when the Appellant was in the UK  unlawfully.   It  is  apparent
    from  what  it  said  at  paragraph  29  that  it  had  concluded   the
    requirements in 399(b)(ii) were not met because it considered it  would
    not be unduly harsh for AB to join the Appellant in Jamaica despite its
    acceptance that the circumstances there would be more difficult than in
    the UK.  It used the term "unjustifiably  harsh"  but  it  can,  in  my
    judgment, be taken to have had the "unduly harsh" test in mind.  In any
    event there would not appear to be any obvious difference between  them
    and no point about that was taken.  In my judgment it is also  implicit
    in what the First-tier Tribunal had to say in the first  two  sentences
    of paragraph 29 of its determination that it was also finding it  would
    not be unduly harsh for AB to remain in the UK without  the  Appellant.
    Were it not so finding it would not have needed to  make  reference  to
    the possibility of contact and visits.  It is also  implicit  from  its
    indication that the appeal principally turned upon the interests of the
    Appellant and AB's son  that  it  had  not  found  the  "unduly  harsh"
    requirements as contained in paragraph 399 to have  been  met.   It  is
    clear that, in fact, whilst deciding that even the son's situation  did
    not justify the appeal succeeding under the Rules it did regard that as
    being the stronger element of  the  Appellant's  claim  such  that  the
    argument based upon the relationship was, relatively speaking,  weaker.
    Putting all of that together it can be taken to have decided,  although
    it did not expressly  say  so,  that  the  exception  contained  within
    117C(5) did not apply insofar as it related to the relationship between
    the Appellant and AB.

26. As to the exception in the context of the children, there is  no  doubt
    that the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with two qualifying children.  It  is,
    though, again, apparent that factors relevant  to  the  exception  were
    considered.  It is clear from what it  said  at  paragraph  26  of  its
    determination that it was concerned to establish whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh  for  the  children  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    Appellant.  It is apparent from what it said at paragraph 29,  that  it
    had resolved that issue against the Appellant  and  that  it  had  also
    concluded, additionally, that it would not be unduly  harsh  to  expect
    them to accompany the Appellant to Jamaica if  that  were  wished.   In
    effect, therefore, it had concluded that the effect of the  Appellant's
    deportation on the children would not be unduly  harsh  such  that  the
    exception  contained  within  Section  17C(5)  as  it  relates  to  the
    children, did not apply.  That, then, disposes of the first  Ground  of
    Appeal.

27. As to the second ground, it is certainly  right  to  say,  as  does  Mr
    Sharif, that the First-tier Tribunal recognised  the  position  of  the
    children and, in particular, the son might be difficult (see  paragraph
    23), and that ordinarily it would be in the best interests of  children
    to be cared for by both parents in a stable and loving environment (the
    same paragraph).  However, it also found, and it was open to it  to  do
    so, that the Appellant had  "spectacularly"  failed  his  son  by  drug
    dealing and, as it put it "taken him along to one of  the  deals".   It
    found that claims that  the  son's  best  interests  were  met  by  the
    Appellant remaining in the UK were severely undermined by that.  As the
    argument was developed at the hearing, though, Mr Sharif focussed  upon
    what he said was the First-tier  Tribunal's  failure  to  look  at  the
    material which was before it regarding the children and, in particular,
    the son and his specific difficulties.  In this context, the First-tier
    Tribunal had specifically noted the absence of  an  expert  report.   I
    would also observe  that  it  might  be  thought  surprising  that  the
    existing statement of special educational needs which is said to be  in
    force in respect of the son had not been provided.  Whilst  that  might
    not have had the same value as  an  expert  report  it  may  well  have
    provided helpful background material.  I do not think it  can  be  said
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  adjourn  for  further
    evidence or for expert evidence regarding the son.  The  Appellant  had
    competent legal representation and no such application had been made to
    it.  Mr Sharif, though, referred me to the witness  statements  of  the
    Appellant and AB, in particular that of AB, and  said  that  there  was
    information contained therein which it had either disregarded or failed
    to properly consider.  The First-tier Tribunal did,  indeed,  have  the
    Appellant's witness statement of 22nd September 2014 and  AB's  witness
    statement of 11th August 2014.  As he accepted, though, with respect to
    the former, there is little of a specific nature regarding the son  and
    his particular difficulties contained  therein.   I  do  note  that  at
    paragraph 7 of the statement it is said that  when  he  "plays  up"  it
    requires the input of both parents to calm him.   At  paragraph  10  he
    says that both of the children are emotionally dependent upon him.   At
    paragraph 13 he says that it would not be possible to afford  the  fees
    for "a specialist school" for his son in Jamaica.  That,  though,  does
    not amount  to  detailed  evidence.  There  is,  though,  some  further
    information contained in AB's witness  statement.   In  particular,  at
    paragraph 6, she says that  her  son  suffers  from  brain  damage  and
    autism, that he is "statemented" (that is a reference to their being in
    force a statement of special educational needs in respect of  him)  and
    that he attends a special school.

28. It does not seem to me that it can  be  successfully  argued  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was not aware of the information contained  in  the
    witness statements or did not take it into account.  At paragraph 17 of
    the determination it referred to the witness statements  and  it  noted
    that the son is disabled, that he attends a special school and that  he
    receives disability living allowance.  Further, it did  clearly  regard
    the  son's  difficulties  and  the  consequent  question  of  his  best
    interests as being the most  significant  factor  in  the  appeal.   In
    truth, though, the witness statements did not go into a great  deal  of
    detail regarding the particular needs of the son nor, indeed, the needs
    of the daughter and, insofar as it might be argued that the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment of those needs was inadequate,  it  seems  to  me
    that it simply did the best it could with the evidence before it.

29. There was a written contention, in Ground 2, to  the  effect  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had failed to explain how the best interests of the
    two children would be  best  served  by  the  Appellant's  deportation.
    However, as Mr Mills correctly points out, that was not at all the test
    which it had to apply.  There was a suggestion, with reference to  case
    law, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  properly  taken  as  its
    starting point the fact that the best interests of children will be for
    them to be with their parents and to have stability.  It is  said  that
    it did not give adequate reasons "as to how this  is  achieved  by  the
    Appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom".   Again,  though,  that
    seeks to pose  the  wrong  question.   In  any  event,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did take the view that, ordinarily, it would be  in  the  best
    interests of children to be with their parents, it said so, but it then
    explained why such arguments were weakened in light of the view it took
    as to the Appellant's conduct.

30. In view of all of the above I conclude that Ground 2 does not establish
    any error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.

31. The third Ground of Appeal  was  to  the  effect  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had simply failed to consider the  possibility  of  Article  8
    outside of the Immigration Rules.  However, in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, it was said that
    with respect to deportation cases,  the  Immigration  Rules  provide  a
    complete code when considering whether the  deportation  of  a  foreign
    criminal is contrary to Article 8.  Thus, strictly speaking, there  was
    no scope for a consideration of Article 8 outside  the  Rules  at  all.
    However, Mr Sharif, in oral submissions, adjusted the argument  to  the
    effect that there had not been an assessment, within the Rules,  as  to
    whether or not the public interest in  deportation  was  outweighed  by
    other factors which amounted to very compelling circumstances over  and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  Rules.   Thus,
    Mr Sharif had in mind paragraph 398.

32. The First-tier Tribunal, with admirable  succinctness,  summarised  the
    relevant Immigration Rules at paragraph 4 of its determination.  It  is
    clear from what it said there that it  appreciated  it  would  have  to
    consider the exceptional circumstances issue if it were  to  find  that
    paragraphs 399 or 399A did not apply.  Its  reference  to  "exceptional
    circumstances" at  paragraph  4  seems  to  suggest  it  had,  in  this
    particular context, the Immigration Rules in the form they  were  prior
    to 28th July 2014 in mind, otherwise, in all probability, it would have
    referred to a test of very compelling circumstances and, of course,  it
    had already taken the view, which was not challenged, and which it  set
    out at paragraph 5 of its determination,  that  it  had  to  apply  the
    Immigration Rules in the form they were as at the date of  the  hearing
    (2nd February 2015).  If that did amount to any form of error,  though,
    it was one which was in favour of the Appellant in any event.

33. In  considering  398  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  specifically
    indicate it was conducting a balancing exercise.  Hence  the  reference
    to the "scant evidence" in the grant of permission to appeal.   It  did
    not specifically  say  it  had  concluded  that  there  were  not  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A or even (to refer back to the Rules as they were prior  to
    28th July 2014) exceptional circumstances.  Nevertheless, it had  given
    full consideration to  all  of  the  relevant  circumstances.   It  had
    concluded that it was not unduly harsh for the family to remain in  the
    UK without the Appellant and it had concluded that the evidence did not
    show they would not be able to accompany him to Jamaica if that is what
    was wished.  It had noted a lack of clear evidence, in the form  of  an
    expert report, regarding the son's best  interests.   It  had  accepted
    that the son had the difficulties it referred  to  and  also  that  the
    daughter had been "struggling without him" as a permanent  presence  in
    the family home" and that she had not adapted well to  life  at  senior
    school.  It took a dim view of his offending, which it was entitled  to
    do, and attached weight to the public interest in  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals, as it was obliged to do, and  the  deterrent  effect
    that would have on others.  It seems to me that  it  is  apparent  from
    what it said that it was, in effect, finding that, the requirements  of
    399 nor 399A being met, there were not very compelling circumstances or
    exceptional circumstances.  Looked at from another  perspective  it  is
    clear, from the findings, that if it had specifically asked itself that
    question it would have inevitably resolved it against the Appellant and
    that would have been so whichever version of the Rules it was applying.

34. In light of the above I conclude that the third Ground of Appeal is not
    made out.

35. My having concluded that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not involve an error of law I  must  decide  that  its  decision  shall
    stand.  As the  First-tier  Tribunal  itself  noted,  the  regime  that
    applies to deportation is now considerably stricter than it  has  been.
    It had to apply the statutory regime in existence and  I  have  had  to
    consider its decision against the background of that statutory  regime.



Conclusions

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.

37. Its decision shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   I  continue  that
order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

