
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01488/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  S. A. C.
                (Anonymity Order made by First-tier Tribunal)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. K. Mukulu of counsel, instructed by Just &
                    Brown, solicitors


                                  DECISION

    1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal  against
       the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson who, following  a
       hearing on 16 March 2015, allowed SAC's appeal against a  deportation
       order made as a consequence of her conviction on 18 July 2013 of  two
       counts of possession Class A drugs with intent to  supply  and  other
       offences for which she was sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.

    2. It is common ground and agreed between the parties that the  decision
       of the judge discloses legal error. Therefore,  the  nature  of  that
       error can be identified briefly.

    3. The judge has applied the wrong version of the immigration rules, the
       consequence of which being that she applied the wrong legal test.  At
       paragraph 31 of her decision the judge said this:

           "At the date of the decision, the version  of  paragraph  399(a)
           that was  in  force  at  the  time  required  the  Appellant  to
           establish  that  she   had   a   genuine   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child who is a British citizen and  that  it
           was unreasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  UK.  It  is
           accepted  by  the  respondent  that  there  is  a  genuine   and
           subsisting relationship between the Appellant  and  C,  and  the
           question that remains is whether it is reasonable to expect  him
           to leave the UK..."

       However, as has been made clear by the Court of Appeal in YM (Uganda)
       v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, the rules that should have been  applied
       were those in force at  the  date  of  the  hearing.  Therefore,  the
       question for the judge was not the one that she addressed but whether
       the effect of SAC's deportation upon her child would be unduly harsh.

    4. Mr Mukulu sought to argue that the error  was  not  material  to  the
       outcome because the judge held also that:

           "... However, C is not only a British national, but a citizen of
           the EU by virtue of his British  citizenship.  Bearing  in  mind
           that the Appellant is his primary carer and, on my  findings  of
           fact,  primary  care  is  not  shared  with  C's   father,   the
           consequence of deporting the appellant will be that  C  will  be
           unable to continue  to  live  in  the  UK.  This  infringes  the
           Zambrano principle (see Sanade and others  (British  children  -
           Zambrano - Dereci [2012] UKUT (IAC), and makes  it  unreasonable
           under paragraph 399(a)(ii) to expect C to leave the UK with  his
           mother, which will occur because he will be unable  to  continue
           to live in  the  UK  without  her.  The  Appellant's  appeal  is
           therefore allowed under  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration
           Rules."

       It is plain that legal error is disclosed  by  this  reasoning  also,
       which  compounds  the  first  error.  The  judge  has   impermissibly
       conflated an assessment under the rules, and the wrong version of the
       rules, with European law. In any event, the child's father,  who  had
       been said to have played "a vital role" in the life of the child had,
       with assistance from another relative a sister, provided care for the
       child while SAC was in prison. Further, once again, in this reasoning
       the assessment is made, wrongly, through the prism of  reasonableness
       rather than asking the correct question, which was whether the effect
       upon the child would be unduly harsh.

    5. For these reasons I am unable to accept Mr Mukulu's  submission  that
       the outcome of the appeal would have been the same even if the  judge
       had applied the correct legal test. That is enough to establish  that
       the decision of Judge Robertson cannot stand and must be set aside.

    6. It might be observed that there  are  other  difficulties  with  this
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal. At paragraph 16 of her decision,
       under a heading "Legal Provisions and Burden and Standard  of  Proof"
       the judge said:

           "... (SAC's representative) referred to the provisions of  s117C
           of the 2002 Act, but this would only be relevant where a  person
           has been convicted of an offence for which  he  has  received  a
           prison sentence which is in excess of 4 years."

       If the judge proceeded upon the basis that S117C of the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended, applied only to  foreign
       criminals sentenced to more than 4 years' imprisonment then  she  was
       wrong to do so. That may explain why the judge made no  reference  to
       s117 in arriving at her conclusions.

       Summary of decision:

    7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material error of law such as to
       require that it be set aside.

    8. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
       appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
       afresh.

Signed      [pic]
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 15 December 2015
