

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01172/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th October 2014                          |On 31st October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                                   CCVT-W
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, counsel, instructed by Dickson
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) was granted permission to appeal  a
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal which allowed the  appeal  of
      the respondent (hereafter the claimant) on the grounds that the First-
      tier Tribunal judge failed to give adequate reasons for  finding  that
      the effect of the deportation of the claimant would  be  unduly  harsh
      and  failed  to  have  adequate  regard  to  the  public  interest  in
      deportation.


   2. The judge found that the claimant fell within  Exception  2  of  s117C
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The judge found [27]


        "I have good evidence before me from the Appellant and his  parents
        that he sees [S] two or three times a week  and  further  that  the
        family as a whole contribute financially to [S's] upkeep. In  these
        circumstances I find that his relationship is one where the  effect
        of the Appellant's deportation on his child would be unduly harsh."


        Background


   3. The claimant arrived in the UK on 23rd July 2005 aged 15 and was given
      indefinite leave to enter. His son S, a British citizen, was  born  on
      19th January 2012. On 1st November 2012 the claimant was convicted  of
      possession of Class C drug and using threatening behaviour  for  which
      he received a community order on 1st February 2013.  On  2nd  November
      2012 (when his child was some 9 months old)  he  was  sentenced  to  2
      years imprisonment following conviction for robbery.


        Error of law

   4. I indicated prior to submissions that I had some  difficulty  identify
      the reasons for the finding that the  effect  of  deportation  on  the
      child  was  unduly  harsh.  Ms  Cleghorn  said  that  there  had  been
      substantial and significant oral evidence as a  consequence  of  which
      the claimant's case was compelling and could and should  succeed.  She
      submitted  that  it  was  clear  (for  example  from   [22]   of   the
      determination) that the judge had had very much in mind the factors to
      be considered and it could not thus be successfully submitted that the
      judge  had  failed  to  take  account  of  the  public   interest   in
      deportation. She further submitted that the evidence before the  judge
      was such that the effect on the child was evidently unduly harsh.


   5.  Mr McVeety referred to the lack of  any  mention  whatsoever  of  the
      public interest in deportation, the lack  of  reference  to  the  oral
      evidence and the social workers report and the lack of  identification
      of any factors that could lead to a  conclusion  that  it  was  unduly
      harsh on the child for the claimant to be deported.

   6. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the claimant  had  a  genuine
      and subsisting relationship with his son that is on-going. The failure
      of his former partner (his son's mother) to attend  the  hearing,  the
      judge said, undermined the quality of that relationship.  The  child's
      mother  is  the  primary  carer  of  the  child.  He   commenced   his
      relationship with his son when he had indefinite leave to  remain.  He
      has the support of his mother,  father  and  siblings  and  they  have
      contact  with  the  child,  which  continued  during  the   claimant's
      imprisonment.


   7. On the basis of those  facts  the  judge  found  that  the  effect  of
      deportation on the child would be unduly harsh. There is a  dearth  of
      reasoning for that conclusion. It is self evident that the removal  of
      the claimant from  contact  with  his  son  would  be  harsh  but  the
      possibility of deportation is a consequence of committing crime, which
      results in imprisonment. The claimant has not resided with his  former
      partner since the child was 8 months old and he had spent 11 moths  in
      prison. It is simply not possible from the determination to  establish
      on what basis the judge reached the conclusions he did.  He  makes  no
      reference to the  public  interest  in  deportation  and  although  it
      appears he  was  aware  of  s117  there  is  no  engagement  with  the
      criminality of the claimant or what the consequences to the child  may
      or may not be or what the nature of his relationship  with  the  child
      is.

   8. I am satisfied that there  is  an  error  of  law  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge in failing to give any or any adequate reasons for  the
      conclusions reached such that it is not possible to understand on what
      basis he has reached the conclusions he has.

   9. In the light of the Practice Direction of the Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber dated 25th September 2012 and the  lack  of  findings  by  the
      judge, this appeal is suitable for redetermination by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard;
      no findings, such as they are, preserved.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be heard afresh by the
    First-tier Tribunal.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)


                                    Date 28th October 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
