
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01343/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd June 2014                              |On 24th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Balasupraniyan Navasuthan

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr David Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Smith instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration Aid Unit


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  To avoid confusion I shall refer to the Secretary of State
    as "the respondent", as she was before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    shall refer to Mr Navasuthan as "the appellant", as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Secretary of State appeals the decision of  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Panel, comprising First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford sitting with Dr de
    Barros, who, in a determination  promulgated  on  24th  October,  2013,
    allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
    taken on 13th June, 2013 to refuse to revoke  a  deportation  order  by
    virtue of Section 5(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.

3.   The  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and also dismissed his humanitarian protection appeal.  They
    allowed his appeal on human rights grounds under Article 3 and  allowed
    his appeal against the appellant's deportation order.  The Secretary of
    State sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal.   In  granting
    permission Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray said this:-

     "The grounds of application state that the Tribunal misdirected  itself
         in law by  misapplying  the  appropriate  test.   They  state  that
         medical care is only relevant to Article 8  where  an  individual's
         ties to the UK have  a  direct  bearing  on  his  prognosis:  -  MM
         Zimbabwe [2012] EWCA Civ 279.  They refer to GS and EO India [2012]
         UKUT 00397 relating to Article 3 health cases and state  that  this
         is a  case  which  makes  it  clear  that  by  withdrawing  medical
         treatment in the host country, thus shortening life expectancy,  is
         not  in  itself  capable  of  engaging   Article   3   unless   the
         circumstances are exceptional.  They refer to N [2005] UKHL 31  and
         N [2008] 47 EHRR 39 stating that any extension of the principles in
         N will be for the higher courts.

         In the determination, the Tribunal finds that the appellant  cannot
         return to Sri Lanka, because of his mental  health  issues.   There
         seems to be no analysis of what treatment there  will  be  for  the
         appellant on return to Sri Lanka.  The  appellant  finds  that  his
         treatment in Sri Lanka on his return and  in  preparation  for  his
         return will cause him significant trauma, but much of this is based
         on supposition and conjecture.  The Tribunal  may  have  misapplied
         the appropriate test."

5.   Before me, Mr  Mills  indicated  that  having  carefully  prepared  the
    appeal, he believed that good reasons had been given by the  First-tier
    Tribunal in allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  3  and  in  all  the
    circumstances this is one of those  very  exceptional  cases  where  it
    appears that the appellant will be at risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
    because he will be returning on a travel document and will,  therefore,
    be questioned on his return at the airport.  Depending on his responses
    to the questions put to him, he may be at risk.  Mr Mills accepted that
    the appellant's response was not likely to be good given  his  apparent
    illness.  He confirmed that in his view  there  was  no  error  in  the
    Tribunal's determination.

6.   I am very grateful to Mr Mills.  I  believe  that  he  was  correct  to
    concede that the determination was not flawed.  I uphold the Tribunal's
    decision which will stand.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
