
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01599/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|Extempore judgment given             |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                         Mr Bradley Ricardo Buchanan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Kirk, Counsel instructed by Bail for
                    Immigration Detainees (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  EXTEMPORE
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr Bradley  Ricardo  Buchanan,  who  was  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was
    promulgated on 2 June 2015 following a hearing  on  28  May  2015.   Mr
    Buchanan is the subject of a deportation order made  on  24  July  2014
    having been convicted of conspiring to sell  or  selling  a  prohibited
    weapon and selling ammunition when not  a  registered  dealer.  He  was
    sentenced to six years' imprisonment.  He  had  a  number  of  previous
    convictions as well.  The substance of the appeal concentrated  on  the
    relationship that he had  between  his  partner,  former  partners  and
    children and his social and cultural ties within the UK given  that  he
    has been here in the UK since he was a very young child.

2.   The judge went through each of the arguments and submissions that  were
    made to him and reached findings which  are  set  out  in  considerable
    detail from paragraph 56 of his decision.   The  judge  considered  the
    nature and the seriousness of the offence, the length of  time  in  the
    UK, his conduct since the offence, the  nationalities  of  the  various
    persons concerned, his family, whether his spouse and partner  knew  of
    the offence when entering  into  the  relationship,  the  ages  of  the
    children, the seriousness  of  difficulties  a  partner  may  encounter
    overseas, the best interests of the children, the social, cultural  and
    family ties with the host country and country of destination.

3.   The judge reached findings on those matters which in  this  appeal  the
    appellant disagrees  with.   The  disagreements  are  set  out  in  the
    application for permission to appeal and referred to as  evidence  that
    the judge has allegedly not taken account of and the  judge's  approach
    to the previous decisions and previous evidence.

4.   Our view is that the conclusions reached by the judge on those  matters
    were conclusions that were open to him on the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before him.  It  may  be  that  another  judge  might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion but the conclusions  reached  were  not  perverse.
    However, even if each and every criticism of the  judge's  findings  as
    regards the appellant's private and family life in the UK,  the  extent
    of his social and cultural integration into the UK, whether or  not  he
    knows anyone or would be able to reintegrate into Jamaica were taken at
    its highest those matters only go to paragraphs  399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

5.   This appellant has been convicted of  very  serious  offences  and  has
    been sentenced to six years' imprisonment.  He therefore  has  to  show
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  in  the   two
    Exceptions.  Although the skeleton that was presented to the First-tier
    Tribunal  has  a  heading  of  "very  compelling   circumstances"   the
    references in that skeleton actually only go to 399 and 399A.

6.   Mr Kirk submitted that the judge ought  to  have  looked  properly  and
    given proper and fuller reasons in connection with the  two  Exceptions
    and that those matters themselves would impact on  whether  there  were
    very compelling reasons.  Although  there  may  well  be  circumstances
    where family relationships  are  such  that  they  do  amount  to  very
    compelling circumstances over and above the requirements to meet 399 or
    399A there is nothing  in  this  appellant's  circumstances  that  even
    approaches that.

7.   Furthermore the First-tier Tribunal in paragraph 101 states:

         "The test of 'very compelling  circumstances'  is  clearly  a  high
         standard and requires circumstances over and above those  specified
         in the Exceptions.  I find that no  evidence  has  been  presented,
         which leads me to conclude that  there  are  such  very  compelling
         circumstances  such  as  to  outweigh  the   public   interest   in
         deportation of a foreign criminal who has  committed  such  serious
         offences for which he was sentenced to six years' imprisonment."

8.   The application for  permission  to  appeal  does  not  challenge  that
    finding.  The application for permission to appeal does not assert that
    evidence had been presented  or  what  evidence  had  been  before  the
    Tribunal addressing the very compelling circumstances  test  such  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law, and for  those  reasons  we
    find that there has been no error of law such that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be remade.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 21st January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

