
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01421/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 February 2014                             |On 21 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                PIOTR TYLENDA


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Piotr Tylenda, was born  on  27  July  1988  and  is  a
    citizen of Poland. I shall refer hereafter to  the  respondent  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the respondent (as they were
    before the First-tier Tribunal).  On 1 July 2013, a decision  was  made
    to deport the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  under  Regulation
    19(3)(b) in accordance with Regulation 21 of the Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006   Regulations").    The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Reed;  Mr  D  R
    Bremmer JP) which, in a determination promulgated on 4  December  2013,
    allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the appeal hearing at Bradford on 25 February 2014,  the  respondent
    appeared in person and was assisted by his brother.  He spoke in Polish
    with the assistance of an interpreter.  Mr M  Diwnycz,  a  Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, appeared for the appellant.

 3. The relevant provisions of the 2006 Regulations are as follows:
      6.  (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person" means a person who is
           an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

                 (a) a job seeker;

                 (b) a worker;

                 (c) a self employed person;

                 (d) a self sufficient person; or

                 (e) a student

           (2) A person who is no longer working  shall  not  cease  to  be
           treated as a worker for the purpose
           of paragraph (1)(b) if-


                 (a) he is temporarily unable to work as the  result  of  an
                 illness or accident;


                 (b) he is in duly recorded involuntary  unemployment  after
                 having been employed in the United Kingdom,  provided  that
                 he  has  registered  as  a  jobseeker  with  the   relevant
                 employment office and-
                 (i) he was employed for one year or  more  before  becoming
                 unemployed;
                 (ii) he has been unemployed for no more than six months; or
                 (iii) he can provide evidence that he is seeking employment
                 in the United Kingdom and has a  genuine  chance  of  being
                 engaged;


                 (c) he is involuntarily  unemployed  and  has  embarked  on
                 vocational training; or


                 (d) he has  voluntarily  ceased  working  and  embarked  on
                 vocational  training  that  is  related  to  his   previous
                 employment.


           (3) A person who is no longer in self-employment shall not cease
           to be treated as a  self-employed  person  for  the  purpose  of
           paragraph (1)(c) if he  is  temporarily  unable  to  pursue  his
           activity as a self-employed person as the result of  an  illness
           or accident.


           (4) For the purpose of paragraph  (1)(a),  "jobseeker"  means  a
           person who enters the United Kingdom in order to seek employment
           and can provide evidence that he is seeking employment and has a
           genuine chance of being engaged.


      14. (1) A qualified person is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom
           for so long as he remains a qualified person.


           (5)    But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b)

      15. (1)  The following persons shall acquire the right  to  reside  in
           the United Kingdom permanently -


           (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the  United  Kingdom  in
           accordance with these Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
           five years;


           ......


           (3)  But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b)


      19. (3)  Subject to paragraph (4) and  (5),  a  person  who  has  been
           admitted to, or acquired  a  right  to  reside  in,  the  United
           Kingdom under these Regulations may be removed from  the  United
           Kingdom if -


                 (a)  he does not have or ceases to have a right  to  reside
                 under these Regulations; or


                 (b)  he would otherwise be entitled to reside in the United
                 Kingdom under these Regulations but the Secretary of  State
                 has decided that his removal is justified on the grounds of
                 public  policy,  public  security  or  public   health   in
                 accordance with regulation 21.

           (4) A person must not be removed  under  paragraph  (3)  as  the
           automatic  consequence  of  having  recourse   to   the   social
           assistance system of the United Kingdom.

           (5) a person must not be removed under paragraph (3) if he has a
           right to remain In United Kingdom by  virtue  of  leave  granted
           under the 1971 act  unless  his  removal  is  justified  on  the
           grounds of public policy, public security or  public  health  in
           accordance with regulation 21.

      21. (1)  In these  regulation  a  'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
           decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security
           or public health.


           (2)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  to  serve  economic
           ends.


           (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person
           which a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except
           on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


           (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except  on  imperative
           grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who -


                 (a)  has resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                 period of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision


                 (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the  relevant  decision
                 is necessary in his best interests, as provided for in  the
                 Convention of Rights of the Child adopted  by  the  General
                 Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.


           (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken  on  grounds  of  public
           policy or public security it shall,  in  addition  to  complying
           with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles -


               (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle   of
           proportionality;


                 (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;


                 (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                 represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                 threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                 society;


                 (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;


                 (e)  a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                 themselves justify the decision.


           (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of  public
           policy or public  security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
           resident in the United Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take
           account of considerations such as  the  age,  state  of  health,
           family and economic situation of the person, the person's length
           of residence in the United  Kingdom,  the  person's  social  and
           cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent  of
           the person's links with his country of origin.




 4. The First-tier Tribunal  found at [18] as follows:


         Having carefully considered  all  of  the  evidence,  we  make  the
      following findings in relation to this aspect of the appeal:


(1)  There is no dispute that the appellant is a  Polish  National  who  was
      born on 27 July 1988. He is a single man with no children  and  is  in
      good health.

(2)  We accept what he says about having come to the UK in  2006  and  again
      in 2007, because he gave his evidence about this in a  straightforward
      manner, was supported by the other witnesses and had provided what  we
      consider to be reliable  documentary  evidence  of  employment,  which
      included amongst other things payslips, P60s and P45s, HMRC  documents
      and a Home Office Accession State Worker Registration  Document  dated
      11 December 2007. Having considered all of this, we  accept  what  the
      appellant said  about  having  continuous  employment  in  the  United
      Kingdom for different employers from September 2007  when  he  started
      working for an agency called Prestige until the end of  2011  when  he
      said his employment in the UK ceased.

(3)  Although the appellant was in work in United  Kingdom  throughout  this
      time, he was not even on his own account in work for a period of  five
      years. The appellant said he had never registered as  unemployed,  and
      so could not have been treated as  a  "worker"  after  his  employment
      stopped in late 2011. We have  also  considered  whether  or  not  the
      appellant could have been considered as a jobseeker  after  this,  but
      the appellant himself said that there were no jobs  available  and  in
      view of this, we consider that the appellant has not shown that he had
      a genuine chance of being engaged even though he may have been looking
      for work. The appellant has  not  therefore  shown  that  he  met  the
      criteria set out in Regulation 6(4) and could not have been classed as
      a jobseeker after 2011.  In  view  of  this,  the  appellant  has  not
      acquired  a  permanent  right  of  residence  in  the  UK  under   the
      Regulations.

(4)  We accept what the appellant  said  about  his  relationship  with  Ms.
      Kasprzak. They were not cohabiting, but having heard her evidence,  we
      accept that it is their intention to live together if the appellant is
      released and allowed to remain in the UK. We see no  reason  to  doubt
      she has a son aged 10 living with her. We accept what was  said  about
      the relationship, because it would have been easy  for  the  appellant
      and Ms. Kasprzak to embellish  their  evidence  by  claiming  to  have
      cohabited prior to the appellant's prison sentence.

(5)  Having heard the evidence of the appellant and his brother,  we  accept
      what the appellant said about his mother being in the  USA  and  there
      having been no contact between the appellant and his father since  the
      appellant was about eight years old. He did refer to a  maternal  aunt
      in Poland, but the core of his family circle, comprising his  brother,
      nephews and nieces and his intended partner/fiancee is in the UK.

(6)  As is usual in deportation hearings, the  respondent  has  not  however
      provided any detailed account of what actually happened and  there  is
      for example no victim impact statement before us. Albeit that we  have
      little information as to  what  took  place  in  the  affray,  we  are
      satisfied that the offence committed by the appellant was serious.  We
      say this because according to the sentencing judge, the appellant  was
      part of a group who went round to the victim's house seeking  him  out
      as a target. Some (not including the appellant) had  weapons  and  all
      new that there was an  intention  of  using  violence.  The  appellant
      committed  the  offence  in  breach  of  a   suspended   sentence   of
      imprisonment. Albeit that the offence was committed only  days  before
      the operational period of the suspended sentence came to  an  end,  we
      see this as an aggravating feature of the most recent  conviction.  We
      have also considered that the appellant had an earlier (albeit  spent)
      conviction for battery dated from  9  March  2009  for  which  he  was
      conditionally discharged. We consider that it is relevant to take this
      into account notwithstanding that it was a spent conviction because it
      presents a full picture of the escalating nature  of  the  appellant's
      offending conduct.

(7)  We were impressed with the evidence given by the  three  witnesses  and
      we are satisfied from this that the appellant has a strong network  of
      family support here in the UK. The appellant's partner and his brother
      did not appear to be naive. We say this because Ms. Kasprzak expressed
      her disappointment with what the appellant had done and it  was  clear
      that she considered that he had let down. We  were  also  particularly
      impressed with the evidence from the appellant's brother.  He  had  no
      obligation to tell us that he had been in trouble in the past, but was
      open about this and we accept that he has managed  to  put  this  past
      behind him. In view of our assessment of the witnesses, we accept that
      they were sincere in saying that they  considered  the  appellant  had
      changed whilst in prison. This may of course not necessarily mean that
      their assessment of the appellant is correct. However, we bear in mind
      that in better economic times, the appellant had a  good  work  record
      here in the UK and he has now experienced his first taste of  custody.
      We are also drawn to the conclusion  that  the  appellant  has  better
      prospects of rehabilitation here in the UK with  the  support  of  his
      brother and Ms. Kasprzak than if he were to return to Poland.

(8)  There is no evidence that the appellant  has  undertaken  any  offender
      related work during his period in prison. On the other hand, there  is
      no evidence to gainsay what he said about having  asked  his  offender
      manager about this and  having  been  told  that  such  work  was  not
      required. We say  this  because  the  respondent  has  not  taken  the
      opportunity to provide us with the usual NOMS report from the National
      Probation  Service  dealing  with  any  future  risks  posed  by   the
      appellant. Such evidence is particularly important  in  appeals  under
      the 2006 Regulations, because we are exclusively  concerned  with  the
      risks posed by the appellant not the need to  deter  others.  We  have
      borne in mind that the appellant was only serving the  custodial  part
      of his sentence for a relatively short period  of  time,  having  only
      been sentenced in May 2013.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  has  not
      undertaken any offender related courses whilst  in  custody  does  not
      necessarily mean that he has not taken the opportunity to reflect upon
      his behaviour.

(9)  Having considered  all  of  the  evidence,  including  the  appellant's
      written submissions, we find that  the  appellant  has  shown  to  the
      required standard that he does intend to rehabilitate himself and stay
      out of trouble. We say this because we consider that he has  expressed
      sincere contrition and remorse for  what  he  has  done  and  we  also
      consider that he has not sought to avoid responsibility for  his  past
      offending behaviour. His previous work history shows that he  has  the
      ability to be someone who contributes to society and  he  can  benefit
      from the close support from his brother and partner.




 5. First, the Secretary of State takes issue with the  Tribunal's  alleged
    failure to consider whether the appellant  was  "genuinely  integrated"
    into  United  Kingdom  society.   (See  paragraph  21(6)  of  the  2006
    Regulations above).  The grounds note that the appellant's primary ties
    in the United Kingdom are with his own co-nationals  (his  brother  and
    his girlfriend) and that the appellant had spent his formative years in
    Poland and still has family members living there.   I  understand  from
    what the appellant told me at the hearing that he  only  has  one  aunt
    living in Poland with whom he has no contact whatever.  The  fact  that
    the appellant had to tell me that information  highlights  one  of  the
    difficulties which faced the Tribunal in the First-tier.  The  Tribunal
    had to consider  the  evidence  that  it  had  available  and  reach  a
    decision.  It may, perhaps, have been hampered to some  extent  by  the
    fact  that  the  appellant  needs  to  give  his  evidence  through  an
    interpreter and was not represented at the hearing.  The  Tribunal  was
    also, however, hampered by the fact that the respondent had  failed  to
    file with the Tribunal the usual documents which one  would  expect  to
    see in such an appeal as this,  namely  the  NOMS  Report  and  similar
    documents.  In the circumstances, I  consider  that  the  Tribunal  has
    carried out a very thorough assessment and  analysis  of  the  evidence
    which it did have before it.  The Tribunal did record [11(3)] that  the
    appellant had limited  contacts  with  family  members  and  others  in
    Poland.  It was aware that the appellant had first come to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2006  and,  although  he  had  returned  to  Poland  in  the
    meantime, he had returned in  2011  to  seek  work.   At  [18(7)],  the
    Tribunal noted that "the appellant had a good work record here  in  the
    UK ..." and concluded that  the  appellant  "has  better  prospects  of
    rehabilitation here in the UK with the support of his  brother  and  Ms
    Kasprzak [his girlfriend] than if he were  returned  to  Poland."   The
    Tribunal did not make that finding explicitly in  the  context  of  the
    appellant's integration in United Kingdom society but it correctly drew
    attention to the fact that the appellant had lived and  worked  in  the
    United Kingdom intermittently since he was 18 years old  and  that  his
    work record here had been "good".  The Tribunal was well aware that the
    appellant's "primary ties" were with his brother and his girlfriend and
    it was aware also the appellant had chosen  to  give  his  evidence  in
    Polish and that there was no evidence to indicate  that  the  appellant
    was completely unable to speak English.

 6. The grounds of appeal also take issue with the Tribunal's findings that
    the appellant had the continuing support of his brother and  girlfriend
    in the United Kingdom (that support had  not  prevented  the  appellant
    from offending) but, once again, those were facts known  to  and  taken
    account of by the Tribunal.  The question is whether, in the  light  of
    the matters raised in the grounds of appeal, it can  properly  be  said
    that the Tribunal  has  failed  to  take  into  account  those  factors
    described in paragraph 21(6) of the  2006  Regulations.   Obviously,  a
    different and more negative view of the  appellant's  integration  into
    United Kingdom society and the availability of rehabilitation  here  in
    the United Kingdom as opposed to in Poland, could have been adopted  by
    a Tribunal but that is not  the  point.   The  point  is  whether  this
    Tribunal erred in law such that its determination should be  set  aside
    by failing in its duty to apply the 2006 Regulations.  I find  that  it
    did not fail in that duty in its clearly expressed, detailed  and  well
    reasoned determination.  It is the task of the Tribunal  to  weigh  the
    various items of evidence (I  have  already  noted  that  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal was limited) and to reach a reasoned conclusion.  I
    find that the Tribunal  did  exactly  that.   The  Tribunal  could,  of
    course, have given greater weight to those matters referred to  in  the
    grounds of appeal but I find that its failure or refusal to do so  does
    not undermine its reasoning to the extent suggested by the Secretary of
    State.  I note that paragraph 21(6) of the 2006 Regulations  speaks  in
    the same sentence of the "person's social and cultural integration into
    the United Kingdom" and "the extent of  the  person's  links  with  his
    country of origin."  Those latter links were found by the  Tribunal  to
    be very limited whilst the appellant's primary relationships  with  his
    brother and girlfriend are with individuals  who,  but  notwithstanding
    the fact that they are also Polish, have to all  intents  and  purposes
    settled down  and  found  work  in  this  country.   I  note  that  the
    appellant's brother has been living in the United Kingdom since 2005.

 7. In the circumstances, I do not find that the Tribunal has erred in  law
    such that its determination falls to be set aside.   The  Tribunal  has
    taken into account  all  relevant  evidence  and  has  considered  that
    evidence in the light of the relevant parts of the 2006 Regulations.

DECISION

 8. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 15 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
