
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01673/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 February 2014                           |On 10 April 2014             |
|Prepared 3 March 2014                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            marcelino adao gomes


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
Audu & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission against a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Callow  and
    Mrs J L Schmitt JP, Non Legal Member) promulgated on 20  November  2013
    in which the Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  of  Marcelino  Adao  Gomes
    against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  make  a  deportation
    order against him under the provisions of Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, the order to be made under  Section
    3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before us we will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly we will refer  to  Mr
    Marcelino Adao Gomes as the appellant as he was  the  appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant, born on 18 May 1985 is a citizen of Angola.  He  arrived
    in Britain on 24 February 1997 at the age of 11 with his  15  year  old
    sister.  They claimed asylum on arrival and although  their  claim  was
    refused they were granted exceptional leave to  remain  until  19  July
    1999. That leave was then extended until July 2003.  They were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 25 September  2008.   The  appellant  has
    therefore lived in Britain for over sixteen years.

4.   The appellant is married to Nilza Susana Cruz Da  Costa,  a  Portuguese
    national born on 19 November 1987 who has lived in  Britain  since  the
    age of 3 and  is  exercising  Treaty  rights  here.   They  have  three
    children:  S G on 10 June 2006, S I G born on 5 August 2007 and S  R  G
    born on 13 October 2013.

5.   On  18  August  2003  the  appellant  was  cautioned  on  suspicion  of
    shoplifting.  On 9 January 2006 he was convicted  at  Camberwell  Green
    Magistrates' Court of possessing an  offensive  weapon  in  public  and
    sentenced  to  twelve  weeks'  imprisonment  in  a   Young   Offender's
    Institute.  He was convicted of dangerous  driving,  driving  otherwise
    than in accordance with his licence, using a  vehicle  while  uninsured
    and failing to surrender and ordered to do 200 hours' unpaid work on 24
    October 2005.

6.   On 15 December 2007 the appellant was arrested on suspicion of  robbery
    and held on remand in custody until he was granted bail  on  28  August
    2008.  On 7 April 2009 he  was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to  rob  and
    sentenced to  eleven  years'  imprisonment  on  22  April  2009.   That
    sentence was reduced on appeal to ten years.

7.   The appellant had served his sentence by 21 August 2013 and he was  due
    to be released on licence.  He was then kept in  immigration  detention
    until being granted bail on 17 September 2013.  One of  the  conditions
    of bail was that he was required to live with his  stepfather's  cousin
    away from the family home although he could have contact with his  wife
    and children.

8.   It does not appear that the appellant has  done  any  work  in  Britain
    apart from operating a market stall at one stage.

9.   The reasons for the decision to deport the appellant were set out in  a
    letter of 9 August 2013 in which a  member  of  the  Criminal  Casework
    Group at the Home Office considered the appellant's  relationship  with
    his wife and children and the issue of removing the appellant under the
    EEA Regulations.  It was accepted that any deportation of the appellant
    had to be in accordance with Regulation  21  of  the  2006  Regulations
    which state that an EEA national or a family member of an EEA  national
    who had the right of permanent residence in the  United  Kingdom  could
    only be deported on serious grounds of public policy or public security
    and that an EEA national who had resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of at least ten years prior to the deportation  could
    only be deported on imperative  grounds  of  public  security.   Having
    referred to Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations and to the  judgments
    of the European Court of Justice in Lassal (C-162/09) and Ziolkowski (C-
    424/10) and Tsakouridis (C-145/09) and the Court of Appeal judgment  in
    FE [2012] EWCA 11199 it was stated that it was not accepted  that  time
    spent in prison constituted lawful residence.

10.  It was accepted that the appellant met the criteria  to  qualify  as  a
    family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  but  it  was
    stated that it was only from the date  of  his  marriage,  19  November
    2008, that his residence could be counted and that the  time  spent  in
    prison should be deducted.  It was therefore stated that the  appellant
    had not resided in Britain in accordance with the EEA Regulations since
    his marriage for a continuous period of five  years  and  therefore  he
    would  not  be  entitled  to   permanent  residence   under   the   EEA
    Regulations.  He could therefore  be  deported  on  grounds  of  public
    policy and it was considered that  his  deportation  was  warranted  on
    those grounds.

11.  The writer of the letter then assessed the  removal  of  the  appellant
    under Regulation 21(5)(a) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006. He
    pointed out that on Saturday, 15 December 2007 the appellant  had  been
    arrested as part of a gang that had committed  thirteen  robberies  and
    attempted robberies between June and December 2007.  On  that  day   an
    employee of the Argos store which was to be robbed, a woman,  had  been
    grabbed and threatened by a man wearing a woolly hat and  scarf  around
    his face, a mobile phone had been taken and she had been told that  she
    would be shot if she moved.  The appellant had provided  a  false  name
    and address when questioned  by  the  police.   The  offence  had  been
    committed in the context of a series of premeditated  robberies  by  an
    organised group.  It was stated that the appellant had been assessed as
    being subject to the minimum level of  Multi-Agency  Public  Protection
    Arrangements (MAPPA, level 1) which had been set up to limit the effect
    on society of those convicted of offences which were of a  violent  and
    sexual nature and also to provide a level of protection to those  whose
    criminal history and personal history notoriety had placed them in  the
    public consciousness.

12.  In the NOMS1 Report the offender manager had found that  the  appellant
    posed a medium risk  of  harm  to  the  public  which  meant  that  the
    appellant had the  potential  to  do  harm  and  his  risk  factor  was
    identified as being a lack of finance, and criminal peers.

13.  The trauma to the victims of the robberies was emphasised  as  well  as
    the impact on society.

14.  In paragraphs 37 through 46 of the letter  the  writer  of  the  letter
    considered the risk of re-offending stating:

         "Risk of reoffending


         37.  In completing your NOMS  1  assessment  the  Offender  Manager
             found that you posed a low risk of re-offending.  In  reaching
             this  conclusion  your  Offender   Manger   has   taken   into
             consideration those  factors  which  originally  led  to  your
             offending behaviour and whether those same factors continue to
             exist.  However, the overall score given on your report is  in
             conflict with the written comments of the offender manager  in
             particular the following issues have been  highlighted  within
             the NOMS 1 report.  In the NOMS 1 report you stated  that  you
             had known one of your co-defendants all of your life  and  had
             little knowledge of what he was up to, adding  that  you  were
             only convicted by phone calls to the co-defendant.   You  also
             acknowledged the fact that you  'associate  with  people  that
             have committed crimes and been to prison because of  the  area
             that you grew up in'.


         38.   It  is  therefore  considered  that  there  is  an  increased
             possibility of you reoffending through your  associations  and
             peers.


         39.  You have been assessed as posing a medium risk of harm  should
             you reoffend.  Whilst the risk of you re-offending  is  viewed
             as low the serious harm which would be caused as a  result  is
             such that it is not considered reasonable to leave the  public
             vulnerable to the effects of your re-offending.


         40.  You have provided evidence of completing  a  Behaviour  Change
             course - understanding  the  victim  (dated  19  March  2012),
             Social/Victim awareness  course  (completed  on  27  September
             2011)  and  the  Assertiveness  and  Decision  Making   course
             (completed on 12 January 2012).  The Home  Office  is  of  the
             view  that  there  is  insufficient  evidence  that  you  have
             adequately  addressed  the  underlying  reasons  behind   your
             offending behaviour.  It is considered that the completion  of
             programmes such as  an  Enhanced  Thinking  Skills  course  or
             courses that addressed the reasons for  offending  would  have
             been of benefit in your rehabilitation.


         41.  In the absence of suitable evidence that  there  has  been  an
             improvement  in  your  personal   circumstances   since   your
             conviction, or that you have successfully addressed the issues
             that prompted you to offend, it is  considered  reasonable  to
             conclude that there remains a risk  of  you  re-offending  and
             continuing to pose a risk of harm to the public.


         42.  The offence of which you have been convicted is a serious  one
             and the sentence that you received reflects this.  Whilst  you
             do not have an extensive criminal  record  and  your  offender
             manager has calculated that your risk of re-conviction as low,
             the Home Office takes the view that  the  serious  harm  which
             would be caused as  a  result  of  any  similar  instances  of
             offending is such that it  is  not  considered  reasonable  to
             leave the public vulnerable to the potential for  you  to  re-
             offend.


         43.  Furthermore, there is clearly an escalation in seriousness  of
             the offences you have committed, as evidenced by the sentences
             you have received.


         44.  You have used seven alias names, it  was  highlighted  on  the
             Judge's Sentencing Remarks: 'From the minute you were  stopped
             by the police you lied and lied hard.   You  are  one  of  the
             people with a bunch of different names under which you operate
             and  somebody  whose  life  has  shown  little  or  no  decent
             promise'.  There is no legal reason to use alias names.  It is
             therefore evidence that you may resort to  using  alias  names
             again, in the future and have  demonstrated  a  propensity  to
             reoffend.


         45.  You committed a serious offence, for financial gain.  There is
             no evidence of any employment in the  United  Kingdom  or  any
             evidence that you have disassociated yourself from  associates
             therefore it is considered you will reoffend.


         46.   All  the  available  evidence  indicates  that  you  have   a
             propensity to re-offend and  that  you  represent  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to
             justify your deportation on grounds of public policy."

15.   The  writer  of  the  letter  went  on  to  consider  the   issue   of
    proportionality having noted Regulation 21(5)(a) stated that a decision
    maker must take into account a number  of  relevant  factors.   It  was
    noted that the appellant was 28, believed to be  in  good  health,  was
    married to a Portuguese national and had three children who were  being
    looked after by his wife.  The length of time the appellant  had  lived
    in Britain was also noted.

16.  Having referred to the Court of Appeal judgment  in  Essa  [2102]  EWCA
    Civ 1718 it was stated that that judgment established that in  applying
    Regulation 21 a decision maker must  consider  whether  a  decision  to
    deport might prejudice the prospects of rehabilitating  from  offending
    in the host country and weigh that risk in the balance  when  assessing
    proportionality.  It was noted  the  appellant  had  had  minimal  work
    experience  but  also  that  he   had   completed   some   courses   in
    rehabilitative work while in custody and had applied for and  had  been
    accepted for a position  with  "New  Age  Development  Limited"  as  an
    Engagement Mentor.  There was no evidence as to whether or not that was
    a voluntary or a paid job.  It  was  concluded  that  the  prospect  of
    deportation  to  Angola  would  not  prejudice  the  prospects  of  the
    appellant's rehabilitation.  It was stated that the threat  of  serious
    harm  which  the  appellant  posed  to  the  public  and  his  personal
    circumstances did not preclude his deportation being pursued.

17.  The rights of the appellant under Article 8  were  then  considered  as
    were the provisions of Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  It was pointed out that the appellant's children
    had been in the care of his wife since he had been imprisoned and  that
    his wife had said that she had had to struggle but had coped.   It  was
    concluded  that  the  removal   of   the   appellant   would   not   be
    disproportionate.

18.  The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by the Tribunal  on  13
    November 2013. They heard evidence from the  appellant  and  his  wife,
    noting that the appellant had attempted to take courses to address  the
    reasons for his offending but  had  been  rejected  as  unsuitable  and
    noting the appellant's regret for the offences which he had  committed.
    They considered a detailed Special Education Needs Report prepared by a
    local authority revealing that Shuheed presented  with  delayed  social
    communication skills affecting his social interaction, use of language,
    behaviour  and  emotional  development  and  stated  that  amidst  that
    background there was a certain climate of unease existing  between  the
    appellant and his son.

19.  Having referred to the provisions in Regulation 21 of  the  Immigration
    (EEA Regulations) 2006, in paragraphs 23 onwards of  the  determination
    the Tribunal set out their assessment of credibility  and  findings  of
    fact.  They stated that the appellant had acknowledged  his  wrongdoing
    and that he had been proactive in taking steps to obtain assistance  in
    education and understanding his propensity to offend.  They  said  that
    he had secured paid employment  to  mentor  young  people  with  social
    problems.

20.  In paragraph 24 of the  determination  they  referred  to  the  NOMS  1
    assessment and the  fact  that  the  offender  manager  had  found  the
    appellant posed a low risk of re-offending and a medium risk of serious
    harm to others.  They noted that the risk of  re-offending  related  to
    the likelihood that a further offence  would  occur  and  the  risk  of
    serious harm to others was of what would occur in the event of  further
    offending.  The Tribunal stated:-

         "24. ...The appellant's Offender Manager  would  have  been  aware,
             unlike the  respondent,  of  all  the  progress  made  by  the
             appellant during his detention and  it  is  not  open  to  the
             respondent  to  gainsay  the  author's   conclusions   without
             reference to all of the material before  her.   Such  material
             would have included  the  Categorisation  Review  Document  in
             which the author noted  the  appellant's  changed  'views  and
             opinions towards people in society and as  a  whole'  and  his
             marked  improvement   in   attitude   and   behaviour.    Such
             conclusions, based in part on the  appellant's  completion  of
             relevant courses,  but  also  on  his  improved  behaviour  in
             detention, served to justify the recommendation that he should
             then  be  re-categorised  to  Category  C.   In  all  of   the
             circumstances it  has  been  established  that  the  appellant
             represents a low risk of  re-offending.   This  assessment  is
             also viewed in the context of the appellant's wife's  evidence
             that her husband has genuinely changed and is calmer since his
             release from prison.  In substance, the  respondent  seeks  to
             deport the appellant as a result  of  his  past  offending  in
             contravention of the principle enshrined in reg 21(5)(e)."

21.  Having noted that the interests of the community as a whole  should  be
    considered in assessing the proportionality of the decision to  remove,
    the Tribunal referred to the terms of the determination in  Essa  (EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC) from  paragraphs  32
    onwards of that determination.  They quoted paragraphs 32 through to 35
    which state:

         "32. We observe that for any deportation  of  an  EEA  national  or
             family member of such national to be justified on public  good
             grounds (irrespective of whether permanent residence has  been
             achieved) the claimant must  represent  a  present  threat  to
             public policy.  The fact  of  a  criminal  conviction  is  not
             enough.  It is not permissible in an  EEA  case  to  deport  a
             claimant on the basis of criminal offending  simply  to  deter
             others.  This tends to mean, in case of criminal conduct short
             of the most serious threats to the public safety of the state,
             that a candidate for EEA deportation must represent a  present
             threat  by  reason  of  a  propensity  to  re-offend   or   an
             unacceptably high risk of re-offending.  In such  a  case,  if
             there is acceptable evidence of rehabilitation, the  prospects
             of future  rehabilitation  do  not  enter  the  balance,  save
             possibly as future  protective  factors  to  ensure  that  the
             rehabilitation remains durable.


         33.  It is only where rehabilitation  is  incomplete  or  uncertain
             that  future  prospects  may  play  a  role  in  the   overall
             assessment.  Here we must take our guidance from the Court  of
             Justice in Tskouridis and the Court of Appeal in  the  present
             case remitting the matter to this  Tribunal.   It  is  in  the
             interests of the citizen, the host state and the Union  itself
             for an offender to cease to offend.  This is most likely to be
             the case with young offenders who  commit  a  disproportionate
             number of offences, but many of whom will  stop  offending  as
             they mature and comparatively few of  whom  go  on  to  become
             hardened criminals and persistent  recidivist  offenders.   We
             can exclude consideration of offenders beneath the age  of  18
             as EEA law will prevent their deportation save in the  unusual
             event that it is in their own interest  (Article  28(3)(b)  of
             the Citizens directive).


         34.  If the very factors that contribute to  his  integration  that
             assist in rehabilitation of such offenders  (family  ties  and
             responsibilities,    accommodation,    education,    training,
             employment, active membership of a  community  and  the  like)
             will assist in the completion of a process of  rehabilitation,
             then that can be a substantial factor in the balance.  If  the
             claimant   cannot   constitute   a   present    threat    when
             rehabilitated, and is well-advanced  in  rehabilitation  in  a
             host state where there is a substantial degree of integration,
             it  may  very  well  be   disproportionate   to   proceed   to
             deportation.


         35.  At the other end of the scale,  if  there  are  no  reasonable
             prospects of rehabilitation, the claimant is a present  threat
             and is likely to remain  so  for  the  indefinite  future,  we
             cannot  see  how  the  prospects   of   rehabilitation   could
             constitute  a  significant  factor  in  the   balance.    Thus
             recidivist offenders, career criminals,  adult  offenders  who
             have failed to engage  with  treatment  programmes,  claimants
             with impulses to commit sexual or  violent  offences  and  the
             like may well fall into this category."

22.  The Tribunal went on to reach their conclusions under  the  Regulations
    in paragraphs 27 through to 29 of the determination.  They wrote:

         "27. The appellant falls within the category of offender considered
             at [32]-[34] above.  He has engaged with the  courses  offered
             to him and remained 'well motivated and  focussed  throughout'
             his social/victim awareness course undertaken while in prison.
              The appellant's life is in the UK and he is likely to benefit
             from the support  of  his  wife  and  children  while  he  re-
             establishes life in the community.  His expulsion would  be  a
             retrograde step in his ongoing rehabilitation and  detrimental
             to the interests of the community as a whole.


         28.  When one takes into account and gives  appropriate  weight  to
             all the circumstances of his personal conduct and  the  threat
             to public policy that it represents;  the  age  and  state  of
             health of the appellant; his family situation in  the  UK  and
             his claimed country of origin; his length of stay  in  the  UK
             and degree of integration and  his  lack  of  links  with  his
             country of  origin,  we  conclude  that  the  removal  of  the
             appellant would not be in accordance with the requirements  of
             the Regulations.  In particular, it cannot be justified on the
             grounds of public policy in order  to  address  any  'genuine,
             present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat'  posed   by   the
             appellant's continued presence in the UK.


         29.  Accordingly  the  appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  under  the
             Regulations.  In these circumstances, mindful of the  decision
             in VB cited above, it is not necessary to further consider the
             appellant's claimed Article 8 rights and those of his wife and
             children.  However, should we be  found  to  be  in  error  in
             allowing the appeal under the Regulations we address the issue
             of Article 8."


23.  In  paragraphs  30  onwards  they  set  out  their  assessment  of  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR allowing the appeal also
    on those grounds.

24.  The Secretary of State appealed.   Although  the  application  was  not
    admitted in the First-tier the application was  renewed  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman on 23  January
    2014.

25.  The grounds of appeal, having referred to the fact that  the  appellant
    could only be afforded the lowest level of protection and  stated  that
    as the Tribunal had found that the appellant had  not  integrated  into
    society the concept of social rehabilitation and the  unknown  prospect
    of the appellant being rehabilitated in Angola compared to the measures
    in the UK was not a material consideration.  The grounds of appeal then
    went on to refer to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria)
    v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 arguing that the Tribunal should  not  have
    allowed the appeal on deportation in the light of the  judgment  in  SS
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.

26.  At the hearing before us Mr Melvin stated that  at  no  stage  did  the
    appellant exercise Treaty rights.  He stated that there was a  lack  of
    findings regarding integration and that that impacted on the assessment
    proportionality.  Having referred to the  judgments  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal  in  SS  (Nigeria)  and  MF  (Nigeria)  Mr  Melvin  referred  to
    paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Rules.  With regard to the  interests  of
    the children he stated that they remained in the primary care of  their
    mother.  It was his view  that  as  the  Tribunal  had  not  considered
    integration as part of the assessment under the  Regulations  they  had
    erred in law  particularly  with  regard  to  the  appellant's  serious
    offending.

27.  In reply Mr Wilford  said  that  the  grounds  raised  only  a  reasons
    challenge.  He stated that grounds had focused on  the  proportionality
    of removal referring to the  prospects of   rehabilitation   in  Angola
    and in the UK, the issue of the appellant's Article 8 rights  following
    the changes in the Rules in July 2012 and the weight to  be  placed  on
    deportation as set out in the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Nigeria) in that the Tribunal had  failed to give adequate  weight  to
    the public interest  in the removal of the appellant.

28.  He pointed out that the Tribunal had considered in  paragraph  19  that
    the appellant was entitled to the first level of protection.  They  had
    stated that:-

         "The fifth anniversary of his wedding is only due  to  occur  after
         the date of the hearing of the appeal on 19 November 2013.  In  any
         event, recognising the appellant was sentenced for an index offence
         on 22 April 2009 it was accepted by the appellant,  without  formal
         concession, following  the  opinion  of  Advocate  General  Bot  in
         Onuekwere [2013] EUECJ C-378/12 that the time spent  in  prison  by
         him did not count for the purpose of acquiring permanent  residence
         under Regulation 15."

29.  He stated therefore that the question was whether or not the  appellant
    represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society  (Regulation
    (5)(c)), when coupled with the principle of proportionality as referred
    to in Regulation 21(5)(a) and the further issues of whether or not with
    reference to Article 8 the appellant enjoyed a  family  life  with  his
    wife and three children all of whom were born in the United Kingdom and
    therefore whether or not  the  appellant's  removal  was  proportionate
    under Article 8(2) of the ECHR.  Turning to the first issue  he  stated
    that it was for  the  respondent  to  demonstrate  that  the  appellant
    represented a present threat to one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.  It was clear from the judgment of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Bulale v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 806 that past offending did not in itself
    justify expulsion.

30.  He referred to the detailed assessment made by  the  probation  service
    and emphasised that it should not lightly be dismissed - he  relied  on
    the judgment in AMM (Turkey) [2012] EWCA Civ 1634.  He stated that  the
    ultimate conclusion of the author of the report was that the  appellant
    presented a low risk of re-offending and a medium risk of serious  harm
    to others.  The first finding he stated related to the likelihood  that
    a further offence would occur and the second  to  the  impact  or  harm
    which would occur in the event of further such offending.

31.  He argued that the Secretary of State was  incorrect  to  suggest  that
    that conclusion conflicted with the comments of  the  offender  manager
    and said that  there was no proper evidential basis for that  argument.
    He referred to the progress which he said the appellant had made during
    detention  and  his  improved  behaviour  which   had   justified   his
    recommendation to be re-categorised to category C.

32.  With regard to the issue of proportionality under  Regulation  21(5)(a)
    he stated that the Tribunal had reached conclusions which were open  to
    them.  He referred to the issue of proportionality under community  law
    as set out in the Court of Appeal judgment in Essa [2012] EWCA Civ 1718
    and stated that the respondent had been correct to  consider  that  the
    dicta therein applied equally to the spouse of an EEA national.


33.  He referred to the Upper Tribunal's decision in Essa [2008] UKUT  00316
    (IAC) which stated that the fact  of  a  criminal  conviction  was  not
    enough to justify deportation nor indeed was the issue  of  deterrence.
    He asked us to note that the Tribunal had stated:-

         "This tends to mean, in case of criminal conduct short of the  most
         serious threat to the public safety or the state, that a  candidate
         for deportation must represent a present  threat  by  reason  of  a
         propensity to  re-offend  or  an  unacceptably  high  risk  of  re-
         offending."

34.  He then referred to the issue of the appellant's relationship with  his
    wife and children emphasising that that relationship was considered  to
    be strong.  Finally, referring to the issue  of  proportionality  under
    the ECHR he emphasised the best interests of the  appellant's  children
    and stated that realistically it was not suggested  that  it  would  be
    proportionate for the appellant and his family to continue their family
    life in Angola or indeed in Portugal.

35.  He emphasised the length of time  which  the  appellant  had  lived  in
    Britain and the fact that he had  lived  here  since  the  age  of  11,
    spending his formative years in Britain.  He also referred to the  time
    that had elapsed since the appellant had been released.

36.  He emphasised the relationship between all members of the family.

37.  He asked us to find that  the  conclusion  of  the  Tribunal  that  the
    removal of the appellant was disproportionate was fully  open  to  them
    and that they were correct to allow  the  appeal  both  under  the  EEA
    Regulations and Article 8 of the ECHR.

Discussion

38.  We note the terms of the grounds  of  appeal  which  claimed  that  the
    Tribunal  had erred when considering the issue  of  rehabilitation  and
    that  the  Tribunal  had  erred   in   their   consideration   of   the
    proportionality of the appellant's removal by not taking  into  account
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria).  They assert  that
    the  appellant  had  failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
    appellant's criminality in light of the Secretary of  State's  interest
    in removing foreign criminals.

39.  The reality is, however, that when considering the  proportionality  of
    removal under Regulation 21 of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006
    the Tribunal were not considering the same  assessment  as  they  would
    when considering the rights of the appellant under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR in the deportation of a foreign national who  was  not  exercising
    Treaty rights.   It would not be proportionate for them to have  placed
    weight on the deterrent effect of deportation.  That is not a factor to
    be  taken into account when considering the deportation of someone  who
    is exercising Treaty rights.

40.  The reality is that the factors in this case which are of relevance  to
    the issue of proportionality relate to the propensity to re-offend  and
    the appellant's relationship with his wife and children and that  under
    the Regulations previous criminal convictions do  not,  of  themselves,
    justify the  decision.    In reaching their conclusions with regard  to
    these issues we consider that the Tribunal reached findings of fact and
    conclusions which were fully open to them on the evidence before  them.
    They were correct to find that there was clearly a  close  relationship
    between the appellant, his wife and their children:  that,  in  itself,
    is a finding on the integration of the  appellant  with  society  here.
    They were also entitled to find that the likelihood of the appellant re-
    offending  was  low.  They  correctly  read   the   NOMS   report   and
    distinguished between the   likelihood of re-offending, which was found
    to be low, and the  likelihood of serious harm which only arose when if
    the appellant re-offended. Their conclusions relating to the likelihood
    of  re-offending  clearly  indicated   their   consideration   of   the
    rehabilitation of the  appellant    which  flowed,  in  part  from  the
    courses, which the appellant had taken in prison.

41.  They set out in detail the relevant law referring to  the  judgment  of
    the EUECJ in Onuekwere [2013] EUECJ C-378/12, noted correctly that  the
    appellant was entitled to only  the  lowest  level  of  protection  but
    having followed the terms of the determination of the Upper Tribunal in
    Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC)  reached
    conclusions in paragraphs 27 through 29 of the determination, which  we
    have set out in full  above,  which  were  open  to  them.   They  were
    entitled to conclude that the appellant  had  engaged  in  the  courses
    offered to him and remained well-motivated and focused and that he  was
    likely to benefit from the support of his wife and children while he re-
    established himself in the community.

42.  They took into account all relevant matters including his age,  health,
    his family situation, the  length  of  stay  here  and  his  degree  of
    integration and  the lack of links with his country of  origin  and  we
    consider that they reached conclusions, to  which  they  were  entitled
    that the appellant's appeal should be allowed under the Regulations.

43.  The grounds of appeal which refer to  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MF and the guidance regarding the issue of proportionality of
    the removal of criminals therein, do, as  we  have  stated  above,  not
    properly engage with the terms of the Regulations.  The  Tribunal  were
    entitled to find,  under  the  Regulations  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would be disproportionate. They were also  correct  to  state
    that, having  found  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  under  the
    Regulations, that they were not required to consider the rights of  the
    Appellant under the  Convention  but  again  their  decision  that  the
    removal of the appellant would be a breach  of  his  rights  under  the
    Convention was fully open to them - not least because that his  removal
    would not have been in accordance with the law. They were also entitled
    to find that, on the various factors  which  they  set  out  above  and
    indeed given their reliance on the various  criteria  set  out  in  the
    judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in  Maslov  [2008]  ECHR
    546, that the removal of the appellant would be disproportionate.

44.  In all we consider that their conclusions were fully open to  them  and
    we therefore find that there is no error of law in their decision.   We
    therefore dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.   The  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal that this appeal is allowed both  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

