
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01837/2013
                                                               DA/01796/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 4 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   GJ (1)
                                   GJ (2)
                   (anonymity direction made in each case)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


For the Respondents:   DA 01837 2013 GJ(1)   Mr P Haywood, Counsel,
                    instructed by Jein Solicitors
                    DA 01796 2013 GJ(2) Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed
                    by Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    respondents. This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.
    Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
    of court proceedings. It is particularly important in  this  case  that
    anonymity is respected.  The respondents' claim to  need  international
    protection  could  be  considerably  and  unjustly  enhanced  by  their
    identities being known to  the  authorities  because  of  publicity  in
    breach of this order.

 2. The respondent in DA/01837/2013 is identified here  as  GJ(1)  and  the
    respondent in DA/01796/2013 is identified as GJ(2).  Ordinarily I would
    have given the number (1) to the lower appeal number but the  Secretary
    of State has identified the respondent in DA/01796/2013 as A2  and  the
    respondent in DA/01837/2013 as A1, and the respondents  agreed  between
    themselves that  Mr  Haywood  should  address  me  first.   It  follows
    therefore that I have identified them accordingly. In this  decision  I
    refer to them as "claimants" or as GJ(1) or GJ(2) depending on context.

 3. I am grateful to each of the representatives for  their  assistance  in
    unravelling these cases.

 4. The respondents to this appeal are brothers.  They are citizens of  Sri
    Lanka.  They have each behaved discreditably and were each  subject  to
    deportation orders made as a consequence of their  criminal  behaviour.
    The events leading to the orders being made were not joint enterprises,
    at least not with each other,  but  their  cases  were,  appropriately,
    heard together because their claims  to  risk  persecution  or  similar
    serious ill-treatment in  the  event  of  their  return  to  Sri  Lanka
    depended on similar evidence.  Although the First-tier Tribunal (First-
    tier Tribunal Judges Kamara and Traynor) heard  the  appeals  together,
    the Tribunal promulgated entirely separate Decisions.  Normally that is
    an undesirable practice but here I accept that the risk of muddling the
    cases was particularly acute  and  I  understand  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal wanted to write its Decision in a way that showed beyond doubt
    that each case had been considered  separately.   Nevertheless  I  have
    prepared one Decision dealing with each of the appeals that were  heard
    in a joint hearing before me.

 5. The claimants each appealed a decision of  the  appellant,  hereinafter
    "the Secretary of State" on 23  August  2013  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order made under Section 5(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 6. In the case of GJ(1) the appeal was allowed on  asylum  grounds,  under
    the 1950 Convention, and under the Immigration Rules.  In the  case  of
    GJ(2) the appeal  was  allowed  on  asylum  grounds,  on  human  rights
    grounds, and "the appeal against the decision to refuse to  revoke  the
    deportation order of 12 October 2010 is allowed".

 7. Nothing turns on this slightly different way of expressing the  outcome
    of the appeals decision.

 8. I find it most helpful to begin by considering  the  challenge  to  the
    findings that each of the claimants is a refugee.

 9. It is an ironic feature of this case that GJ(1) maintains that  he  was
    not interested in Tamil politics until he was sent  to  prison  in  the
    United Kingdom and his contact with ethnic Tamils there caused  him  to
    think for the first time about  the  place  of  Tamils  in  Sri  Lankan
    society. Consequently he became  an  active  member  of  various  Tamil
    groups in the United Kingdom.   He  has  played  a  prominent  role  in
    stewarding demonstrations and has established a reputation in the Tamil
    diaspora as someone who assists  people  with  asylum  claims  and  who
    advises those who claim to have  suffered  human  rights  abuses  about
    where  they  can  get  professional  advice.   He  has  also  played  a
    particular role in organising and distributing a disturbing video  clip
    of  a  well-known  Tamil  journalist,  one  Isaipiriya,  in  which  the
    journalist was seen to be alive and then later dead in the  custody  of
    the Sri Lankan authorities.

10. Without diminishing the relevance of other examples of his support this
    act was seen as a particularly significant incident because its release
    came at a time when the Sri Lankan  authorities  were  concerned  about
    their image  because  they  were  hosting  the  Commonwealth  Heads  of
    Government Conference in Colombo.

11. Having accepted this evidence the conclusion, at  paragraph  159,  that
    the claimant "will almost certainly be  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities as promoting Tamil  separatism  and,  therefore,  would  be
    considered by them as amounting to a threat to  the  stability  of  the
    unitary  Sri  Lankan  state"  followed  by  a  finding  that  he  would
    "therefore" face a real risk of persecution  might  be  thought  to  be
    unremarkable.

12. However, this has been challenged by the Secretary of State.

13. Indeed, at point 11, the grounds complain that the Tribunal  was  wrong
    to describe the witnesses that  gave  evidence  about  the  politically
    embarrassing and harrowing video clip  as  "independent  sources".   Mr
    Haywood is not an aggressive advocate and in his grounds  he  contented
    himself with describing this criticism as "unworthy". I  consider  that
    an eloquent understatement. One  of  the  witnesses  is  a  former  BBC
    correspondent in Sri Lanka and the other is identified as  an  official
    with a human rights organisation.  Neither was  cross-examined  on  the
    basis that they were untruthful witnesses. If it was the  Secretary  of
    State's case that they were acting unprofessionally or worse, then  the
    allegation should have been put to the witnesses when the chance arose.
     The Tribunal is not to be criticised for failing to  give  a  detailed
    explanation for accepting  unchallenged  evidence.   I  agree  with  Mr
    Haywood and the submission at paragraph 12 of his Rule  24  Reply  that
    the claimant's conduct  was  clearly  within  the  categories  of  risk
    recognised in the country guidance case of GJ  and  Others  (Post-civil
    war; returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  The  plain  fact
    is that the claimant is a well-known activist in pro-Tamil  causes  and
    he may very well be associated with publications critical  of  the  Sri
    Lankan government because of his role in publicising the damaging video
    clip.

14. Miss Holmes took a realistic view and did not  expand  on  the  grounds
    which she did not draft.

15. It follows that I find no merit whatsoever  in  the  criticism  of  the
    finding that the GJ(1) needs international protection.

16. I now consider the  finding  that  the  other  claimant,  GJ(2),  needs
    international protection.  His case for being recognised as  a  refugee
    is weaker than that of his brother, GJ(1). Nevertheless, it is his case
    that he has attended pro-Tamil demonstrations with his  family  in  the
    United Kingdom and that his father was involved with  Tamil  separatist
    politics when he was in Sri Lanka.  His main expressed concern was that
    the authorities would identify him as being the brother  of  the  other
    claimant who, in his view, was particularly at risk.

17. At paragraph 100 of its decision the  Tribunal  found  that  the  GJ(2)
    would be at risk even if he were deported on his own because  he  would
    be identified by the authorities as the brother of  a  known  activist.
    He could not be expected to separate himself from his brother. His  own
    political leanings were in the same  direction  at  his  brothers  even
    though they were not pursued with anything  like  the  same  degree  of
    enthusiasm. He had done enough to make it reasonably  likely  that  the
    authorities would know him for his own activities.  However there is in
    his case the added complication of his being mentally ill and all these
    things together led the Tribunal to conclude that he would be at risk.

18. According to the grounds the finding that the claimant  "would  not  be
    distinguished from" his brother is a misdirection and it is said to  be
    a misdirection because,  unlike  the  guidance  given  in  the  Country
    Guidance case GJ, it fails to distinguish between  people  on  a  "stop
    list" and people on a "watch list".   Mr  Mackenzie's  Rule  24  notice
    explains his answer  to  these  grounds.    I  set  it  out  below  and
    respectfully adopt it:

         "The  SSHD's  challenge  to  the  panel's  findings  on   risk   of
         persecution is incoherent.  The basis on which the panel found  the
         respondent to be at risk was that his brother had been  extensively
         involved in sur place political activities in the UK and  would  be
         known to the  Sri  Lankan  security  forces.   It  found  that  the
         respondent would be associated with his brother in the minds of the
         Sri Lankan authorities, would be questioned about  his  brother  if
         returned, would be known to have been involved in demonstrations in
         the UK, and would, because of  his  mental  health  conditions,  be
         particularly vulnerable under interrogation: see  �100.   Hence  it
         took the view that he was at risk of persecution."

19. The grounds go on to assert that these were conclusions that the  panel
    was entitled to reach.  I agree.

20. There is an added dimension in the case GJ(2).  The Tribunal found that
    in the event of his return he would be additionally at risk because  of
    the likelihood of his  committing  suicide.   That  finding  was  based
    largely on the report of an appropriately qualified  psychiatrist  that
    was  supported  by  extraneous  evidence  including  the  GJ(2)'s   own
    presentation and the fact that he had previously attempted to take  his
    own life.  The Tribunal said at paragraph 105:

         "We find that without support he will not be able to  self-care  or
         feed himself and that, without any family support or home  to  live
         in, his circumstances will swiftly deteriorate."

21. The grounds challenge this on the basis that "the  weight  of  evidence
    discloses a clear likelihood that members  of  the  appellant's  family
    will in  fact  accompany  him  on  return".   This  is  an  interesting
    proposition that seems wholly unsupported by  the  evidence  which  was
    that his family members would not accompany him on return.

22. In the circumstances the finding that the GJ(2) would be forced to live
    in circumstances which are inhuman and degrading was  clearly  open  to
    the Tribunal.   The suggestion that the  only  known  relative  in  Sri
    Lanka who has not seen him since he was aged 6 and is preoccupied  with
    her own problems concerning a land claim against the  government  would
    be in the least bit inclined or able to provide assistance to a  person
    she does not know but whose presence might be a source of  vexation  to
    the government is based on nothing other than the fact it is convenient
    for the Secretary of State's case to assume that it is true.

23. It follows therefore that I am not persuaded that there is any material
    error in the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal that  each  claimant
    is entitled to international protection and, subject to  what  is  said
    about disqualification below, each is entitled to be  recognised  as  a
    refugee.

24. A person who would be otherwise recognised as a refugee is not entitled
    to refugee status if he has been convicted of  a  particularly  serious
    crime and he is a danger  to  the  community  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Section  72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    identifies circumstances where these things must be presumed unless the
    contrary is shown.

25. In the case of GJ(1) at paragraph 145  of  the  Decision  the  Tribunal
    finds in terms that the appellant has rebutted the presumption that  he
    would be a danger to the community.  This finding is  based  on  up-to-
    date evidence about his propensity to reoffend supported by the absence
    of any further offences since his last conviction.

26. On the face of it this is an entirely rational decision.

27. I was reminded in submissions that the use of the word "danger" is  not
    surplusage but makes the point that the  Refugee  Convention  does  not
    permit a person to be  deprived  of  refugee  status  just  because  he
    commits a criminal offence  or  just  because  he  may  commit  another
    criminal offence.   For my part I find it  difficult  to  see  how  the
    Tribunal could have avoided finding that GJ(1) was no longer  a  danger
    to the community given the evidence about his present attitude and  the
    absence of further convictions.

28. At paragraph 145 the Tribunal says:

         "In assessing the facts of this  case  on  an  entirely  subjective
         basis, and in accordance with the information which is available to
         us in 2014, we find that  [GJ(1)]  has  shown  that  his  continued
         presence in the United Kingdom would not constitute a danger to the
         community."

29. This is described in the grounds as "opaque".  It is not opaque.  It is
    perfectly clear to any fair minded reader that the Tribunal has  looked
    at the GJ(1)'s personal  circumstances  (hence  the  use  of  the  word
    "subjective") and has concluded that he does not constitute a danger to
    the community.  The finding is further explained. The  Tribunal  refers
    to his GJ(1) addressing his alcohol and drug abuse in addition  to  the
    factors already indicated above.  Mr Haywood, in his  Rule  24  notice,
    drew attention to the fact that the attitude of the  probation  service
    has changed and that GJ(1) respondent is now seen as presenting a "low"
    risk.

30. In the case of GJ(2), the Tribunal deal with the point at paragraph 101
    of its decision.  It notes that GJ(2)  has  not  reoffended,  that  the
    probation officer assesses him at a "very low risk of reoffending"  and
    that his mental illness makes him  vulnerable  in  a  way  that  he  is
    "incapable of posing a danger to the community".

31. According to the Secretary of State's grounds, at paragraph  25,  there
    is an "unresolved conflict" in the evidence and that this "prevents the
    parties from understanding the basis on which the  panel's  conclusions
    on the Section 72 issue had been reached."

32.  I  will  restrain  myself  from  responding  provocatively   to   this
    submission.  It is surprising that the Secretary of State made it.   At
    paragraph 11 the Tribunal explained how it had outlined at the  end  of
    the hearing that it would allow the appeal and gave  its  reasons.  The
    summary reasons included that GJ(2) had been "assessed as  representing
    a low risk of reoffending".   In the Decision written reasons are given
    at paragraph 101.  The  Tribunal  said  that  the  claimant's  risk  or
    reoffending is assessed by the probation officer is  "very  low".   The
    use of the words "low" and  then  "very  low"  does  not  represent  an
    unresolved conflict.  Rather it is  a  case  of  a  considered  written
    explanation following an extempore summary outline.  In any  event,  it
    makes no difference.  Either finding  is  wholly  consistent  with  the
    conclusion that the claimant is no longer at risk.

33. Mr Mackenzie's skeleton argument points out  that  there  was  evidence
    that GJ(2) had given up drinking alcohol.  It was found in  the  report
    of the forensic psychologist and from his partner.

34. It follows that in both cases the Tribunal has given sound reasons  for
    finding that respective claimant faces a real risk  of  persecution  or
    other serious ill-treatment in the event of return and  in  both  cases
    has given  proper  reasons  for  its  conclusion  that  the  particular
    claimant does not represent a danger to the community.

35. It follows therefore that the Tribunal was entitled to find as  it  did
    that each claimant is a refugee.  Refugees cannot be deported and there
    is probably no  need  to  say  any  more.   If  there  are  any  errors
    identified in the further grounds they cannot be material.

36. Nevertheless I have decided to consider the points made, such  as  they
    are.

37. In the case of the GJ(1), the first point of substance  taken  is  that
    the Tribunal did not have a proper understanding of the nature  of  the
    public interest that had to be protected by deportation.    Given  that
    the Tribunal found that the claimants are refugee, it is not  clear  to
    me that this point is capable of undermining the  Tribunal's  decision.
    If  the  Secretary  of  State  is  suggesting  that  the  Tribunal  was
    irresponsible or unaware of the public interest in deportation  then  I
    profoundly disagree.  In particular the Tribunal had regard to Sections
    117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   It
    is now trite law to say that the Rules and statute provided  a  compete
    code and, that being so, any perceived need to spell out each and every
    factor of relevance is diminished to the point  of  being  extinguished
    provided that the reasons for reaching the  decision  are  clear.   The
    Tribunal has clearly has given reasons for finding it would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect the GJ(1)'s partner to remove with him.  They  are  not
    overwhelming reasons in  the  sense  that  it  may  have  been  that  a
    differently constituted Tribunal would have taken a different view  but
    there is nothing perverse or unintelligible about the decision.

38. As indicated above, I agree with Mr Haywood that it is  just  wrong  to
    suggest that there  were  strong  indications  that  the  family  would
    return.  The claimant's father could not return  with  him  because  he
    would not feel safe.

39. I do not see any point in rebutting each point taken  in  the  grounds.
    The alleged unresolved issues are just challenges  to  the  finding  of
    fact that the respondent will not get into further trouble.

40. It is, I think necessary and it is certainly desirable, to say that the
    suggestion  that  GJ(1)  had  been  recalled  to  prison  is   slightly
    misleading.  He had to go to prison because he had breached  the  terms
    of the suspended prison sentence.  That was to his discredit but it was
    not a return to the ways that had  got  him  into  the  really  serious
    offences that  risked  his  status  as  a  refugee.   All  the  adverse
    inferences to be properly  drawn  from  his  having  got  into  further
    trouble were considered by  the  Tribunal  and  a  rational  conclusion
    reached.

41. As far as the GJ(1) is concerned, the grounds do not make out the  case
    when considered carefully.

42. In the case of the GJ(2)  the  high-water  mark  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case concerns an apparent misdirection in  paragraph  11  where
    the Tribunal appears to muddle itself when  considering  if  there  are
    compelling circumstances that justify the appeal  being  allowed.    If
    the only directions on Section 117C were at paragraph 11  the  Decision
    would be concerning.  However, the apparent fault here is  remedied  at
    paragraphs 117 and 118 where a correct test was  applied.    The  "over
    and above" requirements are clearly met.

43. In any event, they have been met by the reason of the respondent  being
    a refugee. Indeed, being a refugee might be the paradigm example of  an
    "over and above" reason.

44. I make the same point made in the case of the other claimant  that  the
    code is applied and the code is complete so there is no need  to  spell
    out endlessly how horrible the offences were.  It is impossible to read
    the Decisions without an appreciation of the seriousness of the  crimes
    for which the claimants were each convicted.

45. I have modelled my decision very closely on the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds because Miss Holmes relied largely on  the  grounds  before  me
    although she did make apt supplementary submissions where  she  thought
    that helpful.  Miss Holmes indicated at the  beginning  of  the  appeal
    that she anticipated difficulties and this shows that she had a greater
    understanding of the Decisions that were being criticised than did  the
    person who settled the grounds.

46. For all the reasons given above I am quite satisfied that the Secretary
    of State's appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's Decisions should be
    dismissed.

47. This is a very unusual pair of cases.   The primary contention that the
    GJ(1) is entitled to refugee  status  because  his  attitude  to  Tamil
    separatist matters were awakened or enlivened by his period  in  prison
    and he has since then become active in the Tamil community could almost
    have been calculated to infuriate.  However, as it was required to  do,
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  it  soberly  and  seriously  and
    subsequently found it to be true.  Entirely sensible reasons have  been
    given for that conclusion.  With it the findings  that  both  claimants
    are refugees are entirely sustainable and are certainly not  undermined
    by the grounds raised by the Secretary of State.

48. It follows therefore that this  is  an  appeal  that  must  be  and  is
    dismissed in the case of each claimant.  It follows that the  decisions
    of the First-tier Tribunal in each case shall stand.

Notice of Decision

49. In each case the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 October 2015                |

