
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01300/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 April 2014                              |On 15th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Hassan Taiwo Adelakun
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss K McCarthy instructed by Westkin Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant (hereafter Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  appeals  with
    permission  against  the  determination  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    (FtT)(Judge Keane and Mrs AJF Cross De Chavannes)  allowing  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds the appeal  brought  by  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant) against the decision  of  the  SSHD
    dated 28 May 2013 refusing to  revoke  a  deportation  order  in  force
    against him.  The claimant, a citizen of Nigeria,  was  deported  on  4
    July 2008 following conviction for 6  offences  which  related  to  his
    obtaining by deception  and  possession  of  a  false  instrument.  The
    claimant had previously been convicted for  crimes  of  dishonesty  and
    deception in 1999, for 6 months.  When sentencing the  claimant  to  21
    months' imprisonment in July 2006, the Crown  Court  Judge  recommended
    that the claimant be deported.  The SSHD made a decision to deport  and
    the claimant was unsuccessful in his appeal against that decision,  the
    determination to that effect  being  notified  on  25  September  2007.
    Letters sent in April, June, July and August 2012 were accepted  as  an
    application for revocation of the appellant's deportation order. It  is
    the refusal of these in May 2013 which founds the current appeal.

2.   Having considered the submissions of the parties I  am  satisfied  that
    the panel materially erred in law in at  least  two  respects.   First,
    they wrongly considered that it was  determinative  of  the  Article  8
    assessment, both under the Rules and under Article 8 on its  own,  that
    it was not reasonable to expect the claimant's wife  and  two  British-
    born children to relocate to Nigeria.  That consideration cannot  alone
    be determinative since it is clear from established case  law  that  it
    can be proportionate for a state to maintain a deportation  order  even
    if the consequence might be separation or division of the claimant from
    his family: see e.g. Harrison [2012] EWCA Civ 1736.

3.   A second error of law was the failure of the  panel  to  consider  that
    the only public interest to  be  weighed  in  the  scales  against  the
    claimant was the  fact  of  his  criminality:  see  para  17.   In  the
    claimant's case it was also a factor  to  be  weighed  in  the  balance
    against him that he had a very poor immigration history, having  become
    an overstayer in 1990, found in 1994 to  have  made  a  bogus  marriage
    application and to have remained in the UK  unlawfully  except  in  the
    context of exercising his rights of appeal).  Of this poor  immigration
    history there is not  a  word  by  the  panel  in  its  proportionality
    assessment.

4.   These errors more than suffice to establish that the  panel's  decision
    was vitiated by legal error necessitating that it be set aside.

Remaking the Decision

5.   There is no issue taken with the FtT panel's primary findings of  fact.
     On that basis it is not in dispute that the claimant has  family  life
    ties with his wife and two British citizen children, namely M  born  in
    2008 and Z born in 2012.  It is unarguable that the  decision  appealed
    against constitutes an interference with, or lack of respect  for,  his
    right to respect for family life.

Factors weighing in favour of the claimant

6.   Turning to consider whether the decision was  a  proportionate  one,  I
    count in favour of the claimant that he was found by the FtT  panel  to
    be "not at risk of re-offending" and I see no reason to revisit such  a
    finding.

7.   As regards his immigration history, whilst  it  was  by  any  reckoning
    poor (after a period of leave to remain  as  a  student  commencing  in
    January 1988 he became an overstayer in August 1990) and whilst  it  is
    far from clear to me that the claimant demonstrated he had always  kept
    in touch with the immigration authorities, I  accept  that  Immigration
    Judge Woodhouse  (who had allowed his appeal in September  2005)  found
    that  it was not his fault that he had not learnt about the  notice  of
    intention to deport him served in 1994) .

8.   The strongest factor in favour of the claimant is his family life  ties
    with his wife, with whom he had been in a relationship since  1995  and
    had married in  2000,  and  his  children.   It  is  not  dispute  that
    (discounting the periods of time he spent in prison) the  claimant  had
    cohabited with his wife and children up to the time of his  deportation
    in July 2008.

9.   Also in the claimant's favour is that since  he  was  deported  he  has
    maintained his family life ties by a combination of visits made by  his
    wife and children to Nigeria to see him and by written  and  electronic
    forms of communication.  Also relevant in this connection is  that  the
    visits from his wife and children have caused them a degree of hardship
    and difficulties.  His wife tried to find  employment  but  could  not.
    She found the general conditions extremely trying.  His children, Z, in
    particular, were also said to have encountered  difficulties  (I  shall
    return to the matter of the extent of those difficulties below).

10.  In the claimant's favour as well is the  fact  that  his  two  children
    have British citizenship from birth are there are obvious disadvantages
    involved for them if they could not continue to enjoy their family life
    in the UK together with their mother and father.

11.  As regards the claimant's ties with his wife, it counts in  his  favour
    that she was not Nigerian  and  that  most  of  her  friends  were  not
    Nigerian, that she  had  had  difficulties  trying  to  find  work  and
    resettle in Nigeria  and that she has an established job in the UK as a
    physiotherapist.  In the UK she also has family, friends and colleagues
    and has a close friendship with Mrs Prudon.

12.  Turning to the private life aspects of the  claimant's  case,  his  own
    length of residence in the UK in particular,  it counts in  his  favour
    that he has resided here since 1983 having arrived in 1983 as a 14 year
    old schoolboy and having been absent from the UK during the period 1983-
    1987 for only 12 months.  There is also evidence that he has worked for
    significant  periods  in  the   UK   and   has   obtained   educational
    qualifications.

13.  There is also evidence (which the First tier  Tribunal  accepted)  that
    the claimant has not found work in Nigeria and lacks  family  there  to
    support him.

14.  It is also a factor in his favour that a  significant  period  of  time
    elapsed since he was deported from the UK in July 2008 -  a  period  of
    over 3 years and 9 months since he  actively  commenced  to  apply  for
    revocation and being 5 years by the date of decision.

15.  I next  turn  to  consider  factors  counting  against  the  claimant's
    Article 8 claim.

Factors weighing against the claimant

16.  Whilst the claimant has been found by the FtT not to be at risk of  re-
    offending, that finding was accompanied  by  the  caveat  that  he  had
    displayed "a distinct lack of candour insofar as his  criminal  history
    [is] concerned," and that in  the  context  of  his  challenge  to  the
    refusal to revoke the deportation order he had deliberately  failed  to
    declare  his  1999  criminal  history.   The   panel   also   observed,
    accurately, that the fraud for which the claimant was convicted in 2006
    took place over a period of time of more than  a  year.   Further,  the
    finding that he was not at risk of re-offending has  to  be  considered
    against the background that he is a  person  who  already  was  a  "re-
    offender": i.e. he is someone who had chosen to re-offend several years
    after committing offences in 1999 contrary to the public good which had
    led the respondent to consider deportation action against him in  1994.
    His 2006 re-offending also arose only a short time after an immigration
    judge had allowed his appeal against a decision to deport.

17.  As regards his immigration history, whether or  not  the  claimant  was
    properly served notice of the notice of  intention  to  deport  him  in
    1994, it is clear that that his residence in the UK since 1990 has been
    unlawful and that the SSHD saw fit to take deportation  action  against
    him in 1994 in view of  his  having  made  a  marriage  application  in
    respect of a marriage that was not subsisting. He sought to stay in the
    UK on the basis of asylum but his claim was held to be groundless.

18.  Whilst I have counted in his favour that during his time in the  UK  he
    did  have  periods  of  working  and  he  also   obtained   educational
    qualifications, it remains that his working was illegal and,  according
    to the sentencing judge, he used his educational progress to facilitate
    his criminal activities in 2006.

19.  As regards the claimant's wife, it is significant that he entered  into
    a relationship with  her  when  he  knew  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious and proceeded to marry her at a time  when  his  immigration
    position had in fact worsened.

20.  Although I  have counted in the claimant's favour the difficulties  his
    wife has experienced trying to live in Nigeria, I  note however that in
    2007 a tribunal found that  she  was  an  intelligent  person  who  was
    capable of learning the local language and would in any event still  be
    able to converse in English with other Nigerians.  I  note  that  since
    then his wife has made several visits to Nigeria and during the periods
    of time spent there, there  has not been any suggestion  that  she  was
    prevented from being able to communicate freely with Nigerians  due  to
    language difficulties.

  21   As regards the two children, it was noted earlier that the fact  that
    they are British citizens entailed obvious disadvantages  for  them  if
    they were not able to live with their father and mother in the  UK.  In
    this connection I must note the first of two respects in which I am not
    able to follow one of the panel's secondary findings.   The  FtT  panel
    considered that in consequence  "these  advantages  which  accrue  from
    British citizenship would be  lost  if  they  attempted  to  settle  in
    Nigeria".   That in my judgment  is  an  overstatement.   The  children
    would not lose British citizenship; Nigeria  allows  dual  nationality;
    and they would continue to have a right of abode in the UK  exercisable
    as and when they chose. They are two very considerable advantages.

22.  At this point it is necessary to consider not just  the  issue  of  the
    best interests of M and Z, but  also  the  Zambrano  aspects  to  their
    situation.

23.  Regarding their best interests,  although  I  would  accept  that  from
    their point of view the optimum was to be able to live with both  their
    mother and father in the UK, there was no evidence of any  significance
    to show that either of them had established strong private life ties of
    their own through their schooling.  It is not clear  whether  they  can
    speak Yoruba (their father's local Nigerian language), but in any event
    (i) English is widely used in  Nigeria  including  in  the  educational
    system; (ii) both children are young enough to learn a  local  language
    over time; (iii) the evidence does not demonstrate that they would  not
    have access to adequate schooling.

24.  There has been some suggestion  in  the  submissions  advanced  by  the
    claimant that his children would not have adequate education  available
    in Nigeria. However COI produced  by  the  SSHD  showed  that  adequate
    education was available.  As regards the a risk to children in  Nigeria
    from attacks by terrorists, there was no evidence to indicate that such
    attacks were  occurring  on  a  significant  scale  and  the  brunt  of
    terrorist attacks on schools has been on Christians.

25.   It is not suggested in this case that either of the children has  been
    brought up to reject Nigerian cultural values.  Clearly they have  ties
    with extended family members in the UK, but there is no  evidence  that
    these have been of decisive importance to their well-being.

26.  Significantly, there is nothing  to  suggest  that  either  during  the
    period when the claimant was in prison or during  the  periods  he  has
    spent with his family during their visits to Nigeria that their  mother
    has not been an effective primary carer.

27.  At this juncture  it  is  necessary  to  revisit  one  other  issue  of
    secondary fact concerning the extent of the difficulties of  the  child
    Z.  I see no reason to revisit the underlying  circumstances  to  which
    the FtT panel had regard: Z has allergies to egg and dairy products and
    suffers from moderate eczema; for treatment he requires Oilatum  shower
    gel and diprobase cream; on his only trip he had an episode of malaria.
     However, beyond those underlying facts, the SSHD's grounds  of  appeal
    challenge the FtT  panel's  evaluation  that  these  difficulties  were
    "deeply injurious" to Z's health, bearing in mind that the claimant and
    his wife's subjective self-assessment  that  such  medicines  were  not
    available in Nigeria were not objectively well-founded.  In this regard
    I consider the SSHD's submission has force.  As  regards  the  risk  of
    malaria there was no objective evidence before the panel to  show  that
    he or the other family members would be at risk of contracting  malaria
    if they adhered to well-known prophylactic drugs  prior  to  and  after
    arrival.  Nor was there any objective evidence  to  show  that  Oilatum
    shower gel or diprobase cream were not available in Nigeria (even if he
    and his wife had tried without success).  In any  event  these  was  no
    reason to think that, if need be, his wife could not make  arrangements
    prior to departure, for such medicines to be sent from the UK.   Hence,
    whilst it  weighs  in  favour  of  the  appellant  that  Z  had  health
    difficulties, it cannot properly be said that these were serious.   Nor
    was there any reason for considering the difficulties  met  by  M  were
    particularly significant

28.  This brings me to the matter of family choice.   As  a  result  of  the
    Zambrano decision and the subsequent concession made  by  the  SSHD  in
    Sanade that it is unreasonable to expect the resident parent of British
    citizen children to move  abroad,  the  fact  remains  that  since  the
    claimant's deportation he has been able to maintain ties with them  not
    only by indirect means such as electronic  communication  but  by  them
    visiting and in this regard I have rejected the  claimant's  submission
    that has caused them difficulties beyond the level of hardships.   That
    is a matter relevant  to  the  proportionality  assessment  I  have  to
    conduct.  In short, whilst it counts in favour of the claimant that  he
    has British citizen children who have met with past difficulties whilst
    visiting Nigeria, their best interests, when considered overall do  not
    point overwhelmingly in favour of them remaining in the UK, unless they
    and their mother choose to.

29.  Turning to the claimant's private life circumstances,  I  have  already
    covered his criminal history, his poor immigration history, his working
    and educational history in the UK.  As  regards  his  circumstances  in
    Nigeria, whilst there is evidence that the appellant has  not  found  a
    job in Nigeria there is no  suggestion  that  he  is  destitute  and  I
    consider that he  is  better  placed,  by  virtue  of  his  educational
    qualifications, than a great many other Nigerians. It is  a  factor  in
    his favour that several years have now elapsed since  he  was  deported
    but by the same token the new Immigration Rules, which in  relation  to
    foreign criminals were found by the Court of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 to  constitute  a  "complete  code"  specify  that
    exclusion should normally be maintained for 10 years: see below.

Conclusions

30.  To summarise, the factors weighing  in  favour  of  the  claimant  when
    conducting the Article 8 balancing exercise carry much more weight than
    those in his favour.  He has  committed  criminal  offences  considered
    sufficient to justify deportation action on not one but two  occasions,
    the second set of offences being  more  serious  than  the  first.   He
    sought to stay in the UK on the basis of asylum but his claim was  held
    to be groundless.  He sought to stay in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  a
    marriage which proved to be bogus.  His  criminality  is  mitigated  to
    some extent that he is not considered to be  at  risk  of  reoffending.
    His immigration misconduct is mitigated to some extent by the fact that
    he did (it seems)  keep  in  touch  with  the  immigration  authorities
    throughout his time in the UK.  Yet it remains he is a foreign criminal
    who has offended a further time after his first conviction and  he  has
    chosen to remain in the UK without  lawful  permission  since  1990.  A
    significant period of time has elapsed since he was deported but it  is
    still significantly short of the period contemplated as the norm within
    the new Immigration Rules: see below.

31.  Weighing all relevant  factors  and  circumstances  in  the  balance  I
    consider that the  decision  of  the  SSHD  to  refuse  to  revoke  the
    deportation order in force against the claimant was both in  accordance
    with the law and the Immigration Rules and  was  also  a  proportionate
    interference with his right to respect for family life.

32.  It is not for me to opine on how long a period it would continue to  be
    proportionate of the SSHD to maintain the deportation order but I would
    observe that the period set by the Immigration  Rules  for  considering
    whether someone who has been deported following a criminal offence  can
    normally continue to be excluded is 10 years (see para 391(i)) and that
    would in this case require an SSHD review by May 2018.

33.  For the above reasons:

    The FtT materially erred in law. Its decision is set aside.


    The decision I re-make is to  dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal  on  all
         grounds.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


