
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01506/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2015                            |On 2 November 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Clive Lee Spencer
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant:        Miss D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by Hanson
                    Young Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  Secretary  of  State  challenges  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart,  who  on  29  April  2015  allowed   the
    claimant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  dealing  with  foreign
    criminals.

2.   The claimant arrived in the UK aged 3 on a six month visit visa.  After
    his father was removed in 2005 he  remained  with  his  stepmother  and
    stepsiblings in the United Kingdom and in 2005 he began  to  live  with
    his step great grandmother Shirley Morgan, who entered into  a  private
    fostering arrangement with the local authority in January 2006.

3.   On 28 May 2012  an  application  was  submitted  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.  This was refused in October 2012.  On 5
    March 2011 the claimant received a reprimand for obstructing powers  of
    search for drugs and on 13 January  2012  he  received  a  warning  for
    possession of a controlled drug and in March 2012 a warning for assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm,  and  then  on  25  July  2013  he  was
    convicted of causing grievous bodily harm with intent  and  received  a
    two year detention and training order and he was  served  a  notice  of
    liability to deportation in February 2014.

4.   The Secretary of State's grounds contend first of all  that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the claimant's primary
    carer was his step great  grandmother.   As  Mr  Kotas  conceded,  this
    ground suffers from the difficulty that this finding, if ever there was
    such a finding, did  not  play  any  apparent  part  in  the  balancing
    exercise that the judge went on to conduct under paragraph 398  and  in
    any event the Secretary of State does not challenge  the  finding  that
    there was a family life existing between the claimant and this lady.

5.   The second ground challenges the failure of the judge  to  resolve  the
    matter of the whereabouts and fate of the  claimant's  father  (it  was
    pointed out that the witnesses, all of whom were found  credible,  gave
    different accounts about this).  Given the finding  that  the  father's
    whereabouts were unknown it seems to me that whether or not he  was  in
    fact shot and killed is of secondary importance.  The  central  finding
    of the judge was that there were no family members  that  the  claimant
    could turn to on return to Jamaica, and again I do not understand  that
    to be challenged by the Secretary of State.  At paragraph 56 the  judge
    said it was unlikely that the claimant or the  step  great  grandmother
    would have any real ties in the normal sense with Jamaica or  that  she
    or the claimant would have any concept of life there.

6.   I turn therefore to the third ground, which has  two  main  components.
    The first component is to allege a failure to follow  the  case  of  MA
    (Jamaica) [2005] 00013  and a failure to assess  whether  the  claimant
    could adapt to life in Jamaica and whether the relatives in the  United
    Kingdom could in fact help the claimant.  I find that this component of
    the ground is a simple disagreement with the judge's findings of  fact,
    findings which were clearly to the effect that the claimant had no real
    ties to Jamaica or any other country and that his family  circumstances
    were such that he would not be able to integrate there  in  the  normal
    sense.

7.   The second component of the ground, and it is the main basis  on  which
    Mr Kotas seeks to rely, is that contrary to para 398 the  judge  failed
    to identify sufficiently compelling reasons over and  above  those  set
    out in paragraphs 399 and 399A for finding that there would be a breach
    of Article 8.

8.    The  first  thing  to  observe  in  this  regard  is  that  the  judge
    undoubtedly did set out the legal test correctly.  At paragraphs 52, 53
    and 61 there is a perfectly  correct  identification  of  the  relevant
    legal test under paragraph 398 and also of the lead cases dealing  with
    its application.

9.   The second matter to observe  is  that  the  judge  conducted  a  wide-
    ranging assessment of the claimant's circumstances attaching particular
    importance to and the fact that he was 3 years old when he came to  the
    UK and still a minor aged 15 when his principal offence  was  committed
    (I note that he remains a young man having been  born  on  22  November
    1996).

10.  The judge then considered the seriousness of the offence  and  gave  an
    extremely detailed analysis of the evidence relating  to  the  risk  of
    reoffending and what had been said by various professionals involved in
    his case.  In the course of her assessment the judge was very clear  in
    identifying the strength of the public  interest  in  deportation,  for
    example  in  paragraph   52.    Although   there   is   not   extensive
    identification of all the factors weighing against the claimant,  there
    was specific identification of the seriousness of his offence  and  the
    carrying of knives and the impact on the victims. It is also noteworthy
    that the judge said at paragraph 61 that this  was  a  finely  balanced
    case. In short, the judge's paragraph  398  assessment  was  one  which
    struck a fair balance of all the competing Article 8 considerations.

11.  It is said by Mr Kotas that the  determination  evinces  a  failure  to
    correctly apply considerations set out in Part 5A of the 2002  Act  and
    he draws particular attention to Section 117B(3) and  (5),  the  latter
    which states that  "little weight should be given  to  a  private  life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious", and of course it is not in dispute that apart from  the
    first six months the claimant has been an overstayer since his  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.

12.  It must be observed, however,  that  this  was  a  case  in  which  the
    Secretary of State had accepted that there was a family  life.  Section
    117B (3) and (5) do not apply considerations in relation to family life
    except in respect of a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner.
    Accordingly it was incumbent on any judge faced with the factual matrix
    in this case to have regard to  the  broader  Article  8  jurisprudence
    dealing with the right to respect for family life  and  cases  such  as
    Maslov where the Grand Chamber of the European Court  of  Human  Rights
    emphasised the different context of a person who has  committed  crimes
    whilst a minor and who has arrived in the host country when a minor.

13.  It is true -and important -  to  say  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  has
    correctly identified in a number  of  cases  that  Maslov  concerned  a
    person who had a lawful basis of stay in the host country whereas, as I
    have just emphasised, this claimant in the instant case did not. At the
    same time the judge in the instant case  was  clearly  mindful  of  the
    claimant's lack of lawful immigration status and can be  understood  to
    have weighed that on the public interest side of the scales against the
    claimant: see for example paragraphs 54 and 39. Against this background
    and reading the determination as a whole, it was within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses for the judge to have placed the emphasis she  did
    on the factor of age in this case.

14.  It is also said that, contrary to Court of Appeal cases such  as  Danso
    and PF (Nigeria), the judge attached undue weight to the  low  risk  of
    reoffending and the evidence of rehabilitation.   However,  read  as  a
    whole the determination identified  an  unusual  set  of  facts  linked
    primarily to the age when the claimant came to the UK and the age  when
    he committed those offences, coupled with  the  quite  strong  evidence
    from a number of professionals to the effect that  he  had  turned  his
    life around.

15.  For the above reasons I reject  the  respondent's  challenge  and  find
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in law in allowing  this
    appeal.  I would only mention two other points.  One is that my task in
    this case was to decide whether the judge erred in  law.   My  decision
    that she did not does not necessarily mean  that  had  I  been  dealing
    myself with the claimant's appeal on the merits  I  would  reached  the
    same conclusion as this judge. The second matter is that, as the  judge
    herself emphasised, this was a finely balanced case and so the claimant
    must be in no doubt that if there is further offending the Secretary of
    State may be in a much stronger position to take action in the future.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Dr H H Storey, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

