
IAC-AH-VP/DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01930/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2015                           |On 27 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Khan, instructed by Howells, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, MS, claims to be a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic
    of Congo (DRC) having been born in 1977.  I shall  hereafter  refer  to
    the appellant as the respondent and the respondent as the appellant (as
    they appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. On 30 August 2013, the respondent refused to revoke a deportation order
    in respect of the  appellant.   The  appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin;  Dr  De  Barros)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 18 February 2014, allowed  the
    appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant had a lengthy litigation history.  This history has  been
    summarised by the First-tier Tribunal as follows:

         "The appellant claims to be a citizen of the DRC.   She  claims  to
         have one brother, Sammy, born in 1987 and two  sisters,  Bernadette
         born in 1982 and Liliane  born  on  the  18  November,  1982.   She
         married Kiyega Sadonge, a pastor of the Rehema Church.  The  couple
         had four children, Flavian born 18  August,  1997,  Sarah  born  20
         December, 1999, Glorie born 15 September, 2001 and  Sandra  born  3
         February, 2003.  Liliane, her child, Gedeon Shema born 29  January,
         1997, and the appellant's children had refugee status in Uganda and
         have been resettled in Sweden.

         The appellant believes the appellant is Christine Nankya  Mpoza,  a
         Ugandan national, born 12 July, 1976.

         The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 June 2005  and  on
         the following day she claimed asylum.  The basis of her  claim  was
         that she would be at real  risk  of  persecution  because  of  race
         (Banyamulenge/Tutsi).   She  further  claimed  to  be  involved  in
         women's rights groups that raised  awareness  of  sexual  violence.
         Asylum was refused on 15 July, 2005.  It was reconsidered and on 23
         September, 2005 again refused.  The appellant appealed against  the
         refusal and that was dismissed in a  determination  by  Immigration
         Judge Thornton promulgated 16 March, 2006.   The  appellant  sought
         Judicial Review in the High  Court  but  that  was  refused  on  17
         October, 2006.

         On 20 August, 2008 the appellant pleaded guilty to three counts  of
         possession of false  documents  and  was  sentenced  to  12  months
         imprisonment.

         On 30 July,  2008  a  Deportation  Order  was  signed  but  revoked
         following further representations.  On 23 October, 2009 a  decision
         was made to make a Deportation  Order  and  to  refuse  the  asylum
         application.  On 13 November, 2009 an  appeal  was  lodged  against
         deportation.  The appeal was heard on 20  January,  2010  before  a
         Panel  including  Immigration   Judge   Reed   which   upheld   the
         respondent's decision.  The appellant sought Judicial Review in the
         High Court and this was refused on 1 October 2010.

         On 10  July,  2012  an  Emergency  Travel  Document  interview  was
         conducted in which the appellant claimed to be a  national  of  the
         DRC.  The Ugandan authorities agreed to issue the appellant with  a
         travel document on 29 November, 2012.  Further representations were
         submitted by  the  appellant  and  refused  on  22  February,  2013
         certified with an out of country right of appeal.

         On 16 May, 2013 a supplementary decision  was  made  to  refuse  to
         revoke the Deportation Order certified with an out of country right
         of appeal.  On 14 June, 2013 further representations were submitted
         as part of a Judicial Review application.  On  30  August,  2013  a
         decision was made to refuse to revoke the deportation  with  an  in
         country right of appeal.

         It is the appellant's appeal against that  refusal  to  revoke  the
         deportation order that comes before us."

 4. The First-tier Tribunal recorded an application made by  the  Secretary
    of State at the hearing and its outcome as follows:

         "Mr Diwnycz sought  leave  to  withdraw  the  concession  that  the
         appellant and four of her children were related as  claimed.   This
         concession was made in the the respondent had made in  the  reasons
         for refusal letter of 30  August,  2013.   The  law  (NR  (Jamaica)
         [2009]  EWCA  Civ  856)  permits  the  respondent  to  withdraw   a
         concession.  The  children  are  in  Sweden  with  the  appellant's
         sister, Liliane.  The reason for the withdrawal was that there  had
         been a DNA test on only two of the children and the sister had  not
         been excluded  as  the  potential  mother.   The  appellant  had  a
         background of negative credibility findings and  criminal  matters,
         including forged documentation.  Mr Diwnycz asked us to  find  that
         although the probability of maternity in the case of each child was
         99.99% the likelihood of relationship was much less  than  normally
         seen in such reports.  They showed that one  of  the  children  was
         11,000 times more likely if the appellant is related as mother than
         if they are unrelated and 35 times more likely if the appellant  is
         related as mother than as an aunt or grandmother.  In the  case  of
         the other child the multiples were 130,000 times and 68 times.   Mr
         Diwnycz submitted that there should have been tests  on  the  other
         two children and their aunt, who, as the appellant's  sister,  will
         be biologically similar.  It  was  not  known  if  the  sister  and
         appellant were twins; that would make  the  likelihood  of  similar
         results much greater.

         Ms Khan  argued  that  the  concession  was  rightly  made  as  the
         maternity probability was 99.99%, well  above  the  requirement  of
         reasonable likelihood.  Furthermore, the DNA report  addresses  the
         aunt/grandmother situation.  The children  were  important  in  the
         appeal because  their  birthplace  is  Bukavu,  DRC  and  they  are
         nationals.  That would place the appellant  in  the  DRC  that  the
         dates of birth of the children.  There  had  only  been  two  tests
         carried out because of funding restrictions.   The  aunt  had  been
         born in 1982 and the appellant in 1977.  These dates had been given
         from an early stage and the aunt's evidence of her date of birth is
         contained in the document from Sweden.  The respondent had made the
         concession in August 2013 it was very late in the day  to  withdraw
         it.  However, if the withdrawal  was  allowed  no  application  for
         adjournment would be asked for.

         We adjourned to  consider  our  decision.   We  concluded  that  we
         preferred the respondent's arguments and allowed the withdrawal  of
         the concession on the relationship between the  appellant  and  her
         claimed children."

 5. The Tribunal went on [16] to identify "the sole issue  in  this  appeal
    [as] the ethnicity and nationality of  the  appellant."   The  Tribunal
    noted that Mr Diwnycz (the Home Office Presenting Officer) "advanced no
    submissions regarding the appellant's contention that, if it was  found
    that she was Banyam Ulenge and a national of the DRC ... that she would
    be at real risk of serious harm on return to the  DRC."   The  Tribunal
    was also aware that there  had  been  two  previous  determinations  by
    Judges Thornton and Reed respectively who had applied the principles of
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702. The appellant had given oral evidence in
    Swahili before the First-tier Tribunal which also heard from the expert
    witness for the appellant, Dr Erik Kennes.  Dr Kennes  had  produced  a
    number of reports dated 19 December 2009, 14 February 2013,  15  August
    2013 and 29 January 2014 respectively.

 6. In a thorough and detailed determination, the Tribunal  concluded  that
    the appellant had proved, to the necessary standard of proof, that  she
    was a DRC national of Banyam Ulenge ethnicity and  allowed  its  appeal
    under the Refugee Convention, the Qualification Directive and the  ECHR
    [Article 3].

 7. At a hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 4 June 2014,  directions  had
    been given with which the parties have complied.   I  had  the  amended
    grounds of the Secretary of State drafted by Mr Jarvis, the Senior Home
    Office Presenting Officer who appeared before me on 10 February 2015 at
    Bradford.  I had Miss Khan's response  to  those  grounds.   Miss  Khan
    informed me at the outset of the hearing that she did not wish to  take
    any further issue with the admission of the application for  permission
    to  appeal  and  the  extension  of  time  granted  by  Judge  McClure.
    Likewise, she did not offer any objection to  the  Secretary  of  State
    amending her grounds in accordance with Mr Jarvis' draft.

 8. Mr Jarvis submitted that the First-tier Tribunal determination had  not
    followed Devaseelan and had also erred in its approach  to  the  expert
    evidence of Dr Kennes.  I shall deal with the remaining amended grounds
    of appeal in the order in which they were set out in Mr Jarvis'  draft.



 9. At [111] the First-tier Tribunal had written:

         "The further evidence which was not before  the  earlier  Tribunals
         includes documents which indicate that  the  appellant's  children,
         her sister and her sisters' child are nationals of the DRC and were
         born in Bukavu.  The documentation shows that  the  UNHCR  and  the
         Refugee Law Project at the Faculty of Law, Makerere University have
         undertaken investigations in respect of the  family  and  they  are
         satisfied that they are Congolese nationals."

10. The Secretary of State challenges the "considerable weight"  placed  by
    the Tribunal upon the UNHCR and RLP (Refugee  Law  Project)  documents.
    The Tribunal had failed to deal with that evidence in  accordance  with
    the principles of Tanveer Ahmed  (2002)  UKIAT  00439*.   At  the  2010
    Tribunal (Judge Reed) had seen the UNHCR letters and the  RLP  evidence
    but the First-tier Tribunal in  2014  had  failed  to  take  that  into
    account.  The Tribunal had failed also to:

         "...factor into their assessment the undisputed evidence  that  the
         appellant had previously been convicted for the use of  documentary
         deception and had already found to have relied upon  an  unreliable
         birth certificate. [Judge Thornton's determination]."

11. I am not persuaded that the Tribunal has  fallen  into  the  errors  at
    [111] Mr Jarvis  seeks  to  identify.   The  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    evidence in question "indicates" and also "shows"  matters  upon  which
    the appellant seeks to rely; the Tribunal has  done  little  more  than
    describe what the evidence purports to prove. I am satisfied  that  the
    evidence described at [111] has been considered by the Tribunal as part
    of the totality of the evidence and before it reached any  conclusions.
    I am not satisfied that [111] indicates,  the  respondent  submits,  an
    uncritical acceptance of the evidence described.

12. The appellant's original ID card could not be produced before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The original document had, however, been seen by  Judge
    Thornton.  At [102] the Tribunal noted:

         "The appellant was shown a copy  of  the  appellant's  old  Zairian
         identity card.  He confirmed that it was the same card as  used  in
         Mobutu's time and that his spouse had one.  No new cards  had  been
         printed since 1988 and most cards became worn out after a couple of
         years.  After it became  worn  it  was  usual  to  write  over  the
         printing on the card to make it more readable.  Without seeing  the
         original it was even more difficult to judge whether it was a  real
         or fake document.  From the copy it seemed to him that  there  were
         not two layers of writing but that the existing  writing  had  just
         been exaggerated.  It would be visible if the characters  had  been
         changed and they had not."

    The grounds criticise the Tribunal for failing to give proper weight to
    Judge Thornton's observations in 2006  given  that  she  had  seen  the
    original card and not simply the copy which had been seen by the First-
    tier Tribunal and Dr Kennes.

13. As I have noted above, the Tribunal recorded the fact  that  Dr  Kennes
    had been reluctant to identify whether the ID card was "real  or  fake"
    without having the opportunity of seeing the original.  Dr Kennes  gave
    opinion evidence as an expert is entitled to do on  the  basis  of  the
    materials available to him.  It was  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    decide how much  weight,  in  turn,  to  give  to  Dr  Kennes'  opinion
    evidence.  The Tribunal was not obliged to prefer the findings of Judge
    Thornton to the opinions of Dr Kennes simply  because  the  former  had
    seen an original document which the latter had not seen.

14.  Ground  7  challenges  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  expert  evidence
    generally.  Dr Kennes had relied upon the opinion of a third party,  Mr
    Maneno, so there was no proper basis for the Tribunal stating at  [108]
    that it had been able to reach findings on  the  basis  of  Dr  Kennes'
    opinion "alone".  Mr Maneno, who had given  information  to  Dr  Kennes
    regarding the appellant's language and dialect, had not been called  to
    give evidence.  Although Mr Maneno was not  a  court  interpreter,  the
    respondent relied on  AA  (language  diagnosis:  use  of  interpreters)
    Somalia [2008] UKAIT 00029 in particular at [7] and [10]:

         "7. It is difficult to make specific comment on the detailed issues
         arising in KS and SA, without fuller information  than  appears  in
         the determinations themselves. In fact  the  Vice  President  whose
         comments are reported  in  SA  was  the  same  person  who  ordered
         reconsideration in the  present  case;  and  the  Chairman  of  the
         Tribunal in SA was the same as the Chairman of the Tribunal in  KS.
         It may be, therefore, that any such  practice  as  alleged  by  Mr.
         Schwenk is not in fact widespread in the Tribunal. Whether  or  not
         it is widespread, we are quite clear that in circumstances such  as
         in the present case it ought not to be adopted,  and  we  are  also
         certain that nobody should have assumed that it  was  part  of  the
         function of the Court Interpreter to resolve an issue of this sort.
         We come to that conclusion for  two  separate  reasons.  The  first
         relates to  the  function  and  expertise  of  an  interpreter.  An
         interpreter's function is to comprehend  and  communicate,  not  to
         assess or analyse. A person's skills in interpretation lie  in  his
         ability to understand what is being said to him in one language (or
         dialect) and communicate it  accurately  in  another  language  (or
         dialect). It is simply wrong  to  say  that  the  abilities  of  an
         interpreter necessarily import an ability to distinguish accurately
         between different dialects and to be able to attribute dialects  to
         different sources. A person whose  first  language  is  French  may
         attain standards of  near  perfection  in  English  interpretation,
         without being able to say with accuracy whether he is dealing  with
         a person from Ipswich or Indiana, or even with a person  whose  own
         first language was not English. As an interpreter he may widen  his
         vocabulary base and his  understanding  of  different  accents  and
         dialects so that he can cope with whatever version  of  English  is
         used by the person for whom he is interpreting, without needing  or
         wanting or being required to consider or work out what the  dialect
         is,  but  merely  to  do  his  own   job   of   understanding   and
         communicating. Of course an  interpreter  may  know  (or  think  he
         knows) something about the type of language or dialect  the  person
         for whom he is interpreting is using: but that is quite a different
         matter. It is not part of his function as interpreter.

         ....

         10. We see no reason to dissent from the Tribunal's observation  in
         SA and others that an expert who speaks a  particular  language  or
         dialect is more likely to be able to provide  evidence  of  whether
         another person speaks that language or dialect than is a person who
         does not have that linguistic competence. But it  does  not  follow
         from that (and we venture to suggest that  nobody  could  think  it
         followed from that) that  every  person  who  speaks  a  particular
         language or dialect is to be regarded as an expert, able to  assess
         whether some other person that language or  dialect,  or,  if  not,
         what dialect is being spoken."

15. The previous expert  (Mr  Ngombo)  had  given  evidence  regarding  the
    appellant's dialect which was "diametrically opposed"  to  that  of  Mr
    Maneno.  The Tribunal had failed to resolve the contradiction.

16. It was the task of the Tribunal to consider each item of  evidence  and
    to apportion weight to it as may be appropriate.  It was then  required
    to consider the evidence as a totality before reaching any  conclusion.
    I am satisfied the Tribunal did exactly  that.   The  apportionment  of
    weight to, for example, Dr Kennes' expert evidence was a matter for the
    Tribunal.  The Tribunal was aware that the opinion  of  Dr  Kennes  had
    been informed by the opinions of a third party (Mr Maneno).   There  is
    nothing particularly unusual about that.  Dr Kennes has,  except  where
    he has given reasons for not doing so, identified the  sources  of  the
    information upon which he has based his own  opinions  and,  given  the
    expert's own acknowledged expertise in  matters  relating  to  DRC  (an
    expertise not challenged before the First-tier Tribunal), it  was  open
    to the Tribunal to attach weight to  his  evidence.   This  is  not  an
    instance where the expert has purportedly given an opinion on a  matter
    outside his  knowledge  or  expertise;  he  has  used  his  own  expert
    knowledge of DRC to evaluate the information given to him by Mr Maneno.
     I do not accept, as the grounds assert, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    abdicated the task of reaching a  determination  in  this  case  to  Dr
    Kennes.  An illustration of the  correct  methodology  applied  by  the
    Tribunal appears at [101]:

         "It was put to Dr Kennes that, as stated by Judge  Reed  (paragraph
         73) that the appellant demonstrated some knowledge of life  in  the
         DRC but this could have been acquired by the time  spent  there  or
         from others.  In response he stated that the appellant's  knowledge
         of the area of South Kivu and Bukavu is so  detailed  and  accurate
         that someone could not learn  this  by  heart  when  she  was  from
         another country.  The combination  of  the  different  elements  of
         knowledge are so specific that it can only be acquired  by  someone
         living in Bukavu for an extended period of at least 10 years."

17. I consider that Dr Kennes' comments  recorded  in  that  paragraph  are
    entirely within the range of opinion evidence which an  expert  witness
    may legitimately give.  I  do  not  accept  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission that, because Dr Kennes' himself was not  from  Bukavu,  his
    opinion is "absurd".

18. The remainder of ground 7 challenges the  Tribunal's  treatment  of  Dr
    Kennes' evidence in a similar manner.  Dr Kennes gave  his  opinion  on
    the appellant's claim to have  been  raped  and  tortured.   Dr  Kennes
    referred to the opinion of "unnamed university professor  in  Kinshasa"
    who, in turn, had given an opinion on the payment of bribes  which  may
    have been necessary to bring about the appellant's transfer from prison
    to hospital.  I do not consider the  Tribunal  erred  by  accepting  Dr
    Kennes' explanation for refraining from identifying some of his sources
    nor is it clear that Dr Kennes relies  uncritically  upon  the  unnamed
    professor's opinion in reaching his own rather different assessment  of
    the appellant's account.  Judge Reeds did not believe  the  appellant's
    account of having been transferred to the hospital but he had not  seen
    the later reports of Dr Kennes nor  did  he  have  the  opportunity  of
    hearing that expert give oral evidence  under  cross-examination.   The
    evidence considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  differed  from  that
    considered by Judge Reed, and accordingly I see no  difficulty  arising
    from the fact that the Tribunal reached a different  conclusion  as  to
    the credibility of the appellant's account.

19. Ground 8 addresses the medical  evidence  of  Dr  Huws.   The  Tribunal
    considered Dr Huws' evidence at [114-117]:

         "The inconsistencies may be explained by  the  appellant's  medical
         condition.  We have before us the psychiatric report of  Dr  Rohdri
         Huws which is undated but reports that he saw the appellant  on  11
         December, 2013 with the aid of a professional interpreter.  Neither
         Dr Huws' qualifications nor his  opinion  were  challenged  by  the
         respondent.

         A summary of his opinion is that the appellant is suffering from  a
         depressive illness of  moderate  severity.   She  also  has  sexual
         dysfunction which  would  be  typically  seen  following  prolonged
         sexual abuse.  She has a number of post-dramatic symptoms but  they
         do not meet the criteria for  post-dramatic  stress  disorder.   Dr
         Huws is of the opinion that her psychological state is  better  now
         than it was  around  2007  when  she  took  an  overdose  with  the
         intention of killing herself.  He reviewed the reports  which  were
         before Judge Reed and he believes they contain enough evidence  for
         a definitive diagnosis of PTSD.  He believes that  at  this  period
         she was suffering from post dramatic stress disorder that responded
         to psychological treatment in conjunction with the  news  that  her
         children were safe.  Taking into account her story and the  content
         of the symptoms at the time he is of  the  opinion  that  the  post
         dramatic stress disorder was highly consistent with being  sequelae
         of the experiences she described in the Congo.

         Dr Huws states that a feature of PTSD  is  dissociation  where  the
         mind shuts off thoughts and memories that  are  too  traumatic  and
         this can lead to  minor  inconsistencies  in  recounting  a  story.
         Memories that are too traumatic can be reconstructed and  this  can
         be part of the therapeutic process of recovery from PTSD.   In  the
         light of this evidence we find  that  the  PTSD  at  the  time  may
         explain some of the inconsistencies in her story.

         We bear in mind that this report was not before Judges Thornton  or
         Reed and that weighty evidence such  as  this,  from  a  consultant
         psychiatrist, is often needed before a Tribunal is willing to  make
         a finding that an appellant's evidence  is  unreliable  because  of
         mental illness."

20. The grounds complain that Dr Huws had based his opinion  entirely  upon
    the appellant's account which two previous judges had rejected.  It was
    clear from the passages of the Tribunal's determination  which  I  have
    quoted above [especially 117] that the Tribunal  was  well  aware  that
    there were problems  with  the  appellant's  account  of  past  events.
    However, it was open to the Tribunal to accept Dr Huws' explanation for
    the inconsistencies in the appellant's story  (that  they  arose  as  a
    result of the PTSD from which she suffered).  Indeed, at  [114]  it  is
    clear that the Tribunal relied upon Dr Huws' report  to  reconcile  the
    same inconsistencies in the appellant's account which  had  led  Judges
    Thornton and Reed to reject her evidence.  It was open to the  Tribunal
    to give weight to Dr Huws' report; the Tribunal was not obliged, as the
    grounds suggest, to reject or attach little weight to Dr Huws' evidence
    because it was based in part on the appellant's account of past events.
     There was nothing to suggest that Dr Huws had not been made  aware  of
    the inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence;  indeed,  his  report
    sought to explain why they had occurred.

21. Devaseelan, as a starred decision of the Tribunal, bound the First-tier
    Tribunal but I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal has fallen
    into error in its treatment of any of the evidence upon which it  based
    its decision.  The Tribunal  was  alive  to  the  difficulties  in  the
    appellant's case, not least the fact  that  her  credibility  had  been
    rejected by two previous judges.  I am satisfied that it  has,  through
    its detailed analysis, reached an outcome which was  available  to  it.
    In the circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 26 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

