
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01271/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2016                            |On 9 March 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            TERESA GUDANAVICIENE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Markus, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the respondent as the appellant and to  the  appellant
    as the respondent (as they appeared respectively before the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Teresa Gudanaviciene, was  born  on  31  May
    1971 and is a female citizen of Lithuania.  On 10  December  2012,  the
    respondent  decided  to  deport  the  appellant  to  Lithuania.   On  7
    September 2012, at Norwich Crown Court the appellant had been convicted
    of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm.  She was  sentenced
    to eighteen months'  imprisonment.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge M Robertson) which, in a decision promulgated on 27 May
    2015 allowed the appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the Tribunal did not err in  law  such  that  its  decision
    falls to be set aside.  The grounds of appeal challenge the decision on
    the basis that the judge has referred to "serious" grounds for removing
    this appellant to Lithuania at [88] and [13].  It had been accepted  by
    both parties that the appellant had not acquired a right  of  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom.  However, (as the  Rule  24  statement
    indicates) the judge has not referred at any point in her  decision  to
    "imperative grounds." I agree with Mr  Markus,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, that the  reference  in  the  determination  to  "Regulation
    21(4)" is a  "slip"  and  does  not  represent  a  misunderstanding  or
    misapplication of the law on the part of the judge.  I find  also  that
    the judge at [14] has correctly applied the approach to "public policy"
    as enunciated in Bouchereau (C-30/77).

 3. Mr Markus submitted that the assertion made in the  grounds  of  appeal
    (that the appellant still poses a risk to her ex-partner  [7])  was  an
    argument which had not been pursued before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr
    Markus submitted that the  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had conceded that the appellant had presented a  low  risk  of
    violent re-offending.  Before the Upper Tribunal,  Mr  Walker  did  not
    disagree with that submission.  As Mr Markus pointed out, the burden of
    proving  that  the  appellant  represented  a   genuine   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat to public policy by remaining in the United
    Kingdom was, in essence, impossible to discharge in the  light  of  the
    evidence of the appellant herself (which had not been  challenged)  the
    probation services and the expert, Dr  Kelland,  evidence  which  fully
    supported the judge's finding that the appellant represented a low risk
    to her former partner.

 4. Finally, I do  not  agree  with  the  Secretary  of  State  that  Judge
    Robertson has allowed any sympathy for the position of the appellant to
    sway her decision in any way.  The  judge's  decision  is  a  model  of
    objective and clear cited reasoning.  In any event,  given  the  agreed
    facts in this appeal, it is difficult to see how the judge  could  have
    reached any other conclusion.

Notice of Decision

 5. This appeal is dismissed.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
