
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 01171 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 March 2014                              |On 25 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       THE HON MR JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                VEYSEL KEKEC
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Kilic & Kilic
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  an  appeal  by  a  citizen   of   Turkey
    (hereinafter "the claimant") against his being made subject to automatic
    deportation under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. It was accepted before by Ms Daykin, in a concession that  was  no  more
    than proper and  professional,  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was  not  adequate.   In  particular,  it  paid  no  regard  to
    established jurisprudence dealing with the proper approach  to  take  in
    Section 32(5) cases. For example it made no reference to  the  decisions
    in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  00640
    (IAC) or R (on the application of) Nagre v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  or,  more  importantly,  the
    principles of law established and explained in those cases.

 3. However there was more to be said. Ms Daykin pointed  out  something  of
    considerable importance.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    claimant was in a durable relationship with an EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights.  Ms Daykin submitted that, having found that the claimant
    was in such a relationship, the Tribunal  should  have  found  that  the
    deportation decision complained was made under the wrong provisions.  If
    the Secretary of State intended to deport the claimant then the decision
    should have been made as a decision against a person who was or may have
    been the family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.   We
    say "may have been" because Ms Daykin properly drew our attention to the
    decision of this Tribunal in Rose (Automatic  deportation  exception  3)
    (Jamaica) [2011] UKUT 00276 (IAC) which said at paragraph 3 of the  head
    note:

         "However a person who has been found to be an  OFM/extended  family
         member under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
         2006 needs to be considered by the Secretary of State as  a  person
         in respect of whom the discretion to issue a residence  card  under
         Regulation 17 may be exercised."

 4. We agree with Ms Daykin's submission.

 5. The point is that the claimant's entitlement to a residence card  should
    be decided before a proper decision can be made about if or how he is to
    be deported.  It is trite law that a person entitled to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom as the dependant of an  EEA  cannot  be  the  subject  of
    automatic deportation (see section 33(3) of the 2007 Act).

 6. With the agreement of both parties, it is our decision that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside because it was wrong in law  but
    the only proper decision in this case is that the Secretary  of  State's
    decision was itself wrong in law  because  it  was  made  without  first
    deciding if the appellant was entitled to a  certificate  of  residence.
    On this occasion we have  some  sympathy  for  the  Secretary  of  State
    because the difficulty was not something that was raised before her  but
    that is irrelevant, it was raised before the First-tier Tribunal and had
    to be decided.

 7. It follows therefore that we substitute the decision made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal with a decision allowing the appeal to the extent that the
    Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance  with  the  law.  The
    Secretary of State must now decide what she wants  to  do  next  and  in
    particular to decide if the appellant is entitled to  a  certificate  of
    residence and, if he is, if  he  is  still  to  be  deported  under  the
    appropriate regime.

 8. Obviously any consideration on that point will be informed by the First-
    tier Tribunal's finding that when  it  reached  its  decision  that  the
    appellant was in a durable relationship.  It does not follow  from  that
    that he still is in such a relationship or that he  cannot  be  deported
    lawfully.

 9. No other findings of the First-tier Tribunal are binding or relevant  in
    any way.







    Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.
    We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  substitute  a
    decision allowing the claimant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because the decision complained of is not in accordance with the law.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 April 2014                  |







