
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01169/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2013                            |On 6 February 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                               joaquim queiros
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Secretary of State:      Ms K Bretherton, Counsel, instructed by
the Treasury Solicitor
For the Claimant:      Mr A Eaton, Counsel, instructed by Rodman Pearce


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State who appeals with permission
    against the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  (the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill and Mr M E Olszewski JP) promulgated on 1 March
    2013 allowing Mr Queiros' appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
    State made on 3 December 2012 to make a deportation order  against  him
    by virtue of Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.  For clarity  we
    refer to Mr Queiros as the claimant.

 2. It is the claimant's case that he arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  1
    September 1999 and has lived here continuously since  then  apart  from
    short periods of a few weeks during which he had returned to  Portugal.



 3. The claimant first came to the attention  of  the  authorities  in  the
    United Kingdom in January 2001  and  has  subsequently  accumulated  17
    convictions for 28 separate offences.

 4. On 5 October 2011 the claimant was  sentenced  to  a  period  of  three
    years' imprisonment for being concerned in a supply of class A drugs at
    a street level as a user/dealer.  As a result of that  conviction,  the
    Secretary of State took a decision to deport the claimant who  appealed
    against that decision pursuant to  Regulation  26  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 5. The EEA Regulations transpose into domestic law Directive 2004/58/EC of
    the European Parliament and of the Council of 29  April  2004  "on  the
    right of citizens of the Union and their family  members  to  move  and
    reside  freely  within  the  territory  of  the  Member  States"  ("the
    Directive"). The relevant parts of the EEA Regulations provide:

         19.  (1) A person is not entitled to  be  admitted  to  the  United
         Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11 if his exclusion is justified on
         grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
         accordance with regulation 21.

         (1A) a person is not entitled to be admitted to the United  Kingdom
         by virtue  of  regulation  11  of  that  person  is  subject  to  a
         deportation or exclusion order

         (1B) If the Secretary of State considers that the exclusion  of  an
         EEA national or the family member of an EEA national  is  justified
         on the grounds of public policy, public security or  public  health
         in accordance with regulation 21 the Secretary of State may make an
         order for the purpose of these Regulations prohibiting that  person
         from entering the United Kingdom

         ...

         (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5),  an  EEA  national  who  has
         entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such a  national
         who has entered the United Kingdom under these Regulations  may  be
         removed if-

         (a) that person does not  have or ceases to have a right to  reside
         under these Regulations; or

         (b) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal is
         justified on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or
         public health in accordance with regulation 21.

         ...

         21.  (1)  In this regulation a "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         ...

         (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in  respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.

         (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

         ...

         (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-

         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;

         (d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;

         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.

 6. The claimant's case is that as he had resided in the United Kingdom for
    more than ten years prior  to  the  conviction  that  resulted  in  the
    decision to deport him, he is a person to whom regulation 21 (4) (a) of
    the EEA Regulations applies and so can be deported only on  "imperative
    grounds of public security".

 7. The Secretary of State's case is that the claimant  presents  a  medium
    risk of reoffending; that all the available evidence indicates that  he
    had a propensity to reoffend and, that he represents a genuine  present
    and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to   justify   his
    deportation.  She did not accept that the claimant had resided in  this
    country in accordance with the EEA Regulations for a continuous  period
    of either five or ten years and that therefore he was not a  person  to
    whom Regulation 21(3) or (4)(a) applies.

 8. On appeal, the First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant had been  in
    the  United  Kingdom  continuously  since  1999.  They   accepted   his
    submission that in order to meet the requirements of regulation 21  (4)
    (a), he need only have resided here for 10 years, and that there was no
    requirement that his residence have been in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    regulations. They found that a sentence of  three  years'  imprisonment
    did not meet the "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  test  and
    allowed the appeal on that basis.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had materially misdirected  itself  in  law  in
    concluding that the ten years residence referred to  in  regulation  21
    (4)  (a)  did  not  have  to  be  residence  in  accordance  with   the
    regulations. It was also submitted that the panel had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasoning as to how the claimant had acquired ten years' total
    residence given the lack of documentary  evidence  and  the  acceptance
    that he  had  been  out  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  2006  and  2009.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Deans  on  26
    March 2013.

10. The appeal then came  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul,  sitting
    alone, on 3 June 2013.  He found that in concluding that  the  claimant
    is a person to whom Regulation 21(4) applies, that is that he has  been
    resident here for ten years and did not require to have shown  that  he
    was resident here in accordance with the Regulations for  that  period,
    the Tribunal relied solely on the decision in SSHD v FV [2012] EWCA Civ
    1199 ("FV") and did not refer to HR (Portugal) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    371 in which it was  held  that  the  same  requirement  of  lawfulness
    governs both the five year and the ten qualifying periods,  a  decision
    approved in the Court of Appeal in Carvalho and Omar v SSHD [2010] EWCA
    Civ 1406. Judge Rintoul considered that although the panel referred  to
    the decision in LG (Italy) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 190 which  left  this
    question open, the panel has failed to have  regard  to  later  binding
    authority or distinguish it and although it is arguable that HR was not
    followed in  FV,  there  is  insufficient  indication  that  the  panel
    considered this issue.    Given that it was noted in the  determination
    [51] that Mr Eaton accepted that the claimant might have difficulty  in
    meeting the requirement in regulations 21 (3), that is to have acquired
    permanent residence in the United Kingdom, and,  given  the  claimant's
    history of offending the First-tier Tribunal could have come to another
    conclusion.

11. The matter was then listed before us to remake the decision. Since that
    hearing on 31 October 2013, the Court of Justice of the European  Union
    ("CJEU") has handed down decisions in two relevant cases -  MG  v  SSHD
    [2014] CJEU C-400/12 and Onuekwere v  SSHD  [2014]  CJEU  C-378/12.  In
    consequence we gave directions to both parties permitting them to  make
    submissions on these cases.  In his response, Mr Eaton states [4];

         ...for the purpose of  the  current  appeal,  it  firstly  must  be
         conceded that [the claimant's] periods of imprisonment preclude him
         from the specific level of protection from deportation, set out  at
         Article 28(3) (a) of Directive 2004/38/EC and Regulation 21 (4) (a)
         of the 2006 EEA  Regulations

12. In the light of this concession,  we  consider  that  in  remaking  the
    decision, we need only concern ourselves with the lower  of  the  three
    levels of protection as described in Batista v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    896 (per Carnwath LJ as he then was) at [9] -[10]:
   1. It is sufficient to recall that the Regulations (particularly
      regulation 21) provide for a hierarchy of levels of protection in
      relation to decisions to remove EEA citizens on grounds of public
      policy or public security. As I explained in LG(Italy) in the Court of
      Appeal (at para 14-15):
      "... the 2006 Regulations have introduced a new hierarchy of levels of
      protection, based on criteria of increasing stringency:
      1) A general criterion that removal may be justified 'on the grounds
      of public policy, public security or public health';
      2) A more specific criterion, applicable to those with permanent
      rights of residence, that they may not be removed 'except on serious
      grounds of public policy or public security';
      3) The most stringent criterion, applicable to a person 'who has
      resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at least ten
      years prior to the relevant decision', who may not be removed except
      on 'imperative grounds of public security'.
      ....
      The Court of Appeal has long accepted that removal on 'public policy'
      grounds may be a justified response to sufficiently serious criminal
      conduct, if combined with evidence of a propensity to reoffend, and in
      particularly serious cases even without it..."

13. It  is  also  important  to  note  that,  under  all  three  levels  of
    protection,  certain  general  criteria  must  be  met   including   at
    regulation 21  (5)  (c)  that  "the  personal  conduct  of  the  person
    concerned must represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society". It flows
    from that requirement, that even in the case of  the  lowest  level  of
    protection, there is a minimum level of threat that must be met  before
    the consideration of proportionality envisaged in regulations 21 (6).

14. As it is accepted that the claimant is not entitled to the  benefit  of
    regulation 21 (4) we proceed consider  whether  regulations  21(5)  has
    been made out. Our starting point is whether the appellant represents a
    genuine, present, and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of society, that is, in this context  whether  he
    has  a  propensity  to  re-offend.   We   note   from   Essa   ( EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC) at [32]-[35]




       32. We observe that for any deportation of an EEA national or family
       member of such national to  be  justified  on  public  good  grounds
       (irrespective of whether permanent residence has been achieved)  the
       claimant must represent a present threat to public policy. The  fact
       of a criminal conviction is not enough. It  is  not  permissible  in
       an EEA case to deport a claimant on the basis of criminal offending
       simply to deter others.  This tends to mean,  in  case  of  criminal
       conduct short of the most serious threats to the  public  safety  of
       the state, that a candidate for EEA deportation must  represent  a
       present threat  by  reason  of  a  propensity  to  re-offend  or  an
       unacceptably high risk of re-offending.  In such a case, if there is
       acceptable evidence  of  rehabilitation,  the  prospects  of  future
       rehabilitation do not enter the balance,  save  possibly  as  future
       protective  factors  to  ensure  that  the  rehabilitation   remains
       durable.

       33.   It is only where rehabilitation is  incomplete  or  uncertain
       that future prospects may play a role  in  the  overall  assessment.
       Here  we  must  take  our  guidance  from  the  Court   of   Justice
       in Tskouridis and the Court of Appeal in the present case remitting
       the matter to this Tribunal.  It is in the interests of the citizen,
       the host state and the Union itself for  an  offender  to  cease  to
       offend.  This is most likely to be the case with young offenders who
       commit a disproportionate number of offences, but many of whom  will
       stop offending as they mature and comparatively few of whom go on to
       become hardened criminals and persistent  recidivist  offenders.  We
       can exclude  consideration  of  offenders  beneath  the  age  of  18
       as EEA law will prevent their deportation save in the unusual event
       that it is in their own interest (Article 28 (3) (b) of the Citizens
       Directive).

       34.   If the very factors that contribute to his  integration  that
       assist  in  rehabilitation  of  such  offenders  (family  ties   and
       responsibilities, accommodation,  education,  training,  employment,
       active membership of a community and the like) will  assist  in  the
       completion of a process  of  rehabilitation,  then  that  can  be  a
       substantial factor in the balance. If the claimant cannot constitute
       a  present  threat  when  rehabilitated,  and  is  well-advanced  in
       rehabilitation in a host state where there is a  substantial  degree
       of integration, it may well very well be disproportionate to proceed
       to deportation.

       35.  At the other end of the scale,  if  there  are  no  reasonable
       prospects of rehabilitation, the claimant is a present threat and is
       likely to remain so for the indefinite future, we cannot see how the
       prospects of rehabilitation could constitute a significant factor in
       the balance. Thus  recidivist  offenders,  career  criminals,  adult
       offenders who have  failed  to  engage  with  treatment  programmes,
       claimants with impulses to commit sexual or violent offences and the
       like may well fall into this category.

15. There was little material before the First-tier Tribunal which  relates
    to the claimant's life in the United Kingdom although it is  listed  in
    their determination at [33] - [34]. The panel heard evidence  from  the
    claimant, but we did not as, although he was offered  the  opportunity,
    Mr Eaton elected not to call him.

16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any findings of fact  in  relation
    to the claimant's account of  how  he  had  spent  his  life  here.  No
    submissions have been made that he was not telling the  truth,  and  we
    have no reason to doubt his account. We accept, that:

      i) the claimant worked as a plumber in Portugal, but  became  involved
         with drugs, although was able to be drug free from  1993  to  2000;
         that he became involved with drugs again  in  the  United  Kingdom,
         finding it hard to beat his addiction;

     ii) the claimant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  1999  to  work,
         initially in a factory in Spalding,  but  lost  his  job  and  then
         started to claim benefits;

    iii) the claimant met his wife in 1999; that they were married  in  2001
         and that she give birth to twin daughters in March 2001;  that  the
         relationship broke down;

     iv) there had  been  regular  contact  between  the  claimant  and  his
         daughters who continue to live in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  that
         since he has been in prison, although  contact  was  maintained  by
         telephone, that has ceased and his former  wife  is  unwilling  for
         contact to continue;

      v) the claimant has undergone a number of courses in prison, including
         on the CARAT programmes, and is a regular churchgoer.

17. In terms of his offending behaviour, we note that he has accumulated 17
    convictions for 28 offences between 2001 and August 2011  when  he  was
    convicted of the index offence of supplying Class A drugs for which  he
    was sentenced to three  years  imprisonment.   His  offending  includes
    convictions for shoplifting, simple possession  of  drugs,  failure  to
    surrender, and breach of community order.

18. We note from the sentencing remarks of HH Judge Madge that the claimant
    had been a street dealer, with entrenched drug addiction, and had  been
    sentenced on the basis that his offending was to feed his habit. Having
    had regard to the presentence report, the judge was not satisfied  that
    the claimant has the necessary motivation  for  a  drug  rehabilitation
    order to be successful.

19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make a finding on the risk posed by the
    claimant. They found that the highest level was not met in  this  case,
    but went on to state [60] "in any event this conclusion [that the  test
    was not met] is underscored by the  most  recent  assessment  that  the
    [claimant] represents a low risk. He has  integrated  into  the  UK  by
    residing here for many years".

20. That last sentence is, we find, not a finding of fact by the First-tier
    Tribunal, nor did Mr Eaton expressly submit that it was; it is  nothing
    more than a gloss on the principal finding  which  meant  that  it  was
    unnecessary for them to reach any further conclusions, the finding with
    respect  to  the  claimant  meeting   the   high   level   test   being
    determinative.  Further,  such  a  finding  is  in  isolation  of   any
    consideration of proportionality, or any of  the  other  considerations
    set out in regulations 21 (5) and (6).

21. There are two reports produced by the Probation Service  assessing  the
    claimant's propensity to re-offend. There  is  a  NOMS  report,  and  a
    subsequent OASys report which is more detailed,  and  breaks  down  the
    risk into three categories: OGRS3, OGP and OVP. Of these scores,  OGRS3
    alone  indicates  a  medium  risk,  and  Mr  Eaton  accepted  in   oral
    submissions  that  there   was   a   medium   risk   of   re-offending,
    notwithstanding the low risk in relation to some scores.

22. The probation reports must be considered with the indication  that  the
    claimant has undertaken  CARAT  courses  and  the  negative  drug  test
    results. These count in his favour,  but  we  bear  in  mind  also  his
    history of long term drug use.

23. There is little or no evidence before us regarding what  support  would
    be in place for the claimant on release. There is  no  evidence  as  to
    where he would be accommodated, what income he would have,  whether  he
    is likely to be employed or what support is available to assist him  to
    avoid drug misuse.  There is, in fact, a  dearth  of  evidence  of  any
    stabilising factors being present on  release,  and  we  consider  that
    there is as a result, and given the  claimants  long  history  of  drug
    abuse and crime to feed his habit, that  it  is  likely  that  he  will
    continue, on release, to deal in drugs as he has done in the past.

24. There is little or no evidence other than what the claimant  says  that
    he has changed and would no  longer  seek  to  commit  crimes.   It  is
    relatively easy to make such statements, but without evidence that such
    a change has in fact become embedded in his  person,  shown  by  proper
    insight into his past behaviour or other actions he has  taken,  it  is
    difficult  to  accept  them  at  face   value,   given   his   history.
    Accordingly, we are satisfied that the claimant does have a  propensity
    to re-offend and is likely to turn again to dealing in drugs and  other
    crimes. There is thus a medium risk of his re-offending.

25. We consider that, in the circumstances, given the pernicious effect  of
    the dealing in Class  A  drugs  has  on  society,  that  this  claimant
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society.

26. In assessing whether it would be proportionate to remove the  claimant,
    we note that there is little evidence before us  of  his  life  in  the
    United Kingdom other than his chaotic history of drug-abuse and  crime.
    There is little evidence of support from  friends  or  family;  no  one
    appeared before us to support him.  He does, we accept, have  a  family
    life with his two daughters, but his relationship with them is, and has
    been for a long time, limited.  There is insufficient  evidence  before
    us to reach conclusions about what is in the children's best  interests
    nor have we heard detailed submissions on that issue. Given that  there
    is now no longer any telephone contact with them, the  content  of  the
    family life is minimal; there is no indication that  deportation  would
    make any substantial difference to the nature  of  the  tenuous  family
    life that exists.

27. The claimant has now lived in the United Kingdom for over 13 years, but
    beyond that, given his limited work record, and continued  criminality,
    his ties to this country are very limited.  That said, we  are  mindful
    of the length of the claimant's residence here,  and  bearing  in  mind
    what was said in  MG at [36] and [37], it is a  factor  which  we  take
    into account in his favour and one to which we attach weight,  although
    we balance this against the risks he poses.

28. We bear in mind, in weighing  these  factors,  that  the  claimant  has
    rights under European  Law  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom,  establish
    himself here and work here. Any interference with his  rights  must  be
    proportionate.  We find that in this case the serious threat  posed  by
    the claimant cannot be addressed by any measures other than his removal
    from the United Kingdom and that the interference with his  rights  is,
    given  his  limited  integration  into  and  life  in   this   country,
    proportionate.

29. Accordingly, the decision made in this  case  was  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations, and we dismiss the appeal on that
    basis.

30. Turning to Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention,  it  is  not
    submitted that the claimant meets the requirements  of  paragraphs  399
    and 399A of  the  immigration.  We  do  not  consider  that  there  are
    exceptional circumstances in this case. The claimant has at best a very
    limited family life with his daughters.  In assessing  proportionality,
    we bear in mind that the claimant has rights under  EU  law,  and  that
    significant weight must be attached to that, but  equally  for  reasons
    set out above,  we  have  found  that  under  EU  law  his  removal  is
    proportionate. We bear in mind our finding  that  the  claimant  has  a
    family life here; he has spent a substantial part of his time  here  in
    custody, and that his private life is limited for the reasons  set  out
    above. We consider that the interference with that limited private life
    is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  as  set  out  in  the  EEA
    Regulations, given the serious threat posed by the claimant's continued
    residence here and his continued offending.

31. Accordingly, we find that the claimant's deportation would  not  be  in
    breach of this country's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention and we dismiss his appeal on that basis also,

32. We find that the claimant has failed to satisfy us  that  the  decision
    made in this case was wrong on the basis of any of the grounds set  out
    in section 84 of the 2002 Act or the EEA Regulations,  and  we  dismiss
    his appeal in its entirety.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


