


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01661/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Royal Courts of Justice   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On : 11 May 2015                     | On: 13 May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    C R D
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal, instructed by Wilson Barca LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  CRD's  appeal
    against the decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent and CRD  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on  20  December  1979.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 January 2004 and was granted  leave
    to enter as a visitor for six months. On 6 May  2004  he  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain as a student which was  refused  on  24
    May 2004. On 17 June 2004 he submitted  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as an unmarried partner of  a  British  citizen.  Following  his
    marriage to his partner in April 2007 he varied  his  application.  His
    application having been made when he  had  no  leave,  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain on 5 February 2009 until 4 February 2012.
    On 29 February 2012 he submitted an application for indefinite leave to
    remain as the spouse of a British citizen. His application was  refused
    on 6 December 2012 as he had previously had only  discretionary  leave,
    but he was given a further period  of  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    until 5 December 2015.

 4. On 13 February 2014 the  appellant  was  convicted  of  six  counts  of
    supplying Class A controlled drug (heroin) and six counts of  supplying
    Class A controlled drug (cocaine) and was  sentenced  to  three  years'
    imprisonment. On 28 February 2014 he was notified of his  liability  to
    automatic deportation under section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007
    and on 4 August 2014 a deportation order was made against him.  On  the
    same day a decision was made that section 32(5) applied.

 5. The respondent, in making that decision, accepted  that  the  appellant
    had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  wife  and  four
    children who were British citizens, but considered that it would not be
    unduly harsh for his wife and children to live in Jamaica or to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without  him.  Accordingly  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 399(a) and (b) of the immigration rules  were  not  met.  The
    respondent considered further that the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 399A and did not accept that there were  very
    compelling circumstances which outweighed the public  interest  in  his
    deportation. The respondent accordingly concluded that the  appellant's
    deportation would not breach Article 8.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 3 December 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Monson.
    The judge heard from the appellant and his wife and considered a report
    from a qualified social worker. He found that it would be  contrary  to
    the best interests of the children for the appellant to be  removed  to
    Jamaica or for them to have to accompany him to Jamaica and  considered
    that it would be unduly harsh for them to have to do  so  and  for  his
    wife to do so. He found that the appellant presented as having  a  very
    low risk of reoffending and concluded that the  criteria  in  paragraph
    399(a) had been met. He  accordingly  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
    under the immigration rules.

 7. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    grounds  that  the  judge's  decision  was  inadequately  reasoned  and
    contained a misdirection in law: that he had failed to explain why  the
    children could not adjust to life in Jamaica; and that the question  of
    the harshness of deportation had been inadequately analysed and did not
    take into account the seriousness of the offending, given in particular
    that the appellant had been sentenced to 12 concurrent periods of three
    years' imprisonment.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 20  January  2015  with  particular
    reference to the second ground, that there was an arguable misdirection
    in law as to whether "undue harshness"  was  to  be  gauged  simply  by
    reference to the effects on the children or whether it had also to take
    account of the nature and seriousness of the offending.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appeal initially came before me on 9 March 2015 but I adjourned the
    case since the appellant was unaware of the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal or that the decision had been challenged by the respondent and
    had received none of the relevant notices and decisions, the  paperwork
    having been sent in error to his previous place of imprisonment. He had
    only become aware of the hearing that morning. Since he  was,  at  that
    point, no longer legally represented, it seemed to  me  to  be  in  the
    interests of justice for him to be given an opportunity to consider the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and the respondent's grounds  and  grant
    of permission and to seek legal representation.

10. The appeal then came before me again on 11 May 2015, by which time  the
    appellant was legally represented.

11. I heard submissions on the error of law.

12. Mr Bramble submitted, with respect to the second ground of appeal, that
    the judge had erred in law when making his findings in paragraph 68  by
    discounting the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's  offences  from  the
    "unduly harsh" consideration and had failed to have regard to  s117C(2)
    which stated that the more serious the offence,  the  greater  was  the
    public interest in deportation. He had placed too much  weight  on  the
    risk assessment and had based his conclusions  on  outdated  case  law.
    With respect to the first ground of appeal, he had not explained why it
    was unduly harsh for the children to adjust to life in Jamaica.

13. Ms Iqbal, in response,  submitted  that  the  judge  had  followed  the
    correct approach in considering whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the children if the appellant were deported,  as  consistent  with  the
    judgment in Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  AQ  &  Ors
    [2015] EWCA Civ 250.

14. I advised the parties that, in my view, the judge's  decision  did  not
    contain any errors of law and should  be  upheld.  My  reasons  for  so
    concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

15. The ground upon which  permission  was  specifically  granted  was  the
    judge's assessment of and approach to the "unduly  harsh"  question  in
    paragraph 399(a) of the rules which, it was submitted  by  Mr  Bramble,
    did not take proper account  of  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
    offending and the weight of the public interest  and  placed  too  much
    weight upon the low risk assessment. However it seems to  me  that  the
    judge took into account  all  relevant  matters  when  considering  the
    "unduly harsh" question and that he made it very clear in his  decision
    that it was a concept that was not simply confined to the interests and
    needs of the children but necessarily encompassed a rounded  assessment
    of all the relevant circumstances including the nature and  seriousness
    of the appellant's offending and the risk of re-offending.

16. At paragraphs 51 to 54 the judge gave careful consideration to the best
    interests of the appellant's children. I do not agree with  Mr  Bramble
    that anything material arises out of his  reference  to  case  law  not
    specifically related to deportation proceedings, since that was  simply
    his starting point. He went on, at paragraphs 55 and  56,  specifically
    to refer to public interest considerations in deportation  cases,  with
    reference to the provisions in s117C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002,  and  at  paragraph  58  he  emphasised  that  the
    children's best interests was not  the  sole  defining  factor  in  the
    "unduly harsh" question. In  the  following  paragraphs  he  considered
    other significant factors which, when taken together with the matter of
    the children's best  interests,  fully  addressed  the  "unduly  harsh"
    question. At paragraphs 59 to  62  he  considered  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's deportation on his wife and, in turn, the  effect  of  that
    upon his children  and  at  paragraphs  63  to  69  he  considered  the
    appellant's offending itself, including the risk  of  re-offending  and
    the seriousness of the offence. It seems to me that,  contrary  to  the
    assertion made in the grounds and to Mr Bramble's submission, paragraph
    68 of the decision plainly shows that the seriousness of the crime  and
    the  public  interest  were  not  discounted  by  the  judge  but  were
    significant considerations in the  assessment  of  the  "unduly  harsh"
    question and were given due weight. The judge was  plainly  aware  that
    the public interest in deportation increased with  the  seriousness  of
    the crime and specifically referred to that  at  paragraph  55  of  his
    decision.

17. In the circumstances I accept Ms Iqbal's submission  that  the  judge's
    approach to the "unduly harsh" question was the correct one and that he
    took into account all relevant factors when considering whether or  not
    the appellant's deportation would have unduly  harsh  consequences  for
    the children. As regards the first ground of appeal,  it  is  the  case
    that he did not provide, in his decision, a detailed  analysis  of  the
    socio-economic conditions the children would experience in Jamaica, but
    what is clear is that he gave consideration  to  the  difficulties  the
    children would face in Jamaica and provided reasons, at  paragraphs  57
    and 60 to 62, for concluding that it would be unreasonable  and  unduly
    harsh for them to be forced to relocate there. His conclusions in  that
    respect and in respect to the separation of  the  children  from  their
    father were based upon the supporting evidence  before  him,  including
    the report of the social worker, as well as the oral evidence and  when
    considered together with  his  findings  on  the  appellant's  criminal
    offending, were entirely open to him on the evidence before him.

18. Accordingly I find that the judge did not make any errors of law in his
    decision. He was entitled to reach the decision that  he  did  and  the
    grounds of appeal amount to little more than a disagreement  with  that
    decision.

DECISION

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to allow the CRD's appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I continue that
    order, pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.






                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
