
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01480/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Tower                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 June 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     hr
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Chaggar, Counsel, instructed by Khan & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order  because  the  main  reasons  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the  appeal  concern  the  claimant's  relationship  with  his
    daughter K who was born in 2004  and  is  now  11  years  old.  She  is
    entitled to privacy.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant" against the decision of the Secretary of State  that  he
    had to be deported by reason of Section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  The decision was made on 10 July 2014.

 3. We remind ourselves that it is not for us to decide at  this  stage  if
    the claimant should  be  deported  but  to  decide  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in allowing the appeal.

 4. We begin by  looking  carefully  at  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. This shows that the claimant is a citizen of Jamaica.  He was  born  in
    May 1969 and so is now 46 years old. He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    as a visitor in December 1999 when he was 30 years old and has remained
    there.

 6. He had leave in different capacities until 30 June 2002.   On  13  July
    2002 he married a British  citizen,  ARO.   He  gave  the  Home  Office
    confirmatory evidence of his marriage in December 2003 and  in  January
    2004 applied, out of time, for further leave to remain as a husband  of
    a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.   That  application
    was refused in September 2009.

 7. His first child, K, a daughter, was born on 23 May 2004 to the claimant
    and ARO.

 8. In February 2006 the claimant was charged with an  offence  of  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm.  He did not attend court and no further
    action was taken on the allegation. We mention it because it appears in
    the papers but it is of little if any relevance now.

 9. In July 2007 a warrant was issued relating to an offence  of  intending
    to supply Class A drugs. The claimant failed to attend the Magistrates'
    Court in December 2007.

10. On 10 September 2009 his application for leave to remain as  a  settled
    person was refused.

11. On 21 September he was served with a form confirming his status  as  an
    overstayer and in December 2009 he was listed as an absconder after  he
    failed to report to the Midlands Enforcement Unit in Solihull.

12. He came to the attention of the police in August 2010 and was  arrested
    and taken to Wolverhampton Central Police Station.

13. In October 2010 he was convicted of two offences of possessing Class  A
    drugs with intent to supply.  The  first  related  to  heroin  and  the
    second to crack cocaine.  On 25 October 2010 he  was  sentenced  to  42
    months imprisonment for each offence to run concurrently.

14. In January 2011 notice informing him of his liability  for  deportation
    and a questionnaire was served on the claimant at the prison  where  he
    was detained and, as a consequence of his response, in February 2011  a
    children's referral  form  was  sent  to  the  local  authority  social
    services to see if the claimant's daughter was known to them.

15. On 28 February 2011 social services notified  the  Secretary  of  State
    that they had been  involved in the care and welfare of  K  since  2006
    and she was at that time living with one AR  at  an  address  in  their
    area.

16. On 24 January 2012 her foster parents, Mr and  Mrs  R,  applied  for  a
    special guardianship order for the claimant's daughter,  K.   It  seems
    that Mrs R was the claimant's maternal aunt.

17. On 9 May 2012 the appellant was due for conditional release from prison
    but was detained under immigration service powers.  On 28 May  2012  he
    was granted bail subject to reporting conditions and he resided with Mr
    and Mrs R in the same home as his daughter K.  On 18 December 2012  the
    local authority children's  services  advised  that  the  claimant  had
    applied to the Family Court for "custody" of his daughter  K  and  they
    would not be opposing the application.

18. On 10 April  2013  Social  Services  confirmed  that  the  guardianship
    application was due to be heard in May 2013 and on 14 June 2013 K  went
    into the care of the appellant and his partner Ms V.

19. On 17 September 2013 the claimant's application for  further  leave  to
    remain was refused.  The decision was not appealable.

20. On 25 September 2013 a letter was received from Ms  V  confirming  that
    she is in a "subsisting relationship" with the appellant.  Ms  V  is  a
    British citizen.  The papers show that a son E was born in 2013. He  is
    the child of the claimant and Ms V.  He is not yet 2 years old.

21. On 27 November 2013 the Secretary of State received a letter  from  the
    claimant's solicitors, Khan & Co, enclosing  a  court  residence  order
    dated 28 August 2013 showing that K was to reside with the claimant.

22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the claimant's marriage  to
    ARO deteriorated as a consequence of  ARO's  drug  addiction  and  when
    their daughter K was about 2 years old ARO left the claimant and  their
    daughter, with the result that the claimant and his daughter were for a
    time homeless and living in shelters or even on the  streets.   It  was
    against that background Mr and Mrs R offered help.

23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied that the offences for which
    the appellant was sent to prison in October 2010  at  the  Crown  Court
    were the same offences for which he had failed  to  appear  before  the
    magistrates in December 2007. It follows that the  offences  for  which
    the claimant should be deported were committed more than 8  years  ago.
    Clearly it is wholly to the claimant's discredit that the case took  so
    long to get to Court and clearly it is unremarkable that  the  claimant
    has not been convicted of any offences while he was in  prison  but  he
    has avoided getting into further trouble for some time now.

24. The judge further accepted that the only time  the  claimant  had  been
    away from his daughter was when he was in prison between  October  2010
    and May 2012.   During that time K was cared for by Mr and Mrs R.

25. The judge accepted that soon after the claimant had been released  from
    prison on licence K's biological mother applied for a  residence  order
    even though neither the claimant nor his daughter had  heard  from  ARO
    for many years.

26. On 28 August 2013 an order was made that K reside with her father,  the
    claimant.

27. The claimant is now in a relationship  with  Ms  V  who  is  a  British
    citizen. The judge accepted that they lived as a family unit with K and
    Ms V's child from  an  earlier  relationship  called  P  and  that  the
    appellant and Ms V had a child together, E, and that Ms V was  pregnant
    with their second child.

28. At paragraph 16  of  the  determination  the  judge  directed  himself,
    correctly, that he had to consider paragraph 399  of  HC  395  and  ask
    himself if "it would be unduly harsh" for them to live in  Jamaica  and
    if it would be "unduly harsh" for them to remain in the United  Kingdom
    without their father.

29. The judge then reminded himself that K was born in the United  Kingdom,
    that she was then 10 years old and had never been to Jamaica, that  she
    was well settled in school and was now in a stable environment.

30. The child E was then 17 months old and lived with his half-sister K and
    her half brother, P in a stable family  environment.   His  mother  was
    born in the United Kingdom and is a British citizen and has family ties
    there.

31. Both children are British citizens and  clearly  entitled  to  all  the
    benefits and advantages that that citizenship brings. The  judge  noted
    the respondent's contention that "despite the fact that  both  children
    are British and that K is now aged 10 and settled in school  that  they
    could both go  and  live  with  their  father  and  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for them to relocate to Jamaica".  The judge also noted from
    the proceedings in the Family Court that there is a residence order and
    that it was clear to him that K was unhappy being  separated  from  her
    father when he was in prison and wanted to be reunited with him.

32. Ms V made it clear that she was unable to care for K on her  own  as  a
    single parent.

33. Apparently it was K's wish that she  maintained  a  close  relationship
    with Mr and Mrs R and their children but she did not want to stay  with
    them permanently.

34. Crucially at paragraph 17  of  his  Decision  the  judge  accepted  the
    claimant's evidence that he had been resident  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 1999 and he no longer had any  family  living  in  Jamaica.   The
    judge was further satisfied there was a close bond between the claimant
    and his daughter and that bond would not be replaced by Ms V and/or  Mr
    and Mrs R caring for her without the claimant's presence.

35. The judge based this finding in part on an independent social  worker's
    report.

36. The judge then said:

         "In my assessment, therefore, it would be unduly harsh to expect  K
         to relocate with her father to Jamaica or for her  to  remain  here
         without her father".

37. With regard to the child E the  judge  accepted  that  he  needed  both
    parents and that Ms V should not be expected to care for E on her  own.
     The judge accepted evidence that the child  P  had  contact  with  his
    natural father from time to time although the claimant has become close
    to him. The judge found that it would be "unduly harsh" for E  to  live
    in Jamaica.  The judge described E  as  a  British  citizen,  like  his
    mother, born and brought up in the United Kingdom with no ties  of  any
    kind to Jamaica. The judge came to the  conclusion  that  it  would  be
    "unduly harsh" for E to remain in the UK without his father.  The judge
    said the:

         "... [claimant] is clearly part of that family unit  and  takes  an
         active part in their care and upbringing".

38. At paragraph 19 of the determination the judge,  like  the  respondent,
    accepted, that the claimant and Ms V enjoy a  "genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship". The judge noted that Ms V is a British citizen  who  was
    born and raised in the United Kingdom and is  without  family  ties  in
    Jamaica. The judge accepted that the claimant's relationship with Ms  V
    was formed at a time when  the  claimant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully as an overstayer and therefore when his  immigration  status
    was precarious.  However he concluded that it would be:

         "... unduly harsh for Ms V to live in  the  country  to  which  the
         [claimant] is to be deported on the basis that I  find  that  there
         are compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  described  in
         paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and that it would  be  unduly  harsh
         for Ms V to remain in the UK without the [claimant] who is  due  to
         be deported."

39. At paragraph  20  of  the  Decision  the  judge  clearly  accepted  the
    claimant's evidence that he had no family ties in  Jamaica.  The  judge
    accepted that any relatives he had in Jamaica when he  left  there  had
    now established themselves in the United States of America.

40. It was the claimant's case that if he was deported  he  would  have  to
    live on the streets.

41. The judge found that there would be "very significant difficulties" for
    the claimant's partner in Jamaica.  She is a British  citizen  and  has
    always lived in the United Kingdom and had never been to Jamaica.    At
    the time of writing she was pregnant.  The judge said:

         "I do not consider that it would be reasonable for  the  [claimant]
         and his partner together with  all  the  children  to  relocate  to
         Jamaica in the circumstances of this particular  case.   Equally  I
         find that it would be unduly harsh for Ms V to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the [claimant] who is to be deported.  If  he  were  to  be
         deported, Ms V would be left with K, E, P and the child that she is
         now expecting and to raise them all on her own."

42. The judge then concluded at paragraph 21 of his determination  that  he
    did not consider it "reasonable" for Ms V to relocate to  Jamaica  with
    all of her children.  He found that the requirements of  paragraph  399
    are met.

43. At paragraph 22 of his decision the judge  indicated  that  if  he  was
    wrong in his finding about the  requirements  of  paragraph  399  being
    satisfied he found exceptional circumstances in the case so that public
    interest in deporting the appellant because of his bad  behaviour  were
    outweighed by the need to respect the  claimant's  private  and  family
    life.

44. The judge noted the "very serious offences" which were committed by the
    [claimant] and the time he had spent in prison as a consequence.

45. The judge also noted how  the  claimant  had  been  reunited  with  his
    daughter after serving a custodial sentence and that he had kept out of
    trouble for some time before he heard the appeal.  The judge noted that
    the claimant had completed his probation satisfactorily and was thought
    to pose a "low risk of serious harm to general members of  the  public"
    and that he had undertaken such courses as he could in prison.

46. The judge referred to the "severe impact upon his family unit"  in  the
    event of his being deported and made reference to the unborn child.

47. The judge also allowed the appeal on human rights grounds  as  well  as
    under the Immigration Rules.

48. The Secretary of State's grounds extend to four points.  Three of  them
    are described as misdirections of law by the Tribunal and the fourth as
    a failure by the Tribunal to  give  adequate  reasons  for  a  material
    finding.

49. The first alleged misdirection of law alleges a failure to  follow  the
    principle identified in MA (prove destitution) Jamaica [2005] UKIAT  13
    which, according to the grounds,  obliged  the  Tribunal  to  give  "no
    weight to the [claimant's]  allegation  of  affected  destitution  upon
    return".

50. The failure to give an adequate  reason  for  material  findings  is  a
    variation of the same point and it contends that the factors identified
    by the judge "are not capable, separately or cumulatively, of amounting
    to adequately clear evidence of insurmountable difficulties or  serious
    hardship".

51. The grounds then contend it is a  misdirection  of  law  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    because  inadequate  weight  was  given  to  the  public  interest   in
    deportation of foreign criminals and finally  it  was  described  as  a
    "material misdirection  of  law"  to  give  weight  to  the  claimant's
    relationship with his partner formed when he was in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully.

52. In summary, Mr Smart submitted that the finding that the claimant would
    be living on the streets in Jamaica was not sustainable.  The  claimant
    had made no effort to explain why that would be the best he could do.

53. The judge had not looked properly at the insurmountable  obstacle  test
    in EX.2 when reaching his conclusions that it would be unduly harsh.

54. The appeal should not have been allowed outside the Rules, at least not
    for the reasons given.  There was no indication of the  extreme  public
    interest in removing someone such as the claimant and clearly  far  too
    much weight was given to a relationship established when  the  claimant
    was in the United Kingdom without permission.

55. As well as hearing from Mrs Chaggar we had a Rule  24  reply  drawn  by
    Miss Rutherford of Counsel who represented in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    We have considered all of these things.

56. We begin by noting the Secretary of State's reliance on the decision MA
    (prove destitution) Jamaica CG [2005] UKIAT 00013. That was decided  in
    January 2005 which, in the fast moving world  of  immigration  appeals,
    gives it an almost antediluvian quality.   It  is  therefore  a  little
    depressing to realise that it is still relevant.   The  point  that  we
    were making there was that before a witness could  be  taken  seriously
    when she said that she would be living in destitution in the  event  of
    her return to her country  of  nationality  she  should  lay  a  proper
    evidential foundation for that rather than simply assert how  difficult
    it would be.   For example in MA the appellant  relied  on  her  active
    involvement in a Church and Church  based  activities  to  support  her
    claim to stay in the United Kingdom, but there  are  many  Churches  in
    Jamaica and Church membership would be a natural starting point  for  a
    person with Church  connections  in  the  United  Kingdom  who  had  to
    establish herself in Jamaica.  If there was some reason why the  Church
    could not be used to help the  appellant  ease  herself  into  Jamaican
    society then they needed to be explained fully.  Similarly in that case
    the appellant owned some land.  It did not appear  to  be  particularly
    valuable land but the appellant had not explained its worth.  What  the
    Tribunal was doing in MA was cautioning people against  unsubstantiated
    assertions about their wealth or lack of it in the event of return.  It
    is difficult to see the extent to which MA is intended to  be  binding.
    It has been designated "CG" but efforts to proscribe in every case that
    certain things have to be proven in a particular way are not  generally
    a recipe for just decision making.

57. Nevertheless there are transferable observations here. We are not told,
    for example, if the claimant has accumulated  any  capital  during  his
    stay in the United Kingdom, if he has any trades that  would  make  him
    employable in Jamaica or if he has  any  contacts  outside  the  family
    which could conceivably assist him.

58. After considerable hesitation we  are  persuaded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was wrong as a matter of law to conclude so  easily  that  the
    claimant would be living on the streets in the  event  of  return.  The
    claim does not appear to be supported by  more  than  bare  assertions.
    There were avenues of enquiry that were not explored and this, we find,
    make the finding unsound.

59. We do consider this to  be  a  point  of  some  importance.  There  are
    probably very few countries in the world where life  is  agreeable  for
    people with no contacts or means  of  support  and  in  poor  countries
    without a system of state support comparable to that  to  be  found  in
    Western Europe life can be extremely bleak.  However,  there  are  many
    countries in the world where some people are very poor but those at the
    affluent end of society have little about which to complain.  A  person
    who is being returned by way of deportation should not be assumed to be
    in any category but should accept the responsibility of proving  rather
    than merely asserting how he would establish himself.

60. We accept as well that the relationship with the qualifying partner and
    the private life has been given weight that is not consistent with  the
    statutory  obligation  to  give  it  "little  weight".   We  note   the
    contention in Ms Rutherford's submission  that  there  should  be  some
    weight.  Here it has been given sufficient  weight,  at  least  on  one
    reading of the  determination,  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deporting a foreign criminal. We do  not  think  it  is  right.  It  is
    certainly not explained sufficiently.

61. However there are three children who had to  be  considered  here.  The
    claimant has established a new  family.  We  accept  that  one  of  the
    children in that family is a child of another man who he sees from time
    to time.  Notwithstanding all that we have said above  about  different
    degrees of affluence existing in Jamaica and other societies, it  would
    be extraordinary if it is  in  the  best  interests  of  any  of  these
    children to leave the country  of  which  they  are  nationals  for  an
    uncertain life in Jamaica.  It would be particularly  unacceptable  for
    the child who has a father in the United Kingdom to be removed.  It  is
    the long experience  of  the  courts  from  having  to  deal  with  the
    consequences of many failed relationships that some contact  with  both
    parents is generally desirable for the long term happiness of children.
    It seems to us quite clear that there  really  is  no  mileage  in  any
    suggestion that P should be removed from the United  Kingdom  where  he
    has contact with his father. A practical consequence of this finding is
    that P's mother cannot be expected to remove and, we find,  it  follows
    that none of the children can be expected to remove.

62. The child E is small. He has not established  any  significant  private
    and family life outside the home. Even if removal is not  in  his  best
    interests, provided that his mother went with him, we  incline  to  the
    view that he could  be  expected  to  remove  although  we  would  have
    preferred to have seen evidence about his likely living  conditions  in
    Jamaica. The slender evidence before us suggests  that  they  would  be
    hard at least initially.  It is reasonable to assume that at least  for
    a time the claimant would have no work and things would be difficult.

63. However the rights of each of the children have to be considered.

64. We note the order of District Judge Hearne on 28 August 2013 permitting
    the claimant to disclose to the Secretary of State the reports  in  the
    case before the family courts.  Significantly the residence  order  was
    made to the claimant and Ms V.  The court must have been satisfied that
    it was in the best interests of K to live with her father and her  step
    mother.   The reports disclosed by the Secretary of State clearly  show
    that K's aunt and uncle who cared  for  her  when  her  father  was  in
    custody are worthy people who have played an important part in her life
    but there really can be no doubt that the best interests of  K  are  to
    remain with her father and her father's present partner and her  little
    brother, her step brother and the other child who has probably by  been
    born by now to her father and step mother.

65. We do remind ourselves of the very unpromising start to life that K has
    experienced.  Her mother walked out on her.   No doubt her  mother  had
    her reasons.  It appears that she was a drug addict and people in  that
    unhappy state do not always behave sensibly.   Nevertheless  that  must
    have been a great jolt for K.  Similarly her father's imprisonment  hit
    her hard.  Her father went to prison because he chose to commit serious
    offences.  No one is suggesting that he is entitled to any sympathy  on
    that account but his absence hurt the child.  Happily  she  was  looked
    after by relatives but has now gone back into a family with her  father
    and her father's partner.   The idea of being removed again, this  time
    to Jamaica, is very concerning.  It is very hard to think that that  in
    the best interests of  society.   It  is  certainly  not  in  the  best
    interests of the child.  This was perfectly obvious to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and is the reason for the decision being made in the way
    that it was, even if it was not necessarily expressed entirely aptly.

66. We remind ourselves of the Rules.  Paragraph  398  applies  when  human
    rights are raised in the case of a deportation following a sentence  of
    less than  four  years'  imprisonment.   Paragraph  399  applies  where
    paragraph 398(e) applies [it does in this case] and there is a  genuine
    and subsisting parent relationship with a child under 18 who is in  the
    UK and is a British citizen [these conditions are satisfied  here]  and
    it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  Jamaica  and  unduly
    harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person who is to be
    deported.  The answer to both of these requirements is very  positively
    in the affirmative.

67. It is not really a question of  lifestyle  and  conditions  in  Jamaica
    although we accept the findings of the Tribunal that it would at  least
    initially be a very lonely life for the claimant. The point is that  it
    would be breaking up a family in the  case  of  a  young  person  whose
    family has already been broken.  We also note the claimant's daughter's
    age.  It really is not the time to remove her from a mother figure.

68. It follows that although we accept the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  made
    some findings that it ought not to have made  and  it  has  not  always
    applied the law correctly, in the bit that really matters, which is the
    operation of paragraphs 398 and 399 of HC 395 in the case of a child K,
    the law has been applied correctly and a rational decision reached that
    is open to the Tribunal.

69. It follows  that  although  we  find  some  points  have  been  decided
    incorrectly the errors are not  material.   Proper  reasons  have  been
    given for allowing the appeal in accordance with the Rules and that  is
    all that matters.

    Decision

70. The Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal is dismissed.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 July 2015                   |


