
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01957/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Victoria Law Courts, Birmingham      |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 18th March 2014                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JACEK JAN BUCH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr D Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms Wawrzynczyk of ILAS.


                     ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND DIRECTIONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Judge Cox and Mr F T  Jamieson
        JP (hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel') who in a  determination
        promulgated on the 6th December 2013 allowed the appeal against the
        order to deport the Mr Buch from the UK on the basis  the  decision
        to deport him was "not in accordance with the law".


     2. This finding is challenged by the Secretary of State.



Background


     3. Mr Buch is a Polish national born on the 11th  September  1980.  He
        was found to have entered the United Kingdom on 21st May  2004  and
        bar a period between 21st March and 25th June 2011 when he returned
        to Poland in order to renew  his  passport  he  has  remained  here
        since.


     4. Mr Buch is a single man with no children who was employed in Poland
        as a paint sprayer for the Polish Air Force and who also  undertook
        gardening work. He came to the United Kingdom to  join  his  sister
        who entered in 2001 and who has remained in employment  since.  She
        has acquired a permanent right of residence too.


     5. Their father came to the United Kingdom to join Mr Buch's sister in
        2001 to assist with childcare but he died in 2007.  That same  year
        she was joined by her mother who has lived here ever since.


     6. The periods of Mr Buch's employment are set out in paragraph 10  of
        the determination.  At paragraph 11 it is noted that  between  23rd
        February 2011 and 9th  February  2012  he  was  convicted  on  five
        occasions for theft by way of shoplifting for which he  received  a
        community order or fine.  He did not comply with the terms  of  the
        community order which led to a resentencing on 4th March 2013  when
        he received a suspended sentence coupled with a drug rehabilitation
        requirement  and  was  also  sentenced  for  an  offence  of  using
        threatening and abusive  or  insulting  words  or  behaviour  under
        Section 4 Public Order Act 1986. This  was  at  the  point  he  was
        awaiting sentence on the index offence of  Section  47  assault  at
        Reading Crown Court.


     7. The Panel set out the sentencing remarks of the Crown  Court  Judge
        at paragraph 12  of  the  determination,  showing  that  the  index
        offence was an assault causing actual bodily harm to a  15-year-old
        Polish boy.  The starting point in relation  to  the  sentence  for
        actual bodily harm was said to be twenty four months although as  a
        result of a guilty plea at  an  early  stage  the  actual  sentence
        passed was one of sixteen months.


     8.  The  Panel  considered  a  preliminary  submission  made   by   Ms
        Wawrzynczyk to the effect that on the basis of the index offence Mr
        Buch was not liable to be  deported,  as  a  result  of  which  the
        decision was not in accordance with the law.


     9. Having considered the  competing  arguments,  some  of  which  were
        rejected, the Panel set out their primary conclusions in  paragraph
        21 in the following terms:


          21. Fortunately, there is an authoritative source  from  which  we
   can ascertain           how the "guiding principle" in  the  Respondent's
   Criminal Casework                instructions plays  out  in  a  level  2
   case. It is to be found in Bulale v SSHD           [2008] EWCA  Civ  806.
   In    that    case    the    Court    of    Appeal    said    that     in
   considering  deportation  of  an  EEA  national  who   had   five   years
     continuous residence in the UK,  previous  convictions  could  only  be
   taken          into account so far as  they  were  evidence  of  personal
   conduct constituting             a  present  threat  to  the  fundamental
   interests of society.   Protecting                   members  of  society
   from violent crime of a sufficiently serious nature was              such
   a fundamental interest.  The  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  suggested
     that a serious offence of violence carrying  a  penalty  of  ten  years
              imprisonment or  more  might  constitute  serious  grounds  of
   public policy           and that guidance should be followed.


              Now that of course does not mean that the offender in question
   must have           received a sentence of ten years or more  but  rather
   that the index offence           itself should carry,  as  a  maximum,  a
   sentence of that length.  The                  maximum  sentence  for  an
   offence   of   Section   47   assault    is    one    of    five    years
   imprisonment. There  is  nothing  put  before  us  to  suggest  that  the
   Secretary           of State's policy in this matter  has  altered  since
   2008 and  equally  nothing               before  us  to  suggest  that  a
   sentence of sixteen months' imprisonment (or           even of 24  months
   before discount for guilty  plea)  would  come  anywhere             near
   sufficing as a threshold for  serious  grounds  of  public  policy.   The
   Appellant's index offence was undoubtedly a very  nasty  one  and,  as  a
     matter of description, was serious of its kind but  we  are  driven  to
          conclude that it could not meet the level  2  threshold  and  that
   therefore the           submission on behalf of the Appellant that he was
   not a person liable to           deportation under the  Regulations  must
   be upheld.  We find that the                  Respondent's  decision  was
   not in accordance with  the  law  (including               with  her  own
   policy)   and   the   Regulations   and    that    the    Appellant    is
   entitled to succeed in his appeal.



Error of law finding


    10. There are a number of issues that arise in relation to the  Panel's
        approach and decision. The first of  these  is  identified  in  the
        grounds on which permission to appeal was sought by  the  Secretary
        of State in that although the Panel referred to the case of  Bulale
        they make no mention of the late reported case of LG  and  CC  (EEA
        Regs: residence; imprisonment; removal) Italy [ 2009]  UKIAT  00024
        in which it was found, at paragraph 106:


                  "The threat in the "serious grounds"  category  (level  2)
   requires to be                   differentiated  from  that  posed  in  a
   level 1 case, bearing in mind that a          level 2 person has acquired
   a permanent right of residence in the United           Kingdom.   We  can
   see from the section of the instructions  concerning  level             2
   that a conviction for any of a number of listed offences might constitute
              "serious grounds".  We see merit to the list of offences as  a
   means of                differentiating between level 1 and level 2,  but
   it must be emphasised that            it is the present risk arising from
   conviction  for  the  offence  in  question   that              must   be
   established.   As  the  instructions  recognise,  the  list  of  offences
   represents guidance rather than  prescription,  but  properly  represents
     a higher level of seriousness.  One can imagine, for example, a  serial
              shoplifter being properly removable under level 1,  but  being
   unlikely to             represent the level of risk that is  required  to
   be posed in  the  case  of  a                  person  with  a  right  of
   permanent residence."


    11. There is also no reference to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
        Jarusevicius (EEA Reg 21 -  effect  of  imprisonment)  [2012]  UKUT
        00120(IAC) (Blake J) who found:


              65.      However, even if,  contrary  to  our  assessment,  it
    were concluded that he              had acquired a right  of  permanent
    residence, we do not  regard  the  UKBA              Criminal  Casework
    Directorate Instructions (attached as Appendix B to             LG  and
    CC ) to be exhaustive or conclusive  of  which  convictions  will  lead
         to an assessment of serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
    security.              We recognise that conspiracy  to  handle  stolen
    goods is different from the              kinds of offences referred  to
    in that guidance note, but like serious sexual             and  violent
    offences  it  carries  a  maximum  penalty  of  more  than  ten   years
    imprisonment.


    12. The Panel specifically refer in the determination to the fact  that
        they were unable to access a link  mentioned  in  the  case  worker
        instructions which is because it is a link to which the  public  do
        not have access.  There is no clear indication from the papers that
        the Panel asked the Presenting Officer in court for a copy  of  the
        list of offences and Mr Mills submitted that no  such  request  had
        been made. As a result it is arguably not  open  to  the  Panel  to
        speculate what may or may not be contained within that document.


    13. The Panel also make specific reference to the  fact  they  did  not
        consider there  was  anything  before  them  to  suggest  that  the
        Secretary of State's policy has  altered  since  2008  whereas  the
        document to be found in Mr Buch's appeal bundle is the policy valid
        from 23rd July 2013.  The document is described as  being  guidance
        to case workers and  sets  out  the  process  for  considering  non
        national offenders who are also  EEA  nationals.   It  specifically
        states that in the case of an EEA national the workflow teams  must
        check the referral form to make sure that person meets the internal
        deportation threshold criteria which are:


              i.  If a person receives a custodial sentence of two years (24
   months) or                   over for any offences, or


              ii. Custodial sentences of one year (12 months) or over if the
   offence  is                  related to drugs,  sex,  violence  or  other
   serious criminal activity (for                details of  these  specific
   offences see related  link:  EEA  National  12m                  offences
   list).


    14. Mr Mills also confirmed that the instructions contain reference  to
        various aggravating features that could warrant deportation for the
        lesser sentences, which includes offences against a child. Not only
        did Mr Burch receive a  custodial  sentence  of  more  than  twelve
        months for an offence of  violence  it  was  an  offence  committed
        against a 15-year-old boy.


    15. The Panel seem to  have  treated  the  guidance  to  criminal  case
        workers as policy.  It  is  clear  that  the  language  is  one  of
        guidance and discretion.  The specific reference  that,  whilst  in
        the majority of cases the two-year threshold would apply there  may
        be rare occasions when a criminal  case  worker  is  instructed  to
        accept a case that falls below  the  threshold,  demonstrates  this
        point.  In  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  there  is  specific
        consideration of  the  nature  of  the  offence  and  the  sentence
        received and it is not suggested  that  the  caseworker  failed  to
        follow established procedure in accordance with the guidance.


    16. Guidance to individual case workers of the way in  which  they  are
        expected to undertake tasks assigned to them does not have the same
        legal status as policy.  It is also  important  to  note  that  the
        terms of the guidance do not mandate the outcome in all cases. This
        language is clearly and  unequivocally  the  language  of  internal
        guidance and discretion, within the margin of appreciation that  is
        available to Member States in dealing with this issue,  and  it  is
        simply not open to the Tribunal to interpret it in any  other  way.
        For the Tribunal to do so is to amend the guidance not to interpret
        it.


    17. The Panel seem to have concluded that as the  sentence  was  for  a
        Section 47 assault, for which the maximum period of imprisonment is
        one of five years, it was unlawful to make  the  deportation  order
        for a person with a permanent right of  residence.   Applying  this
        logic an individual convicted of  a  number  of  offences  of  this
        nature charged under Section 47, who has such a right of residence,
        could never be the subject of a deportation  order.   I  accept  Ms
        Wawrzynczyk's submission that this may be the case because there is
        a  differentiation  between  the  different  levels  at  which   an
        individual may be removed, but to find this is  the  case  in  such
        absolute terms as the  Panel  did  when  the  instructions  to  the
        criminal case workers clearly provides discretion when  considering
        those committing repeated offences or even one  offence  for  which
        the sentence is below the two-year threshold, has not been shown to
        be legally sustainable.


    18. An individual who is an EEA national becomes liable to be  deported
        if it is found by the Secretary of  State  that  their  removal  is
        justified on grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
        health.  The finding that Mr Buch has acquired a right of permanent
        residence in the United Kingdom is not challenged and  nor  is  the
        fact he is entitled to a higher level of protection  as  a  result.
        Guidance on the way in which the Panel should have approached  this
        appeal has been provided by the Court of Appeal in the case  of  BF
        (Portugal) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 923 which involved  a  Portuguese
        citizen who acquired a right of permanent residence  and  therefore
        can only be removed on the serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
        public security.  The Court set out a four stage  approach  to  the
        issues as follows:


              i.  The  Tribunal  first  had  to  determine  the  appellant's
   relevant personal                conduct;


              ii. The Tribunal then had to  determine  whether  the  conduct
   represented                  a genuine present and  sufficiently  serious
   threat;


              iii.     The Tribunal then had to assess  whether  the  threat
   affected one of                  the fundamental interests of society;


              iv. The Tribunal had to assess  whether  deportation  will  be
                  disproportionate in all the circumstances.


    19. Had the Panel considered the evidence they were asked  to  consider
        in this logical  order  they  would  have  been  able  to  reach  a
        conclusion as to whether the threat, which was clearly  present  at
        the time of the offence, was still  present  at  the  date  of  the
        hearing.  It was also incumbent upon the Panel  to  decide  whether
        there was a present serious threat and if  so  the  extent  of  the
        threat.  The focus upon the offence that had been committed in  the
        past and whether that complied with guidance given to case  workers
        appears to have deflected the Panel's attention  from  the  correct
        approach to be taken in relation to the appeal.


    20. I conclude that  the  Panel  applied  the  wrong  test  by  looking
        backwards at the  question  of  whether  the  index  offence  could
        satisfy  the  test  of  seriousness  rather  than  looking  at  the
        situation at the date of the hearing and risk going forward, and in
        misdirecting  themselves  in  relation  to  the  guidance  to  case
        workers.


    21. Having found that the Panel erred in  law  the  next  issue  is  to
        consider whether the error is material to the decision  to  dismiss
        the appeal.  In this case I find it is for even though the  outcome
        may be that the appeal is allowed, in light of the  fact  Mr  Burch
        has been found to have a right of permanent residence, it cannot be
        said that this is the only outcome  in  the  absence  of  a  proper
        analysis of the facts.  This was a nasty assault on a child and  it
        has been found that there is a risk of reoffending in the  reports.
        Although the Secretary of State initially considered the matter  at
        the lower level there is also a finding  in  the  alternative  that
        deportation is warranted in all the circumstances of the  case,  in
        any event.


    22. As there has been no proper examination of the merits of the appeal
        by the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with the guidance provided
        by the Court of Appeal in BF (Portugal)  it  was  agreed  that  the
        appropriate way to proceed was for the matter  to  be  remitted  to
        that Tribunal and for the case to be considered  by  a  differently
        constituted panel.


    23. Mr Burch's immigration history and the finding he  has  acquired  a
        right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom are not  subject
        to any challenge by the Secretary of State.


    24. The following direction shall apply to the future conduct  of  this
        appeal:




              i.  The appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   sitting at the                   Victoria Law Courts, or any other secure
   court that may be available,                  on the next available  date
   with a time estimate of three hours.


              ii. The appeal shall be heard by a  Panel  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal                     nominated by Resident Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Renton in accordance                  with the  operational  requirements
   of Sheldon Court, but excluding               First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Cox and Mr Jamieson.


              iii.     The  parties  shall  file  indexed  and  consolidated
   bundles containing all                the evidence they  intend  to  rely
   upon no later than 14  days  before  the                   hearing.  Such
   bundles     are     to     contain     their     respective      skeleton
   arguments. Witness statements are to  stand  as  the  evidence  in  chief
     of the maker.


              iv. A Polish interpreter is required.



Decision

    25. The First-tier Tribunal Panel materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Panel. This appeal is remitted to  the
        First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham.




   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order as there is no application for anonymity
        and it has not been justified on the facts.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18th March 2014
