
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01324/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2014                              |On 19 November 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     AAN
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, instructed by Hoole & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the Upper  Tribunal  in  its
    decision of 19 December 2013 (pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of documents or information  relating  to  the  proceedings
    which are likely to lead members of the public to be able  to  identify
    the Appellant or any members of his family.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born in February 1993.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 January 2009  and  claimed  asylum.
    This application was  refused.  The  Appellant  was,  however,  granted
    discretionary leave to enter the United Kingdom until 3 August 2010  as
    a consequence of his age.

 3. The Appellant appealed this decision and by a determination of 4 August
    2009 the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal dismissed  such  appeal  ("the
    2009  determination").   An  appeal  against  the  2009   determination
    subsequently came before Judge Freeman who dismissed it in  a  decision
    of 18 December 2009.  On 12 October 2012 Lord Justice Sullivan  granted
    the Appellant permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  in  relation
    to Judge Freeman's decision.  However, prior to this appeal being heard
    the Respondent gave further consideration to the Appellant's  case  and
    thereafter notified him that he was entitled to a grant of three years'
    discretionary leave to remain but that such leave could not be  granted
    during the currency of  the  appeal  process.   As  a  consequence  the
    Appellant withdrew the appeal  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  was
    subsequently granted leave to remain on a discretionary basis so as  to
    expire on 1 November 2014.

 4. Turning to the events which led to the instant appeal.  On 9 March 2012
    the Appellant was convicted by the Crown Court sitting  at  Bristol  of
    two counts of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and one  count  of
    common assault.  He was sentenced, on 24 May 2012, to  a  total  of  21
    months' detention in a young offenders' institute.  In due course on 12
    June 2013 the Respondent made a decision that section 32(5) of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applies to the  Appellant[1].  It  was  this  decision
    which led to the Appellant appealing to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed such appeal by way of a determination
    of 16 August 2013. However, in a decision of 15 January 2014, the Upper
    Tribunal[2] set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  and
    remitted  the  appeal  to  be  determined  afresh  by   a   differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal.  This determination was undertaken  by
    a panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal[3]  ("the  Panel")  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 11 April 2014, dismissed the appeal on all
    grounds.

 6. Designated Judge Appleyard granted the Appellant permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal against  the  Panel's  determination.   Thus  the
    matter came before me.

 7. In the broadest of terms, the Appellant  has,  in  the  course  of  the
    asylum application process, claimed that he  will  be  persecuted  upon
    return to Afghanistan as a consequence of (i) a dispute he has with his
    paternal  uncle,  a  Taliban  member,  who  had  sought  to  marry  the
    Appellant's sister, AE (or alternatively his sister, M - depending  on
    which version of the Appellant's evidence is  being  considered),  such
    attempts having been frustrated by the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    arranged for her to marry JE, (ii) his paternal uncle's wish   to  take
    his (the Appellant's) father's land and (iii) his paternal  uncle  will
    ask him to join the Taliban and (iv) he feared the Afghan police  would
    attack the family home because it contained weapons  belonging  to  the
    Taliban, as a consequence his father's Taliban activities

 8.  The  Appellant's  written  grounds  of  challenge   to   the   Panel's
    determination can be summarised  in  a  single  submission:  the  Panel
    failed to consider the expert evidence when assessing  the  credibility
    of the truthfulness of the evidence given  by  the  Appellant  and  his
    witnesses.

 9. In its determination the Panel first set  out  the  background  to  the
    proceedings [1-10], then deal with preliminary matters not relevant  to
    this appeal before the Upper Tribunal [11-12],  set  out  the  relevant
    legislative provision [13], identify the substantive grounds of  appeal
    [14] and then correctly direct itself to the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof in relation to such grounds [15-17].

10. Thereafter the Panel make reference to the 2009 determination of  Judge
    Wiseman and direct itself to the starred decision of Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702.  In the paragraphs which follow the Panel set  out,  inter
    alia, the following reasons for its conclusion that the  Appellant  was
    not telling the truth as to the events which he  claimed  had  led  his
    departure from his home country and to him being at  risk  upon  return
    there:

      i) He gave conflicting accounts as to the reason why he had  left  his
         home village [28-29];

     ii) He gave conflicting accounts as to what he feared would  happen  to
         him, and whom he feared, upon his return to Afghanistan [30-31];

    iii) His claim to be in fear of his paternal uncle as a  consequence  of
         the uncle's intention to acquire the family lands was undermined by
         the fact that his brothers had lived in the  home  village  between
         2007  and  2010  without  difficulty,   despite   being   potential
         inheritors to the land [32];

     iv) He had omitted to identify in his asylum interview that  he  had  a
         fear that the police would raid the family home in  Afghanistan  to
         seize guns and that this would also put him at risk [33];

      v) He had previously admitted employing deception in order to  further
         his attempts to remain in the United Kingdom [35].

11. The Panel also gave careful consideration to the evidence of AE and JE.
    For  reasons  set  out  at  length  in  paragraphs  37  to  42  of  the
    determination the core of the evidence given  by  these  witnesses  was
    rejected as being untruthful.  In particular, the Panel identified that
    there had been inconsistent evidence given as between the Appellant and
    JE in relation to date (June 2010) that the Appellant claimed  that  he
    had informed  JE  of  the  enforced  marriage  of  AE,  which  in  turn
    undermined the Appellant's subsequent assertion to have facilitated the
    marriage between AE and JE in October 2010 [49].

12. Yet further  reasons  were  given  by  the  Tribunal  for  its  adverse
    credibility finding between paragraphs 50 to 61 of  the  determination,
    including findings that:

    (i)  The Appellant had given inconsistent accounts as  to  why  AE  had
         left Afghanistan [52];

    (ii) AE had given inconsistent evidence on the issue of whether she had
         travelled from Pakistan to  Afghanistan  after  the  death  of  her
         mother in 2010 [56]; and

    (iii)    It was implausible that the Appellant did not know the age  of
         his sister (AE or M depending on which version of  the  Appellant's
         account is being considered) whom he identified as being  12  years
         old on his arrival in the United Kingdom  but  whom  it  turns  out
         would, if the AE and M are the same person as was  claimed  by  the
         Appellant, have been 22 years old at that time [58].

13. The Appellant provided two reports to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the
    expert reports"). The first is authored by a Dr Giustozzi and is  dated
    6 August 2011, the second by a Mr Tim Foxley MBE  and  dated  13  March
    2014.  The Panel gave specific consideration to these expert reports in
    paragraphs 73 and 79 of its determination.

14. In summary the Panel said as follows of Dr Giustozzi's report:

         "[The] report  provides  background  history  of  the  general  and
          historic  nature  in  Afghanistan  and  assesses  the  appellant's
          claims, principally in pages 15-18.  The  author  assumes  on  the
          appellant's claim that he would face a threat  from  his  paternal
          uncle on  account  of  land  seizure  against  the  background  of
          disputed land inheritance rights.   The  appellant  has  not  been
          found to be credible in such regard at the lower standard.   [73].



          Dr Giustozzi opined that the appellant  could  easily  be  tracked
          down in Afghanistan, requiring employment and accommodation.  That
          opinion assumes that there are individuals in Afghanistan who wish
          to track him down.  The appellant has not been found  credible  in
          such regard.  Dr Giustozzi further records  the  difficulties  the
          appellant would face in respect of accommodation and employment in
          Kabul.  We deal with such matters also raised in the report of Tim
          Foxley below" [74].

15. As to the Panel's consideration of Mr Foxley's report, it said:

         "Mr  Foxley's  exhibits   impressive   background   knowledge   and
         experience...Mr Foxley's conclusion in respect of  the  appellant's
         claim however is predicated upon the  claim  that  the  appellant's
         father and brother had been recently engaged in  fighting  for  the
         Taliban.  We have not found that claim to be credible at the  lower
         standard [75].

         The report of Mr Foxley addresses  the  prolonged  absence  of  the
         appellant from his country of origin,  opining  that  such  absence
         could be easily misconstrued, young boys not suddenly leaving their
         village.  He further bases  his  conclusions  about  risk  in  such
         regard upon the appellant's claim to have thwarted the ambitions of
         his paternal uncle in the marriage of the appellant's sister to her
         young cousin.  Again that claim has not  been  demonstrated  to  be
         credible to the lower standard.  In the absence of a threat to  the
         appellant in Afghanistan it is not necessarily the  case  that  the
         appellant left his home area  suddenly.   Given  the  frequency  of
         child asylum seekers who have left their homes and  claimed  asylum
         in the UK  coming  before  the  Tribunal  whose  claims  have  been
         rejected at various stages, including from  Afghanistan,  who  have
         been sent by their parents with the aim of  giving  them  a  better
         life, as previously observed by Judge Wiseman, it is  clear  to  us
         that such travel and consequential absence is  not  a  particularly
         unusual feature. [76]

         In respect of the appellant's claim to have prevented the  marriage
         intended by his paternal uncle in  Afghanistan  Mr  Foxley  records
         that arranged marriages are standard  and  women  are  conceptually
         chattels amongst most tribal communities.  He  opines  that  it  is
         plausible that the appellant's paternal uncle a dominant  male  and
         Taliban fighter, could subject the appellant  to  violent  redress.
         We have above recorded on reasoned grounds that the  appellant  has
         not established at the lower standard that his uncle was a  Taliban
         combatant or that the appellant played any role in the marriage  of
         Mr Easakhil in Pakistan or that the bride was  his  sister  Maryam.
         No dangers are thus demonstrated to arise at  the  lower  standard.
         [77].

         ... given our findings as to the credibility of  the  appellant  we
         find there is no demonstrable risk arising to  the  appellant  upon
         return to Afghanistan  which  would  require  protection  from  any
         individual group...[78]

         A further question was posed to Mr Foxley for  his  opinion  as  to
         whether the appellant would be able to relocate to another area  in
         Afghanistan.  Based upon our credibility  findings  above  recorded
         upon reasoned grounds there would be no need for the  appellant  to
         relocate within Afghanistan.  Having experienced life in  the  west
         and particularly in cities it may well be that the appellant  would
         prefer  to  reside  in  Kabul.   Mr  Foxley  records  the  probable
         difficulties for the appellant in establishing himself in  such  an
         area.  Even with such difficulties as Mr Foxley  anticipates,  that
         option open to the appellant would not give  rise  to  a  situation
         reaching or breaching Article 3 levels upon return  to  Kabul.   In
         such context we note that the appellant retained his preferred  use
         of Pashtu  at  the  appeal  hearing;  his  religion  and  religious
         practices are shared by an estimated 80% of the population, and  he
         has had employment experience in the UK.  He would additionally  be
         returning with a resettlement package to assist  his  reintegration
         into Afghan society."  [79]

16. In support of his criticism of the Panel's treatment of  these  reports
    Mr Bandegani places reliance on the well-known decision of the Court of
    Appeal[4] in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367  in  which  the  court,
    when considering an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal, state as follows:

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must  not  reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto.  Just as, if I may take a banal if  alliterative  example,
         one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient, so also frequently
         one cannot make a case, in the sense  of  establishing  its  truth,
         otherwise than by combination of a number of  pieces  of  evidence.
         Mr Tam, on behalf of the Secretary of State, argues that  decisions
         as to the credibility of an account are to be taken by the judicial
         fact-finder  and  that,  in  their  reports,  experts,  whether  in
         relation  to  medical  matters  or  in   relation   to   in-country
         circumstances, cannot usurp the fact-finder's function in assessing
         credibility.  I agree.  What, however, they can offer, is a factual
         context in which it may be necessary for the fact-finder to  survey
         the allegations placed before him; and such  context  may  prove  a
         crucial aid to the decision whether or not to accept the  truth  of
         them.  What the fact-finder  does  at  his  peril  is  to  reach  a
         conclusion by reference only to the appellant's evidence  and  then
         if it be negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted
         by the expert evidence."  [24].

17. Mr Bandegani submits that the Panel failed to place the evidence of the
    Appellant and his witnesses in the context of the evidence relating  to
    the background situation prevailing in Afghanistan, as set out  in  the
    expert reports. This, he says, can be identified from (i) the structure
    of the determination (ii) the  failure  of  the  Panel  to  mention  Dr
    Guistozzi's report in paragraph 22 of its determination (iii) the terms
    of paragraphs 73 to 79 of the determination and (iv) the failure of the
    Panel to refer to the background situation in Afghanistan other than in
    paragraphs 73 to 79 of the determination.

18. In coming to my conclusions I have had full regard to the  entirety  of
    the expert and other background evidence before me,  paying  particular
    attention to the passages drawn to my attention by Mr Bandegani  during
    the course of the hearing.

19. Turning then to my consideration of whether Mr Bandegani is correct  in
    his submission that the Panel failed to  take  account  of  the  expert
    reports when coming to its conclusions as to  the  credibility  of  the
    evidence given by the Appellant and his witnesses, I conclude  that  he
    is not.

20. The structure of a determination is not a reliable indicator as to  the
    process undertaken by a judge when determining an appeal. By  its  very
    nature a written document is linear and the  considerations  undertaken
    by a judge can only be expressed sequentially. Whilst it could be  said
    that it would be prudent for a Tribunal  to  identify  early  on  in  a
    determination that it had paid regard to the background situation in  a
    particular  country  when  coming  to  its  conclusions   as   to   the
    truthfulness and reliability of other evidence before it, the fact that
    it does not do so does not of itself amount  to  an  error  of  law.  A
    determination must be considered as a whole.

21. In the  instant  case  the  Panel  identify  at  paragraph  22  of  its
    determination that it had "taken  into  account  all  documents  placed
    before" it, including those contained within the  Home  Office  bundle.
    This bundle contained a partial copy Dr  Giustozzi's  report.  Although
    the Panel do not refer in paragraph 22 of the determination  to  having
    considered the entirety of this  report,  contrary  to  Mr  Bandegani's
    submission it is plain that it did so - as to which see paragraph 73 of
    the determination.

22. The Panel further identify in paragraph 22 of its determination that it
    took into account the report of Mr  Foxley  and  the  other  background
    evidence produced by the Appellant.

23. It is  additionally  to  be  observed  that  in  paragraph  43  of  the
    determination, when setting out its conclusion as  to  truthfulness  of
    the Appellant's evidence given in relation his  father's  and  paternal
    uncle's claimed membership of the Taliban, the Panel specifically state
    that its conclusion was reached:

        "Assessing all  the  evidence  before  us  and  in  particular  the
        findings recorded within the body of this determination, both above
        and below" (emphasis added).

24. In my view the Panel was there identifying that it had paid  regard  to
    the terms of the expert reports when coming to its  conclusions  as  to
    the truthfulness of  the  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  and  his
    witnesses. This is re-enforced, in my view, by the terms  of  paragraph
    101 of the determination.

25. The Panel's determination is lengthy, covering some 108 paragraphs.  It
    may have been  prudent  for  the  Panel  to  summarise  the  background
    information prior to coming to its conclusions on  the  credibility  of
    the evidence given by the Appellant and his witnesses, but it  was  not
    required to do  so.   Nowhere  in  the  determination  does  the  Panel
    identify that it was doing anything other than proceeding on the  basis
    that the account given by the Appellant was plausible in the context of
    the circumstances prevailing in Afghanistan. The cause of  concern  for
    the Panel was not one of plausibility, but that the Appellant had given
    inconsistent evidence, that his evidence was inconsistent with that  of
    his witnesses, and that the witnesses themselves were  inconsistent  as
    between each other.

26. On the basis of the nature and the number of inconsistencies identified
    by the Panel, its conclusion as to the credibility of  the  Appellant's
    evidence (and that of his  witnesses)  was,  if  not  inevitable,  then
    certainly one that was well within the range  of  reasonable  responses
    open to the Panel.

27. Whilst I  accept  that  the  Panel  expressed  themselves  clumsily  in
    paragraphs 73 to 79 of the determination, I do not accept that when the
    determination is considered as a whole it has  been  demonstrated  that
    the Panel considered issues of credibility  in  a  vacuum  and  in  the
    absence of an understanding of the background situation in  Afghanistan
    as expressed, primarily, in the expert reports.

28. At the hearing Mr Bandegani sought to develop a  second  ground,  which
    did not appear in the Appellant's written case. He submitted  that  the
    Panel had failed to lawfully consider whether the Appellant would be at
    risk upon return to Afghanistan  as  a  consequence  of  having  become
    westernised.  This ground,  he  asserted,  was  not  dependent  on  the
    Appellant being found to be a credible witness because the fact that he
    is westernised is not a matter which is in dispute.

29. In support of this  submission  Mr  Bandegani  drew  attention  to  the
    following evidence, found at paragraph 16 of Mr Foxley's report:

         "However, I think it is plausible that his prolonged  absence  from
         the  country  might  easily  be  misconstrued  (or,  perhaps   more
         appropriately in this instance maliciously misinterpreted) as proof
         that he is an 'informer' or otherwise tainted by western ideas  and
         ideology.  Young boys do not suddenly leave  their  village  and  a
         small, ill informed, rural village  environment,  where  access  to
         information is limited and generally controlled  by  a  handful  of
         village elders, with rumour and counter  rumour  commonplace,  this
         sort of 'mud' could stick, placing him at further risk.   If  there
         is another issue at play (such as the perception that  your  client
         was instrumental in thwarting the ambitions  of  a  powerful  local
         community member, such as his uncle), this could be perhaps  easily
         woven into the local narrative to present a wholly negative picture
         of your client. This could very plausibly place him at risk in  his
         home area."

30. Once again I reject Mr Bandegani's submissions.  The Panel specifically
    addressed this paragraph of the Mr Foxley's report in paragraph  76  of
    its determination, which I have already cited  above.  The  reasons  it
    gave therein  were,  in  my  conclusion,  perfectly  adequate  and  its
    conclusion is one which cannot be said to be irrational - the Appellant
    not being someone who had suddenly left  his  village  or  someone  who
    would be perceived as having thwarted the ambitions of a powerful local
    community member.  In any event the Panel concluded at paragraph 79  of
    its determination that the Appellant could relocate to Kabul. This  was
    a finding that was open to the Panel on the available evidence.

31. Although not a matter pursued by Mr Bandegani, I observe, for the  sake
    of completeness, that  subsequent  to  the  Panel's  determination  the
    Appellant has provided DNA evidence demonstrating that he and AE are in
    fact siblings, as he claimed. This fact was rejected by  the  Panel  in
    paragraph 61 of its determination.  Despite the Panel's  conclusion  as
    to the relationship between AE and the Appellant being incorrect, I  do
    not consider it necessary to set the determination aside given what the
    Panel say later in the same paragraph[5]:

         "Even if such evidence [that being the DNA evidence]  had  been  or
         was to be produced demonstrating  a  relationship  the  appellant's
         credibility would still be undermined, having maintained  that  [M]
         and [AE] were one and the same individual after the marriage  claim
         was made by him.  That claim  is  simply  not  credible  given  the
         obvious differences between a 12 year old child and a 22  year  old
         woman, clearly perceivable by the appellant when in his  mid-teens.
         It would simply mean that the appellant would have submitted  false
         evidence in respect of family relationships  at  the  time  of  his
         asylum claim and  had  continued  to  maintain  that  unanticipated
         evident falsity when such had subsequently become apparent.   There
         may be some association between the appellant and  [JE]  given  the
         role  he  has  played  in  providing  bail  accommodation  for  the
         appellant.  It is not for us to speculate what  might  be.   It  is
         sufficient for the purpose of this appeal to record that we do  not
         accept at the lower standard that [AE] is a sister of the appellant
         previously known as [M]."

32. This alternate reasoning is rational and in any event has not been  the
    subject of challenge before the Upper Tribunal. For  this  reason,  the
    production of the DNA evidence by  the  Appellant  in  the  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal does  not  lead  me  to  set  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination aside.

33. For all  the  reasons  given  above  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination does not contain an error on a  point  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside and it is to remain standing.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 11 November 2014



-----------------------
[1] A Deportation Order having been signed in the Appellant's name on 4
June 2013.
[2] The President, Vice President and Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb
[3] First-tier Tribunal Judge Whiting and Mr B D Yates (non-legal member)
[4] Ward and Buxton LJJ and Wilson J
[5] The names of the Appellant's siblings being anonymised only in the
Upper Tribunal's determination, such names being stated in full in the
paragraph 61 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

