
[pic]

  Upper Tribunal

  (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01635/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




  |Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th  January 2016                  |On 13th May 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |



                                   Before




                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS




                                   Between



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                MURPHY BWALOP
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION noT made)
                                                                  Respondent
  Representation:
  For the Appellant:   Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
  For the Respondent:  Mr T Bobb, Solicitor from Aylish Alexander Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make,  any  order  restricting  reporting
    about this case.

 2. The respondent,  hereinafter  "the  claimant",  is  a  citizen  of  the
    Netherlands. He was born in August 1991 and so is  now  24  years  old.
    The appellant, hereinafter "the Secretary of State", appeals a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing his appeal against the decision  of
    the Secretary of State to deport him from the United Kingdom  following
    his conviction in July 2013 at the Crown Court sitting  at  Snaresbrook
    for offences of possession of Class A and Class B controlled drugs with
    intent to supply.  He was sent to prison for a total of 28 months.

 3. The Secretary of  State  decided  that  deportation  was  justified  on
    grounds  of  public  policy,   public   security   or   public   health
    notwithstanding the claimant being an EEA national.

 4. At the risk of being trite, the deportation of  EEA  nationals  is  not
    subject to the  ordinary  Rules  of  immigration  control  but  to  the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  which  impose
    restrictions on the deportation of any EEA national and make  it  still
    harder to deport an EEA national with  five  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence and harder again to deport an EEA national  with  ten  years'
    lawful residence.

 5. The Secretary of State decided that the claimant had  established  five
    years' lawful residence but not ten years' lawful  residence  and  made
    her decision in a way that she considered appropriate for a person  who
    could only be removed on "serious grounds" of public policy  or  public
    security. The First-tier Tribunal  decided  that  this  was  the  wrong
    approach and that the Secretary of State should have decided  if  there
    were "imperative grounds" because  the  claimant  had  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom for ten years.

 6. I must at this point record my gratitude to First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Landes who gave permission to appeal in a particularly illuminating and
    careful way and her comments at paragraphs 2 and 7 of  her  grant  have
    particularly assisted me.

 7. For reasons that are very clearly explained and are  clearly  sound  in
    law the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that the claimant  had  lived
    in the United Kingdom for more than ten years.  He  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2001.  He was then about 10 years old. The  First-
    tier Tribunal, having found that the claimant had lived in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than ten years decided that  he  had  established  ten
    years' lawful residence and that was not disturbed by his  having  been
    sent to custody. Apparently  the  judge  based  this  conclusion  on  a
    quotation from the decision in Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/  integration)
    [2013] UKUT 00316.  Curiously, after citing Essa correctly  and  noting
    that it was reported in 2013, the judge recorded that Essa was  decided
    after considering other cases decided in 2014.   Clearly something  had
    gone adrift.

 8. More significantly, with the decision of the Court of  Justice  of  the
    European Communities in C-400/1200 Secretary of State v  MG  which  was
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in MG (Prison -  Article  28(3)(a)  of
    Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC), it is clear  that
    a prison sentence can  be  expected  to  break  a  person's  continuous
    residence and the decision maker must look at the  person's  degree  of
    integration before deciding if he has retained  the  higher  degree  of
    protection.

 9. Mr Bobb did not concede the point but said little to support the point.
    It is really impossible to argue sensibly that the  judge  applied  the
    ratio in MG.  The judge applied Essa  without  realising  that  he  was
    applying old law.

10. I now have to decide if the error was material.  This means that I have
    to decide if the appeal would necessarily  have  been  allowed  on  the
    judge's findings even if this mistake had not been made. I have decided
    it he would.

11. As will be apparent from points that follow, it is clear to me that the
    judge would have allowed the appeal if he had decided that the claimant
    was only entitled to the level of protection appropriate  for  somebody
    with five years' residence. There are no serious grounds for removal

12. The judge should have asked himself if the  applicant  is  sufficiently
    integrated to  remain  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the  high  level
    protection for a person with ten years' residence.

13. I am aware that the offence that led directly to the claimant being the
    subject of a deportation order was the last in a line of offences which
    show a particular disregard for the law, irresponsibility and inability
    or disinclination to comply with orders of the court and serious crime.

14. The claimant has a conviction for an offence of robbery which I  regard
    as a serious offence.  The claimant was one  of  a  gang  of  boys  who
    bullied another school boy into giving up his mobile phone as he walked
    out of school.  School boys, like everyone else,  are  entitled  to  go
    about their lawful business without that sort of experience.   I  agree
    with the First-tier Tribunal Judge that it was "an unpleasant offence".

15. As well as accepting that the claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in
    July 2001, having visited briefly in July 2000, the judge also accepted
    that he had never left the United Kingdom since he arrived.   This  was
    explained at paragraph 20.  The judge also accepted that  the  claimant
    had been educated in the United Kingdom.   Most  recently  he  attended
    Havering College and obtained certificates relating to  his  competence
    as a decorator.  Further at paragraph 39 the judge found expressly that
    he had "no hesitation in finding that the [claimant] is  integrated  in
    the UK".  This is because  the  claimant  had  never  left  the  United
    Kingdom since his arrival, that he had  not  spoken  Dutch  since  soon
    after arriving in the United Kingdom and that he had no family  in  the
    Netherlands.  His father returned to Congo when  the  claimant  was  14
    years old and had had no involvement with the family since  that  date.
    Clearly a person is not integrated into the United Kingdom by reason of
    not being integrated anywhere else. The point is that the claimant  was
    educated in the United Kingdom, has acquired trade qualifications there
    and has family there. He also has a  serious  girlfriend.  The  finding
    that the claimant integrated in the United  Kingdom  was  open  to  the
    judge.

16. There is another point here that needs to be considered carefully.   It
    was part of the Secretary of State's case that the  claimant  has  been
    suspected of involvement in other offences that have  not  resulted  in
    prosecution.

17. The approach to the Nexus evidence requires specific consideration.  It
    may have been before me  in  a  rather  disorganised  way.  A  properly
    organised copy was not made available to me until  after  the  hearing.
    I am satisfied the necessary material was available to the claimant.

18. I have still not been able to locate copy of the statement of  DC  Lee.
    I note that it is DC Lee who has helped to produce the bundle of  Nexus
    material and  I  have  to  assume  that  his  statement  added  nothing
    particular to it.   All  the  material  in  that  bundle  predates  the
    claimant's offences in July 2013.  It clearly adds to  the  picture  of
    his reprehensible behaviour but when read carefully  is  slightly  less
    serious than it first seems. For example it includes  reference  to  an
    incident when the claimant was the  victim  of  crime  and  on  another
    occasion when he was thought to have been an attacker he may well  have
    been helping the victim after an  attack.  The  judge  found  that  the
    claimant was not prosecuted because there was not  sufficient  evidence
    to support a conviction.  He was not satisfied that there was  anything
    to link him with a  particular  gang  or  any  gang.  Nevertheless  the
    frequent brushes with the law, and unwillingness  to  help  the  police
    when he may have been victim of crime suggest that he was living on the
    fringes of legality.

19. The judge would have been wrong if it had been his view that there  had
    to be a conviction before there was any  concern about  the  claimant's
    general suitability to remain but I do not think that was  the  judge's
    point.  His point was that although suspected of further  offences  the
    claimant did not have more convictions  recorded  against  him  because
    there was no evidence to support a conviction  and  mere  suspicion  of
    being involved in a criminal offence cannot  amount  to  an  imperative
    reason.  Whether that is right as a statement of law I am doubtful  but
    there is nothing in this case that would begin to show that his removal
    was imperative because of things he might have done.

20. It is right to note that the claimant's integration is not always  with
    the desirable elements in British society. However there is very  clear
    evidence accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  the  claimant
    responded well to opportunities given him when  he  was  in  prison  to
    address his antisocial attitudes.  He particularly benefited from  work
    with the support groups known as "Chaos Theory" and  "Spark2Life".  The
    judge  approached  that  evidence  carefully,  even  sceptically,   and
    explained carefully his reasons for finding it impressive. This part of
    the evidence is important. This is not a case of criminal who  has  had
    the wit to mouth a possibly insincere apology but of a person  who  has
    persuaded someone experienced in the rehabilitation of  criminals  that
    he really has turned his life around. Only time will see if these hopes
    are well founded but there is no reason to doubt the findings.

21. It is also  right  to  note  that  although  sentenced  to  28  months'
    imprisonment the claimant only served twelve  months'  detention.   The
    point here is that the time away from the beneficial influence  of  his
    family is much less than might be suggested by the length of sentence.

22. The claimant's numerous criminal convictions are to his  discredit  and
    point to his not being well integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom.   A
    sentence of imprisonment clearly has a negative impact on  integration.
    However even when full weight is given to these factors this is a  case
    of a young man who has lived in the United Kingdom for most of his life
    and who has no links with  his country of  nationality.   Following  MG
    (Prison - Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014]  UKUT
    00392 (IAC) I am satisfied that this is a case where  the  sentence  of
    imprisonment does not prevent the  claimant  from  qualifying  for  the
    enhanced protection of a person  integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom
    after ten years' residence. The judge was entitled to regard him  as  a
    person who was integrated into British society and  I  reach  the  same
    conclusion.

23. It follows therefore that although the judge got  there  by  the  wrong
    route and I have had to look at that part of the decision again,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge was right to treat the claimant  as  a  person
    qualifying for ten years' protection and the judge was clearly right to
    find that there are no imperative reasons for his removal.

24. That essentially is my decision.

25. I am reluctant to make decisions on an alternative basis because, in my
    experience, it  tends  to  indicate  uncertainty  amounting  to  error.
    Nevertheless, it is my decision that even if the claimant were entitled
    only to the lower measure of protection appropriate for a  person  with
    five years continuous residence, he should not be deported.  If it were
    only necessary to show that there were serious grounds the Secretary of
    State could not establish her case.   Drugs  offences  are  often  very
    serious not necessarily because of the particular  criminality  of  the
    particular criminal but because they are  part  of  an  evil  force  in
    society which  corrupts  many  and  causes  others  to  fall  into  the
    temptation of  criminal  activity  to  finance  their  illicit  habits.
    Nevertheless, this  case  does  not  concern  a  drug  baron.   He  was
    described by the sentencing judge as a street level dealer.  He  was  a
    lieutenant playing a significant  role  in  a  not  particularly  large
    operation.  This kind of behaviour  is  entirely  consistent  with  the
    gloomy view of the Nexis evidence pointing to his being associated with
    a gang and that activity adds to reasons for removing him.

26. Whilst recognising that involvement in drugs  offences  is  capable  of
    being sufficient reason itself to justify the deportation  even  of  an
    EEA national, I do not see this as such a case. Even if it  might  have
    been such a case before the claimant was detained  the  findings  about
    the propensity to reoffend mean that it is not such a  case  now.   The
    judge  was  clearly  impressed  with  the  support  of  Spark2Life  and
    particularly the caseworker Mr Dayes and was entitled to be.

27. I do not agree that the judge failed to explain why the  views  in  the
    NOMS and OASys Report did not prevail.   The  judge  conspicuously  had
    regard to evidence of intervening events and attempts  to  rehabilitate
    the claimant.

28. There is another  important  point.  Even  if  the  claimant  were  not
    entitled to the benefit of the "serious grounds" protection,  which  is
    not the Respondent's case, I do not accept that his  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom represents "a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society"  as
    required by Regulation(5)(c).   The  claimant  has  been  convicted  of
    criminal offence but it is plain  from  Regulation  21(5)(e)  that  the
    previous criminal convictions do not themselves justify  the  decision.
    Having accepted the evidence that the claimant is a reformed  character
    I  cannot  agree  that  his  remaining  is  a  "genuine,  present   and
    sufficiently serious threat".

29. It may be the First-tier Tribunal Judge has misdirected himself by  not
    making a clear finding on whether there  was  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat but that is no longer important.  I make it
    clear that this claimant's removal is not proportionate in this case.

30. This is not a Maslov case.  The claimant succeeds because he is an  EEA
    national settled in the United Kingdom.

31. The First-tier Tribunal did explain adequately why he  was  not  unduly
    concerned by the claimant's criminal behaviour.  As  I  have  explained
    above, this is not about a drug baron  and,  in  my  judgment,  is  not
    sufficiently serious to justify the deportation of an EEA national.

32. The judge was wrong in his approach to "imperative grounds" and I  have
    sought to correct that error.

33. I do not find that ground 5 "approach to rehabilitation" adds  anything
    significant.  The judge was wrong in his approach to  the  decision  in
    Essa.  His findings about any propensity to reoffend and integration in
    the United Kingdom were not infected by any  error  arising  from  that
    misunderstanding.

    Notice of Decision

34. The First-tier Tribunal erred but the error was  not  material  to  the
    decision.

35. For the avoidance of doubt I remake the decision for the reasons given.
    I dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and I  uphold  the  decision  to  allow  claimant's
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated  13 May 2016                   |








