
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da018682014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the RCJ                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 June 2016                        |On 16 June 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FH
         (anonymity direction MADE on 29 ocTober 2015 and continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Action


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         (SSHD) against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N J
         Osborne promulgated on 2 February 2016 allowing FH's asylum  appeal
         against the SSHD's decision that FH does not fall within any of the
         exceptions from automatic deportation  in  section  33  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007. I will refer to FH  as  the  'claimant'  in  this
         decision.

      2. The claimant is a national of Afghanistan, of Tajik ethnicity, born
         in April 1993. He came to the UK as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking
         child on 16 March 2007. His asylum claim was  refused  but  he  was
         granted discretionary leave to remain as  an  unaccompanied  minor.
         This expired without the claimant  seeking  to  extend  his  lawful
         residence.


      3. In January 2011 the claimant was involved in a fight between  Dari-
         speaking and Pashtu-speaking men in the UK. As a  result  a  Pashtu
         man was killed and, in December 2011, the claimant was convicted at
         Maidstone Crown Court of manslaughter. He  was  sentenced  to  five
         years detention in a Young Offender Institution.


      4. In January 2012 the claimant was notified that  he  was  liable  to
         deportation under the automatic deportation provisions  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007. Representations made by the claimant were treated
         by the SSHD as a human rights claim. The claimant  maintained  that
         he  would  be  at  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment  amounting   to
         persecution as a result of a blood feud arising from his killing of
         the Pashtun  man.  On  26  September  2014  the  SSHD  refused  the
         claimant's claim for asylum and  humanitarian  protection  and  his
         claim under the ECHR, in particular Article 8.  On  that  date  the
         SSHD also made a decision that s.32(5) of the 2007 applied.


      5. This decision  was  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a
         decision promulgated on 12 June 2015 the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds. The  Judge
         found that the SSHD's certification under s.72 of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (that the claimant was convicted of
         a particularly serious crime and was a risk to the  community)  had
         been rebutted but went on to dismiss the appeal on asylum  grounds.
         Nor was the Judge  satisfied  that  the  claimant's  removal  would
         breach Article 8 ECHR.


      6. The claimant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
         and his appeal was heard  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on  20
         October 2015. Judge Grubb found that the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal involved the making of a material error of law in  respect
         of the asylum claim. The dismissal by the  First-tier  Tribunal  of
         the appeal on human rights grounds stood. The  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision in respect of s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 also stood. The  appeal  was  remitted  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal for consideration of the  claimant's  assertion
         that his deportation would breach the Refugee Convention.


      7. The remitted hearing occurred at Newport on 13 January 2016. First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  concluded  that  the  claimant  was  a
         refugee as he held a well-founded fear of persecution on the  basis
         of the blood feud, that the Afghan authorities would be  unable  to
         provide him with a sufficiency of  protection,  and  that  internal
         relocation was not a viable option. In reaching his conclusions the
         Judge placed reliance on an  expert  report  commissioned  from  Dr
         Giustozzi and a Landinfo report used by the  Norwegian  immigration
         authorities.


      8. The SSHD sought permission to appeal the decision of Judge Osborne.
         The initial grounds were lengthy and took issue, inter  alia,  with
         the applicability of s.72, the  Judge's  approach  to  Humanitarian
         Protection, and  the  Judge's  assessment  under  Article  3  ECHR.
         Permission was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  renewed
         grounds adopted the initial grounds (save  with  reference  to  the
         s.72 ground) and  additionally  submitted  that  the  decision  was
         devoid of any finding as to the position of  the  victims'  family,
         and that the Judge failed to give adequate consideration to whether
         the claimant could internally relocate to a Tajik  controlled  area
         of northern Afghanistan. Permission to appeal was granted.

      9. At the error of law hearing Mr Jarvis invited me to  only  consider
         the new grounds. Mr Jarvis accepted that a person in the claimant's
         position may  be  unable  to  provide  information  concerning  the
         circumstances of his victim's family, and it was accepted that  the
         Judge was entitled to the credibility  findings  he  made.  It  was
         however submitted that the Judge gave insufficient  reasons  as  to
         why the claimant could  not  relocate.  In  response  Mr  Mackenzie
         submitted that the Judge had been entitled to rely  on  the  expert
         report prepared by Dr Giustozzi. This  report  concluded  that  the
         claimant would be unable to relocate as the Pashtun family to which
         his victim  belonged  would  be  capable  either  of  pursuing  the
         claimant throughout  Afghanistan  if  possessed  of  the  necessary
         resources, or they could hire a criminal gang to hunt and kill  the
         claimant. According to the expert even a family  of  common  wealth
         might be able to sell some property in  order  to  gather  the  few
         thousand  dollars  necessary  for  commissioning  the  murder.   Dr
         Giustozzi was said to be a highly regarded expert and the Judge was
         clearly entitled to attach weight to it.


     10. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     11. I am grateful to Mr Jarvis for focusing his submissions  solely  on
         the renewed Grounds of  Appeal.  These  could  be  split  into  two
         separate grounds. The first ground contends that the  Judge  failed
         to make any findings in respect of the  position  of  the  victim's
         family. There was no evidence and no findings in respect  of  their
         occupations,  the  number  of  family  members,  or  the  types  of
         political connections they had. It was submitted that, without such
         findings, it was impossible to conclude that  the  victims'  family
         were willing and capable of locating and harming the claimant.


     12. In his rule 24 response Mr Mackenzie referred to the 'positive role
         of uncertainty' at  play  in  asylum  appeals  (with  reference  to
         Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] 3 All ER  499  and  KS  (Benefit  of  the
         doubt) [2014] UKUT  00552  (IAC).  Asylum  appeals  are,  by  their
         nature, speculative. A Judge has to necessarily speculate,  on  the
         basis of the factual matrix found by her and in the context of  the
         background evidence, whether a particular person will be exposed to
         a real risk of serious ill-treatment if removed to their country of
         origin. The  claimant  did  not  have  personal  knowledge  of  his
         victim's family in Afghanistan and was unable to provide  the  type
         of  information  identified  as  being  necessary  in  the  renewed
         grounds. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  however  found  the
         claimant to be a credible witness (at [15]) and accepted  that  his
         ex-girlfriend had been threatened by Pashtu men who said they would
         hurt her as a result of the claimant's actions (at  [18]).  In  the
         same paragraph the Judge  accepted  the  claimant's  evidence  that
         Pashtu men had been asking  after  him  and  inquiring  as  to  his
         release date. The claimant was informed that  Pashtu  men  and  the
         cousin of his victim would be looking for him. This  suggests  that
         the victim's family were clearly intent on locating and harming the
         claimant. There was therefore clear evidence before the Judge  that
         the  claimant  had  been  specifically  targeted  by  Pashtu   men,
         including the cousin of his victim.


     13. The Judge also took account of Dr Giustozzi's expert report and the
         Landinfo report,  both  of  which  stated  that  blood  feuds  were
         prevalent in Afghanistan, especially amongst  Pashtuns,  and  there
         was therefore a real risk that the victim's family  would  be  both
         willing and able to locate the claimant. According to Dr  Giustozzi
         there was a  social  imperative  in  Pashtu  culture  for  avenging
         relatives in whichever way possible. There was said to be  no  time
         limit to the validity of a feud.


     14. In my judgement the Judge was fully entitled to conclude  that  the
         victim's family would abide by their cultural imperatives and  seek
         out the claimant in Afghanistan. Although  there  was  no  specific
         evidence relating to the circumstances of the  victim's  family  in
         Afghanistan it was apparent from the evidence that a member of  the
         victim's family was in the UK and had,  together  with  other  men,
         sought out the claimant. There was therefore a real risk  that  the
         victim's  family  in  Afghanistan   received   or   would   receive
         information about the claimant.  Applying  the  lower  standard  of
         proof and having regard to the 'positive role  of  uncertainty'  at
         play in this particular appeal,  set  against  the  expert  country
         evidence, there was no requirement for the Judge to  make  specific
         findings in respect of the circumstances of the victim's family  in
         order for him to legitimately conclude that the claimant  would  be
         at real risk of being targeted by the family  or  a  criminal  gang
         commissioned to carry out his murder.


     15. The second renewed ground takes issue with the Judge's  failure  to
         consider whether the claimant could have internally relocated to  a
         Tajik controlled area in the north of Afghanistan. There  was  said
         to be inadequate analysis as to how the Pashtu aggressors would  be
         able to pursue the claimant, a Tajik, if he relocated  to  a  Tajik
         controlled areas as the Tajik authorities would be unlikely to turn
         a blind eye or favour the aggressors.


     16. This ground fails to take account of the Judge's consideration  and
         acceptance of the expert report from Dr Giustozzi  (at  [22],  [24]
         and  [34]).  Dr  Giustozzi  stated  that  the  claimant  could   be
         relatively easily tracked down around Afghanistan by the family  of
         his victim if they wanted to  unless  he  was  able  to  hide.  The
         victim's family might also rely on a criminal gang to commission  a
         murder. According to Dr Giustozzi even a family  of  common  wealth
         might be able to sell some property in order to  obtain  the  funds
         necessary for such a commission. Dr  Giustozzi  stated  that  there
         were  plenty  of  criminal  gangs  in  Afghanistan  who  could   be
         contracted for hire. Moreover,  as  the  claimant  and  his  victim
         belonged  to  different  ethnic  groups  there  was  no   customary
         mechanism for negotiating a settlement to the blood  feud.  In  his
         conclusions, and with reference to the report  from  Dr  Giustozzi,
         the Judge found that the claimant could be easily tracked  down  in
         Kabul or elsewhere in Afghanistan either by the victim's family  or
         by killers hired by the family, and that  the  internal  relocation
         alternative was not available to the claimant.


     17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found there to be a  real  risk  that
         the victim's family would commission a criminal gang to commit  the
         murder and that the gang would be able to penetrate  all  parts  of
         Afghanistan. The Judge was  rationally  entitled  to  rely  on  the
         expert's evidence and gave sustainable reasons for so  relying  (at
         [20]). There was no challenge in the First-tier  Tribunal  to  such
         evidence (at [34]). In my judgement the Judge's acceptance  of  the
         assertions in the Giustozzi report entitled him  to  conclude  that
         internal relocation to any part of Afghanistan was  not  an  option
         reasonably open to the claimant.  I  therefore  conclude  that  the
         Judge did not make an  error  of  law  in  his  assessment  of  the
         availability of the internal relocation alternative.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any material error of law.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal stands.


[pic]                               15 June 2016
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]                               13 June 2016
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


