
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01635/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 May 2014                                |On 30 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE GREEN
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                        ABDIWAHID ABDIRAHMAN ABDULAHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.   The essence of the appeal before us today  is  that  the  Tribunal  has
    failed to make specific findings of fact relating  to  this  particular
    appellant.  The appeal is brought with  the  permission  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  posted  on  1
    April 2014 dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of
    the SSHD of 20 August  2013  which  itself  made  a  deportation  order
    pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant is a Somali national born on 15 March 1988.   He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on a false passport  on  11  June  2009  and  was
    arrested and thereafter  detained.   He  claimed  asylum.   He  pleaded
    guilty to the offence of with  intent  knowingly  possessing  false  or
    improperly obtained documents  and  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment on 26 June 2009.  There was no appeal.

3.   He appealed the decision of the Secretary of State  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The First-tier  Tribunal  stated  in  paragraph  22  of  its
    determination as follows:

         "It is necessary to make a finding of  credibility  concerning  the
         evidence of the appellant.  We have made such a finding only  after
         mature consideration of all relevant  and  material  circumstances.
         In making this finding we have taken into account all the  relevant
         evidence in the round and have attached such weight as we  consider
         properly attributable thereto."

4.   In paragraph 7 of the determination the Tribunal set out in detail  the
    appellant's  case  and  in  paragraph  8  the  Tribunal  referred   and
    summarised in detail the expert report of a Dr Mullen  on  20  December
    2013.  The Tribunal rejected the appellant's appeal and in paragraph 29
    stated as follows:

         "Mindful of the country information and the opinion  of  Dr  Mullen
         acknowledging that al-Shabaab have been displaced from the whole of
         Mogadishu but recognising that this  fact  does  not  signify  that
         their influence has been entirely  removed,  we  have  reached  the
         conclusion that that the situation in Mogadishu should no longer be
         regarded as presenting a general risk of Article 15(c)  harm.   The
         appellant's personal circumstances are such that he would not be at
         a real risk.  His personal circumstances are such that he will  not
         be at an additional risk above that which applies to  the  civilian
         population generally.  Such violence as does occur cannot  be  said
         to be indiscriminate as it is targeted at specific  individuals  or
         properties."

5.   The gist of the Tribunal's finding therefore  was  that  the  appellant
    was to be  treated  as  one  of  the  many  but  was  not  a  "specific
    individual" who might be targeted by al-Shabaab were he to be returned.



6.   In the course of  submissions  before  us  today  Mr  Burrett  for  the
    appellant has pointed out that since the Tribunal considered  that  the
    appellant's credibility was pivotal to  their  reasoning  that  it  was
    incumbent upon them properly to analyse  those  issues  of  credibility
    that focused upon the issue whether he  would  in  actual  fact  be  at
    particular risk were he to be returned to Mogadishu.  In particular and
    by reference to the summary of the appellant's evidence in paragraph 17
    Mr Burrett identified the following as particular issues upon which the
    Tribunal should have made findings.

7.   First,  whether  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  close  members  of  the
    appellant's family had been killed because they were  members  of  Reer
    Hamar.  Secondly, whether al-Shabaab had in fact sought to recruit  the
    appellant in 2009.  Thirdly, whether the appellant had in fact  refused
    to join al-Shabaab.  Fourthly, the circumstances of his alleged  escape
    from al-Shabaab and their detention.  Fifthly, factual evidence in  May
    2009 concerning the incursion by armed members of al-Shabaab  into  the
    appellant's house and the circumstances pursuant to which he fled  from
    the scene.  There are also other issues relating to the business run by
    the appellant's family which were raised and which  were  not  properly
    dealt with in the determination.

8.   Mr Deller for the Secretary of  State  helpfully  and  frankly  accepts
    that the Tribunal's findings are in some respects deficient.  He  draws
    a distinction between critical findings relating to the interaction  of
    the appellant with al-Shabaab and other findings which he says may  not
    be so central to the issues.  However,  he  accepted  that  there  were
    certain deficiencies in the analysis of this critical issue.  It is for
    these reasons that we consider it appropriate to allow the  appeal  and
    as we have indicated we are remitting it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with a new composition for these critical issues to be re-evaluated.






Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Green



