
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01517/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Crown Court      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 August 2015                    |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     OR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Schwenk, Counsel instructed by WTB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  deport
    him from the UK. First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 12 May 2015. The  Upper  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal on 15 June 2015.

2.    The appellant's grounds of appeal assert that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to adequately assess the law and evidence relating to  the
    risk  on  return  to  the  appellant's  country  of  nationality  as  a
    gay/bisexual man. The grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    placed too much weight on the fact that, despite the fact that the  law
    criminalises homosexual acts with a  penalty  of  up  to  10  years  in
    prison, there was  no  evidence  of  prosecutions  in  the  appellant's
    country of nationality in recent years. The grounds went  on  to  argue
    that the evidence showed that the appellant lived discreetly because he
    feared for his safety and to avoid prosecution. The First-tier Tribunal
    Judge failed to properly assess whether the treatment he would face  on
    return amounted to persecution.

3.    The appeal now comes before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point
    of law.

4.    The appellant was unable to attend the hearing. He is still a  serving
    prisoner. The Upper Tribunal sent a production order  to  the  relevant
    authorities on 25 June 2015. The appellant  was  not  produced  on  the
    morning of the hearing. Further enquiries revealed that  there  was  no
    plan to produce him and that it was unlikely that arrangement could  be
    made for the appellant to be produced for the  hearing  that  day.  The
    situation was highly unsatisfactory.  The  appellant  was  entitled  to
    attend the hearing if he wanted. However, Mr Schwenk accepted  that  it
    was not strictly necessary for the appellant to attend in order for him
    to put the case. The appeal would proceed by way of submissions and  he
    did not need to take any instructions.

5.    Before I decided whether to proceed with the hearing I  asked  whether
    it would be possible for  the  appellant's  solicitor  to  contact  the
    appellant to take instructions. I was told that she had  been  able  to
    speak to the appellant and that  he  was  content  for  the  appeal  to
    proceed in his  absence.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing  the  Tribunal
    apologised to the appellant's representative once again for the failure
    to produce him for the hearing. After the hearing I asked  for  further
    enquiries to be made with DEPMU  and  HMP  Manchester  as  to  why  the
    appellant had not been produced despite the fact that the Tribunal  had
    made a production order.

6.    I heard submissions from both parties  and  have  taken  a  record  of
    proceedings. The submissions will  be  incorporated  into  my  findings
    where relevant.

Decision and reasons

7.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making
    of an error on a point of law.

8.    In a lengthy and detailed  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    properly directed himself to the four stage test set out by the Supreme
    Court decision in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2011] 1AC  596,  which  Lord  Roger
    explained as follows:

         "82.     When an applicant applies for asylum on the  ground  of  a
         well-founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,  the  tribunal
         must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence  that
         he is gay, or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by  potential
         persecutors in his country of nationality.

            If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied
         on the available evidence that gay people who lived openly would be
         liable to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.

            If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what  the  individual
         applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

            If the applicant would  in  fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
         exposed to a real risk of persecution, then he has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution - even if he could avoid  the  risk  by  living
         "discreetly".

            If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.

            If the tribunal concludes that the  applicant  would  choose  to
         live discreetly simply because that was how he himself  would  wish
         to live, or because of  social  pressures,  e  g,  not  wanting  to
         distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application
         should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.

            If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

9.    No  challenge  has  been  made  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings of fact. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set  out  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's sexuality in an enormous amount  of  detail
    [137-338]. Despite the lengths he had gone to he found it difficult  to
    reach a firm view on the evidence [339]. However, he went on to set out
    adequate reasons his finding that the appellant had failed  to  produce
    sufficiently reliable  evidence  to  support  certain  aspects  of  his
    account [340-362]. After having considered  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round the First-tier Tribunal Judge was prepared  to  accept  that  the
    appellant was bisexual although he was not satisfied that the  evidence
    showed that he was "predominantly  homosexual"  [360].  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was not satisfied that there was sufficient evidence  to
    show  that  the  appellant  had  ever  been  in  any  long   term   gay
    relationships or that he had been as active in the gay community in the
    UK as he claimed [361].  In light of those findings  he  accepted  that
    the appellant met the first requirement of  the  test  set  out  in  HJ
    (Iran).

10.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to consider the second stage  of
    the test i.e. whether gay people who live  openly  in  the  appellant's
    country of nationality  would  be  subject  to  treatment  sufficiently
    serious to amount to persecution. He considered the background evidence
    relating to the treatment of gay or bisexual  men  in  the  appellant's
    country of nationality in some detail [372-391].  Mr  Schwenk  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's summary of the evidence was  fair.
    In light of that evidence the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded  that
    there was legislation that  criminalised  homosexual  activity  between
    men, which provided for a punishment of a term of imprisonment of up to
    10 years. However, he noted that there  was evidence to show that there
    had been no reported instances of anyone  being  prosecuted  under  the
    legislation "in recent years".

11.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that,  while  there  was
    evidence of "a level of societal disapproval" of homosexuality  in  the
    appellant's country  of  nationality,  there  was  little  evidence  of
    violent attacks against gay  men  although  discrimination  remained  a
    problem. The evidence showed that there was an LGBT  community  in  the
    appellant's country of nationality and some LGBT organisations operated
    there albeit  that  societal  disapproval  of  homosexuality  sometimes
    impeded the operation of such organisations and the free association of
    gay men. He noted that the evidence showed that a  number  of  gay  men
    lived openly there  and  did  not,  in  general,  suffer  serious  harm
    amounting to persecution [392]. After having considered the  background
    evidence in the round the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that  the
    level of societal disapproval, violence, harassment and intimidation of
    gay men did not reach the degree of prevalence or seriousness  required
    to show a real risk of persecution to openly gay men [393].  For  these
    reasons he concluded that the evidence did not  show  that  the  second
    limb of the test set out in HJ (Iran) was satisfied.  Although  he  did
    not go on to make detailed findings in relation to the other  limbs  of
    the test he made clear that it followed from his findings that  if  the
    appellant were  to  live  openly  as  a  gay  man  in  his  country  of
    nationality he would not  be  at  risk  of  sufficiently  serious  ill-
    treatment that would amount to a breach of Article 3. If  he  chose  to
    live discreetly it would not be because his  fear  of  persecution  was
    well-founded or that there was a real risk of  treatment  amounting  to
    persecution [396].

12.   Mr Schwenk's submissions turned on a narrow point;  whether  the  mere
    fact that homosexual acts are criminalised in the  appellant's  country
    of  nationality  was  sufficient  to  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution within the meaning of the Refugee Convention. He noted that
    the respondent relied on the Court of Justice decision in X, Y and Z  v
    Minister voor Immigratie en Asiel [2014] 3 WLR 770. He argued that  the
    decision showed that the burden shifted  to  the  respondent  in  cases
    where it was accepted that a person is gay. He referred to paragraph 58
    of the decision, which states:

         "58.     In those circumstances,  where  an  applicant  for  asylum
         relies, as in each of the cases in the  main  proceedings,  on  the
         existence in his country of  origin  on  legislation  criminalising
         homosexual acts, it is for the national authorities  to  undertake,
         in the course of their assessment of the  facts  and  circumstances
         under Article 4  of  the  Directive,  an  examination  of  all  the
         relevant facts concerning that country  of  origin,  including  its
         laws and regulations and the manner in which they are  applied,  as
         provided for in Article 4(3)(a) of the Directive."

13.    He  referred  me  to  an  extract  from  Asylum  Law  and   Practice:
    Immigration and Nationality Law (2nd ed.) by  Symes  and  Jorro,  which
    referred to the treatment of laws that had fallen into desuetude.

         "3.39    The tenor of modern refugee law is in favour  of  granting
         protection  only  against  fears  of  harm  that  will  in  reality
         eventuate. Whether this trend will operate to wholly exclude  fears
         of the future invocation of laws on the statute book but at present
         in desuetude, is difficult to predict. The possibility that such  a
         law may operate so as, at the very  least,  to  contribute  to  the
         presence of a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  should  not  be
         lightly  rejected  given  the  undoubted   subjective   nature   of
         'persecution'. Schiemann LJ recognised the  persecutory  nature  of
         such a sword a Damocles in Jain though the approach of the Court of
         Appeal in Z, A and M was to consider this factor as one element  of
         the whole. On the other hand, if it appears that the law is on  the
         statute book  there  may  well  be  an  evidential  burden  on  the
         Secretary of State to show that it is inoperative."

14.   Mr Schwenk also relied on a further judgment of Schiemann LJ  in  Adam
    v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 265, where he stated:

         "12.     Miss Plimmer submits that  the  approach  of  the  IAT  in
         paragraph 16 of their determination is not supportable. The Country
         Assessment states in paragraph 5.69 that "the penalty for  refusing
         to perform military service  is  a  fine  and  up  to  three  years
         imprisonment...". This document was produced by the Home Office and
         placed before the adjudicator by  their  representative.  In  those
         circumstances to place a burden on the appellant to show that there
         is a real risk that this penalty would be imposed on him is unfair.
         I agree. It may well be that circumstances can arise when a law  is
         shown to be never enforced in which case there  would  be  no  real
         risk to a citizen that he would be imprisoned pursuant to it.  But,
         for my part, I do not consider that it  was  open  to  the  IAT  to
         conclude from the evidence before it that the present  was  such  a
         case."

15.    He  relied  on  those  sources  to  argue  that  it  would  only   in
    circumstances where a law has fallen into desuetude to the extent  that
    a decision maker can be sure that a person is not gong to be persecuted
    that a person could be returned. He argued that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge failed to appreciate that the burden was  on  the  respondent  to
    show that, even though homosexuality is criminalised in the appellant's
    country of nationality, the law would not be enforced.

16.   Mr Schwenk developed his argument with reference to Article 9  of  the
    Qualification Directive (2004/93/EC). Article 9(2)(b) states that  acts
    of persecution can  take  the  form  of  legal  measures  that  are  in
    themselves  discriminatory  or  are  implemented  in  a  discriminatory
    manner. Article 9(2)(c) also states  that  acts  of  persecution  could
    include  prosecution  or  punishment,  which  is  disproportionate   or
    discriminatory.

17.   The purpose of the Refugee Convention is to protect those who  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution. It is trite  law  that  a  subjective
    fear of persecution is insufficient and that  the  person's  fear  must
    have some objective grounding in order for it to be "well-founded". The
    assessment of whether a person's fear of  persecution  is  well-founded
    normally begins with consideration of his  account.  A  decision  maker
    will asses whether his statements are coherent and plausible and do not
    run counter to the available specific and general information  relevant
    to his case.  The decision maker will also consider whether the  person
    has made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim or has  provided  a
    reasonable explanation for any lack of relevant material. The fact that
    a person has been subjected to persecution or serious harm in the  past
    will be regarded as a serious indication of the  person's  well-founded
    fear of persecution unless there are good reasons to conclude that such
    serious harm would not be repeated. In most cases  risk  on  return  is
    also assessed by reference to background or expert evidence relating to
    the conditions prevailing in the person's country of nationality.

18.   Because of the potentially serious  nature  of  the  consequences  the
    standard of proof in an asylum claim is low. However, the  person  must
    still show that there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  he
    would be at real risk of serious harm if returned  to  his  country  of
    nationality. In other words the person must show that there is at least
    a reasonable degree of likelihood of the feared harm occurring and that
    the feared harm is sufficiently serious to reach the required threshold
    to amount to persecution within the meaning of the Refugee  Convention.
    A protection claim is not well-founded where the risk of  serious  harm
    is not reasonably likely to happen or where there is  a  real  risk  of
    harm that is not sufficiently serious in nature.

19.   The arguments put forward by Mr Schwenk amount  to  little  more  than
    well-known principles relating to the evidential burden of proof. If  a
    person who is seeking protection produces evidence to support his claim
    to be at real risk of serious harm, if the respondent does  not  accept
    the evidence, it is for her to give adequate reasons to explain why the
    evidence is not accepted or she  should  produce  further  evidence  in
    rebuttal. But the overall burden of proof, albeit a low one, remains on
    the person who claims that they would be at risk if returned  to  their
    country of nationality.

20.   Mr  Schwenk  is  correct  to  point  out  that  Article  9(2)  of  the
    Qualification Directive states that acts  of  persecution  can  include
    discriminatory legal measures as well  as  prosecution  or  punishment,
    which is disproportionate or discriminatory.  But  Article  9(1)  makes
    clear that acts of persecution must be sufficiently  serious  by  their
    nature or repetition to constitute a severe violation  of  basic  human
    rights,  or  that  an  accumulation  of  various   measures   must   be
    sufficiently severe to affect the individual in a similar manner.

21.   He was unable to refer me to any specific  authority  to  support  the
    argument that the mere existence of a law prohibiting  homosexual  acts
    is sufficient, without more, to reach the  minimum  level  of  severity
    required to found a protection claim. The decision in X, Y and Z is  in
    fact  quite  clear  on  the  point.  The  case  concerned  the   proper
    interpretation  of  Article  9  of  the  Qualification  Directive.  The
    applicants came from countries where homosexual acts are  criminalised.
    The court noted that the right to respect for private and  family  life
    under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights  was  not  a
    fundamental right from which no derogation is possible.

22.   The court concluded that the mere fact  that  there  is  in  existence
    legislation criminalising homosexual acts does not affect an  applicant
    in a manner so  significant  that  it  reaches  the  minimum  level  of
    severity required to  constitute  persecution  within  the  meaning  of
    Article 9(1) [55]. But  a  term  of  imprisonment  that  accompanies  a
    legislative provision would  be  capable  of  constituting  an  act  of
    persecution "provided that it is actually applied  in  the  country  of
    origin" [56]. The court went on to state that, in considering whether a
    protection claim  is  well-founded,  the  national  authorities  should
    undertake  an  assessment  of  the  relevant   facts   concerning   the
    applicant's country of nationality "including its laws and  regulations
    and the manner in which they are applied" [58]. I do not consider  that
    this equivalent to shifting the burden of proof as Mr Schwenk  contends
    but it merely forms part of the  anxious  scrutiny  required  in  every
    protection  claim.  The  court  found  that,  when   undertaking   that
    assessment,  the  authorities  must  determine  whether  the  term   of
    imprisonment provided for by the legislation is applied in practice  in
    the applicant's country of nationality and went on to conclude:

         "61.     Having regard to all of those considerations,  the  answer
         to the third question is that, in each of the  cases  in  the  main
         proceedings, Article 9(1) of  the  Directive,  read  together  with
         Article 9(2)(c) thereof, must be interpreted as  meaning  that  the
         criminalisation of homosexual  acts  alone  does  not,  in  itself,
         constitute persecution.  However,  a  term  of  imprisonment  which
         sanctions homosexual acts and which  is  actually  applied  in  the
         country of origin which adopted such legislation must  be  regarded
         as being a punishment which is disproportionate  or  discriminatory
         and thus constitutes an act of persecution."

23.   The principles outlined above show that the question of whether a  law
    criminalising homosexual acts is sufficient to  amount  to  persecution
    for the purpose of the Refugee Convention will depend on  the  evidence
    and the facts of each case. The applicant must show that  there  is  at
    least a reasonable degree of likelihood of the law being  enforced.  If
    the evidence shows that there is a real risk of  prosecution  then  the
    claim is likely to succeed. If the  evidence  shows  that  the  law  is
    likely to have fallen into desuetude then the fact that it  remains  on
    the statute book is unlikely,  without  more,  to  found  a  protection
    claim. Mr Schwenk argued that the mere fact that a law remains  on  the
    statute book is still likely to give rise to a fear of prosecution  and
    may lead the appellant to modify his behaviour as a result. But if  the
    fear of prosecution is not well-founded then this is  insufficient  for
    the purpose of recognition under the Refugee Convention.

24.   In light of the principles outlined above I turn to  consider  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error  on  a
    point of law. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was  ambivalent  about  the
    appellant's claimed sexuality and the extent of his involvement in  the
    gay community in the UK. Although he was satisfied on the low  standard
    of proof that the appellant was  likely  to  be  bisexual  he  was  not
    satisfied that he was "predominantly  homosexual".  He  considered  the
    background evidence relating to the treatment of  LGBT  people  in  the
    appellant's country of nationality in some detail.  He  considered  the
    source and what weight to place on each piece of  evidence.  While  the
    evidence showed that there is societal disapproval against LGBT  people
    there was evidence to show that no known prosecutions have taken  place
    in his  country  of  nationality  "in  recent  years".  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  noted  that  there  was  some  evidence  to  show  that
    discrimination occurs but concluded that there was little  evidence  to
    show a pattern of violence against LGBT people.

25.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  conducted  a  fair
    appraisal of the evidence before him. It was open to  him  to  conclude
    that the  evidence  did  not  show  that  there  was  a  real  risk  of
    prosecution despite the fact that there  is  a  law  that  criminalises
    homosexual acts. It was also open to him to conclude that  while  there
    was evidence of societal discrimination, and that there might  be  some
    isolated incidents of violence, taken as a whole, the evidence did  not
    show that there was a real risk of serious harm that  was  sufficiently
    serious to amount  to  persecution  for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee
    Convention. It is understandable that the appellant disagrees with  the
    decision but the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings were  within  the
    range of reasonable responses and do not disclose any errors of law.

26.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that the decision shall stand.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


Signed      [pic]      Date 22 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
