
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01363/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 December 2013                           |On 13 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ANDREI ZAHARIA

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Sutton, Counsel, instructed by Lloyds PR
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a national of Romania born on 26 November 1988.

2.   On 5 June 2013 he was served with  a  notice  of  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order and reasons for  deportation  letter.   The  claimant
    sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ford and Dr J O De Barros (non legal member)  on  7
    October 2013.

3.   The appeal was allowed.

4.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department has submitted  a  number
    of grounds contending that the Tribunal acted in error  in  making  the
    findings which it did.

5.   The matter which gives rise to the immigration decision is the  offence
    committed on 2 February 2012, the particulars of which are set  out  in
    the  sentencing  remarks  of  Judge  May  QC  at  paragraph  3  of  the
    determination.  On 17 October 2012 the claimant was found guilty  by  a
    jury of two offences of wounding with  intent  to  do  grievous  bodily
    harm.  He was sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment.   The  offence
    involved is of violence towards a previous boyfriend of his girlfriend.
     A knife was used and the victim  was  stabbed.   Another  person,  who
    tried to prevent the  argument  and  fight  ,was  also  stabbed.   Both
    victims were treated in hospital for their injuries.

6.   As the appellant is an EEA national, any decision to  remove  him  must
    be made in  accordance  with  Rule  21  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

7.   That is set out in paragraph  9  of  the  determination  in  which  the
    decision letter is quoted as to the relevant passage namely:

         "You have committed serious criminal offences in the United Kingdom
         and, as explained above, there is a real risk that you may reoffend
         in the future.   Account  has  been  taken  of  the  considerations
         outlined in EEA Regulation 21(6).  Nevertheless, given  the  threat
         of serious harm that you pose to the public it is  considered  that
         your personal circumstances do not preclude your deportation  being
         pursued.  It is considered that  the  decision  to  deport  you  is
         proportionate and in accordance with the principles  of  Regulation
         21(5)."

8.   In applying the principles of Regulation 21(5), it is  first  necessary
    to determine the status of the appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in
    particular whether he has remained in the United  Kingdom  sufficiently
    long enough to acquire a permanent right of residence under  Regulation
    15.  If so, then his removal can only be made  on  serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security and indeed, if he has resided  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of at least ten years, then  the
    relevant decision cannot be  taken  except  on  imperative  grounds  of
    public security.

9.   It is the case for the Secretary of State for the Home Department  that
    the appellant has  not,  at  the  time  of  the  decision,  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom.   It  is  noted  at
    paragraph 10 of the refusal letter that the appellant  claims  to  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 September 2008.  Although  that  is
    noted at paragraph 10  of  the  determination,  it  is  also  noted  at
    paragraph 13 that in June 2008 he left Romania to join  his  father  in
    the United Kingdom.

10.  That was more reasonably likely to have been a mistake as I  note  from
    the statement of the claimant's father of 30 September  2013  that  the
    claimant arrived in the UK in September 2008 and it was his father  who
    arrived in 2007.

11.  It is likely therefore that the appellant has not acquired five  years'
    residence so as to acquire a permanent right to remain under Regulation
    15.  In any event, it is  settled that time spent in custody  does  not
    count towards that time.

12.  There may be some criticism offered of the Tribunal in that it did  not
    make a clear finding of fact as to  that  matter,  although  I  do  not
    understand from the remarks by Mr Sutton, who represents  the  claimant
    before me, that it is  contended  that  the  claimant  has  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.

13.  The status of the claimant is relevant to one aspect of the grounds  of
    appeal that have been advanced, namely that the Tribunal was  in  error
    in speculating upon the appellant's chances of rehabilitation so far as
    the  guidance  set  out  in   the   case   of   Essa   v   SSHD   (EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC).

14.   As  Mr  Tarlow  submits,  the  principles  in  Essa   concerning   the
    requirement  of  the  Tribunal  to  consider  whether  the   claimant's
    potential for rehabilitation  are  better  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
    Romania do not arise unless the claimant has acquired a permanent right
    of residence.

15.  Paragraph 26 of the judgment in  Essa  is  quoted  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal as follows:-

         "We agree that the court's reference to genuine integration must be
         directed at qualified persons and their  family  members  who  have
         resided in the host state as such for five years or  more.   People
         who have just arrived in  the  host  state,  have  not  yet  become
         qualified persons, or have not been a  qualified  person  for  five
         years, can always be removed  for  non-exercise  of  free  movement
         rights irrespective of public good grounds to curtail free movement
         rights.  If their presence during this time makes  them  a  present
         threat to public policy it will be inconsistent with  the  purposes
         of the Directive to weigh in the balance against deportation  their
         future prospects of rehabilitation."

16.  Thus, so far as the criticism made of the Tribunal in  the  grounds  of
    appeal that they wrongly considered the factor of rehabilitation in the
    case of the claimant would seem to have been well-founded.

17.  It is always part of  the  balancing  exercise  to  consider  what  the
    claimant enjoys in the United Kingdom and what he may conceivably  face
    upon return to Romania.  To that extent, the analysis, perhaps, is  not
    wasted.   Clearly,  the  consideration   as   to   rehabilitation   was
    unnecessary in those circumstances.

18.  The issue, therefore, which arises for consideration in this appeal  is
    whether the Tribunal, in focusing some of its efforts into the issue of
    rehabilitation, has failed  to  consider  the  central  issue  in  this
    appeal.

19.  The central issue which  arises  from  Rule  21  is  that  set  out  at
    21(5)(c) whether "The personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society".

20.  It is perhaps a matter  of  some  concern  that  paragraph  22  of  the
    determination makes no reference specifically to Rule 21.

21.  Certain of the requirements of that Rule have been taken into account.

22.  It is unfortunate indeed that the Tribunal failed  to  focus  expressly
    upon  the  issue  as  to  whether  there  is  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.

23.  In fairness to the Tribunal, however, it is clear that  it  has  sought
    to assess the risk which the claimant now poses to society.   It  dealt
    with various reports at paragraphs 5 and 6 of  the  determination.   It
    notes that one set of scoring places the risk of offending as  low  and
    another scoring the risk as medium.

24.  At paragraph 20 the Tribunal makes the following comments:-

         "We do not accept  that  the  Appellant  poses  a  medium  risk  of
         reoffending and we find the assessment set out in 16th May 2013  e-
         mail at K1 of the Respondent's bundle to be more reliable.  We  are
         satisfied that there is a low risk of  reoffending  in  this  case.
         The relationship that led to the confrontation and the  assault  is
         over and such a situation is highly unlikely to recur."

25.  The Tribunal goes on at paragraph 21 to note:-

         "The Appellant's father and his father's partner are  of  the  view
         that the behaviour of the Appellant in February 2012 was completely
         out of character  and  that  they  anticipate  no  repeat  of  that
         behaviour."

26.  At paragraph 30 the Tribunal states as follows:-

         "We recognise that great weight must be attached to the decision of
         the Secretary of State, following legislation  and  guidance,  that
         this Appellant should be deported to Romania.  However, we are  not
         satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  serves  the  public
         interests of public policy and/or public security, given the  level
         of risk the Appellant poses to society, the level of risk of repeat
         offending and reduced prospects of his rehabilitation if he were to
         be removed to Romania."

27.  As I have indicated, it is unfortunate   that  the  Tribunal  does  not
    articulate precisely the issue upon  which  they  have  to  adjudicate,
    namely whether there is a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

28.  That having been said, however, the findings as to risk have been  made
    and they are put within the proper context of day to day support by the
    claimant's  parents,  his  continuous  employment,  his  previous  good
    character, essentially the support which is  provided  to  him  by  his
    family in the United Kingdom, a support which would not  be  reasonably
    to be expected were he to return to Romania.

29.  Although the Tribunal has not articulated  the  precise  issue,  it  is
    clear, as I so find, that in the passages to which reference  has  been
    made, it has come to a  conclusion  that  the  claimant  does  not  now
    present a genuine, present or sufficiently serious threat to one of the
    fundamental interests of society.  The Tribunal has given  reasons  for
    its findings which are sustainable and properly open to  be  made.   It
    has conducted  the  proportionality  exercise.   It  has  compared  the
    lifestyle of the claimant in the United Kingdom with that which he  may
    face if returned and has  concluded  that  the  balance  falls  in  his
    favour.

30.  The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal also seeks to criticise the  Tribunal's  assessment  as  to  the
    issue of low risk of re-offending, contending that the panel has failed
    to give adequate weight to the Secretary of State's public interest and
    public safety policies.  Reliance is placed upon DS (India) [2009] EWCA
    Civ 544.  The grounds go  on  to  express  the  view  that  the  public
    interest in the deportation of  those  who  commit  serious  crimes  is
    beyond the need to deprive the individual of the  opportunity  to  have
    the chance to re-offend in a country which extends to the need to deter
    others and prevent serious crime generally and  to  uphold  the  public
    abhorrence of such offending.

31.  As I indicated to Mr Tarlow, I find that that ground is  not  one  that
    has merit, given the issue which needs to be addressed in Rule 21.

32.  Indeed, that principle is set out clearly by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    the decision of Essa, to which reference has been made.  The court said
    at paragraph 32:-

         "We observe that for any deportation of an EEA national  or  family
         member of such national to be  justified  on  public  good  grounds
         (irrespective of whether permanent residence has been achieved) the
         claimant must represent a present threat  to  public  policy.   The
         fact of a criminal conviction is not enough.  It is not permissible
         in an EEA case to deport  a  claimant  on  the  basis  of  criminal
         offending simply to deter others.  This tends to mean, in the  case
         of criminal conduct, short of the most serious  threats  to  public
         safety of the state, that a  candidate  for  EEA  deportation  must
         represent a present threat by reason of a propensity  to  re-offend
         or an unacceptably high risk of re-offending.  In such a  case,  if
         there is acceptable evidence of rehabilitation,  the  prospects  of
         future rehabilitation do not enter the balance,  save  possibly  as
         future protective factors to  ensure  that  rehabilitation  remains
         durable."

33.  Thus, although in a normal deportation case deterrence  and  abhorrence
    are relevant considerations, this is not so for an EEA case.  In  those
    circumstances, I find that ground 3 of the Secretary of State's grounds
    of appeal is misconceived.

34.  Rule 21(6) requires, before taking a relevant  decision,  the  decision
    maker must take into account considerations of age,  state  of  health,
    family and economic situation, the person's length of residence in  the
    United Kingdom, his social  and  cultural  integration  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and the extent of personal links with his country  of  origin.
    It is clear that that has been done by the Tribunal.

35.  It is unfortunate that the determination is somewhat  muddled  and  not
    focused, as I have indicated, expressly on the issue.  However,  it  is
    clear that the findings made in that determination, when applied to the
    issue, are determinative of it.

36.  Although there  are  obvious  errors  in  the  approach  taken  by  the
    Tribunal, it is clear that overall the findings which were made support
    the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  does  not  currently  present   a
    sufficiently   serious   threat,   indeed   any   threat.    In   those
    circumstances, it is clear that on those findings there is no basis  to
    remove under Rule 21.

37.  In those circumstances, the appeal by the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department is  dismissed.   The  findings  made  by  the  Tribunal
    allowing the appeal in respect of the immigration decision and that  in
    respect of Article 8 of the ECHR shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

