

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
DA/01052/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 3 March 2014                             |On 4 March 2014           |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                           Mr Alrick Orville Huie
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Dr D Chirico, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on
      4 December 2013 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne in respect of the
      determination of a panel of the First-tier Tribunal chaired  by  Judge
      Keane which dismissed the appeal following a hearing at  Taylor  House
      on 11 October 2013  by  way  of  a  determination  promulgated  on  11
      November 2013.

   2.       The appellant is a Jamaican national born on 20  February  1976.
      He appeals against the decision of the respondent, on 3 June 2013,  to
      make a deportation order against him by virtue of section  3(5)(a)  of
      the Immigration Act 1971 following his conviction for  drugs  offences
      in September 2006 when he was sentenced, on a  guilty  plea,  to  four
      years' imprisonment. He relies upon his private and family life in the
      UK, upon his marriage to a British national  in  September  2012,  the
      relationship between himself and his wife's two children  (one  is  an
      adult and is in prison, the other is a teenager in her final  year  at
      school) and the presence of his own two children  (born  in  2005  and
      2010)  from  an  earlier  relationship.  The  appellant's  immigration
      history is set out in the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal;
      essentially he first arrived here  in  November  2001  as  a  visitor,
      switched to being a student but could give no details of  his  studies
      when apprehended in November 2002, for driving offences. He  was  also
      found to be working illegally and maintained that a cousin had applied
      for the variation of his stay from visitor  to  student.  There  is  a
      contradiction over whether he was removed from the UK later that month
      (see determination of 2008) or whether he left  voluntarily  (see  his
      own witness statement) but he then re-entered illegally (on an unknown
      date) and only came to the attention of the authorities  when  he  was
      arrested at his property with  a  large  quantity  of  crack  cocaine.
      Following his release from prison after his four  year  sentence,  the
      appellant absconded, failed to attend the hearing of  his  deportation
      appeal in December 2008, which was dismissed, and only resurfaced when
      he was shot on 30 April 2012 in a gang related incident  connected  to
      his stepson. He gave evidence against his attacker which resulted in a
      prison sentence for the latter. It is noted that  in  support  of  his
      appeal against deportation in 2008 he had claimed he had eye  problems
      and that he had children in Jamaica but not in the  UK.  A  claim  for
      asylum was refused on non compliance grounds on 10 May 2012.

   3.       Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that arguably  the
      panel had failed to give sufficient weight to the  best  interests  of
      the children involved and failed to make findings on the risk  of  re-
      offending or the appellant's rehabilitation.

Appeal hearing

   4.       The appellant attended the hearing and I heard submissions  from
      the parties as to whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of
      law.

   5.       Dr Chirico expanded his grounds and  argued  that  whilst  there
      were strong factors on both sides, the Tribunal had failed  to  engage
      with those pleaded for the appellant. There was  no  consideration  of
      the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary   factor,   no
      appreciation of the fact that the appellant had not re-offended  since
      his last conviction and no findings on whether  he  had  rehabilitated
      himself following his conviction. He also argued that the judge failed
      to give weight to the fact that the appellant had showed public spirit
      in giving evidence against the individual who had shot him.

   6.       In response Mr Jarvis argued that the determination  had  to  be
      read as a whole. As the Home Office Presenting Officer had not  sought
      to challenge any of the evidence pleaded on behalf  of  the  appellant
      and the Tribunal had accepted all of it, there had  been  no  need  to
      assess that evidence. That was  why  the  Tribunal  had  prepared  the
      determination in the way that it had. It was plain that the judge  was
      aware of the strong ties between the appellant and  the  children  and
      also of the other factors argued in the  appellant's  favour  but  the
      panel  concluded  that  the  nature  of  the  offence  was  such  that
      deportation was justified.

   7.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

   8.       I have considered the submissions made, the determination of the
      First-tier Tribunal, the judgments and the evidence I was referred to.



   9.       As acknowledged by Dr Chirico, this is a  case  that  is  finely
      balanced. On the one hand  there  is  the  extremely  serious  offence
      committed by the appellant, the lengthy conviction he received despite
      a guilty plea and his appalling immigration history and abuse  of  the
      laws of this country both before his return/removal to Jamaica and his
      illegal return. On the  other  are  the  strong  family  ties  he  has
      established with his wife, her daughter and his own two children  from
      a previous relationship and the other  aspects  of  his  private  life
      including the time that has passed since his conviction.  The  balance
      that is to be struck between the two competing sides is a  matter  for
      the Tribunal. In this case, the panel came down on  the  side  of  the
      respondent, against the appellant. The question I must now address  is
      whether that decision contains any errors of law.

  10.       Had it not been the case that the panel had fully  accepted  all
      the oral and documentary evidence argued for  the  appellant  and  his
      family, the appellant would have had a better case for criticising the
      decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  this  case,  however,  the
      Tribunal commenced its findings on the premise that the case  for  the
      appellant, as presented, both by way of the extensive  oral  testimony
      and the documentary evidence, was unchallenged and therefore accepted.
       The core of that case consisted of the very factors that  Dr  Chirico
      states the panel failed to  engage  with.  Having  accepted  that  the
      appellant's case was that he had strong family  ties,  that  the  best
      interests of his two minor children and those of  his  wife's  teenage
      daughter were for the status quo to remain as  it  was,  that  he  had
      remained out of trouble since his release from prison and that he  had
      been brave in giving testimony against his attacker, there was no need
      for the panel to then make "findings" on the very facts  that  it  had
      accepted.

  11.       Having read the determination as a whole and  having  regard  to
      the context in which the decision was reached, it is  plain  that  the
      Tribunal took the view that notwithstanding  all  the  strong  factors
      argued on the appellant's behalf, the  public  interest  required  his
      deportation.  Given  the  seriousness  of  the  offence,  the  lengthy
      sentence and the appellant's other adverse behaviour over a  prolonged
      period, this was a decision the Tribunal was  entitled  to  reach.  In
      some cases, a family split is justifiable and  unfortunately  for  the
      appellant and his family, this is one such case.

Decision

  12.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make  any  errors  of  law.  The
      decision to dismiss the deportation appeal is upheld.


      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      4 March 2014.


