
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01754/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 August 2016                          |On 30 May 2017                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MACIEJ MATUSIAK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S McTaggart, instructed by O'Neill Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department.  I shall refer herein to Mr Matusiak as the  claimant.



 2. The claimant is a citizen of Poland, born 14 February 1982, who arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 27 September 2007.





The claimant's criminal convictions

 3. Since his arrival in the UK the  claimant  has  been  convicted  of  51
    offences, the first being on 28 February  2008  for  possession  of  an
    article with a blade, for which he received  a  fine.   The  claimant's
    first sentence of imprisonment was as a consequence of a conviction  on
    13 October 2009 for assault occasioning actual bodily harm,  which  led
    to the imposition of a term of seven  months'  imprisonment.  This  was
    followed in August 2010 with a conviction on two counts  of  theft  and
    one count of going equipped for theft, which led to sentences of  three
    months' imprisonment and one-month imprisonment,  respectively  -  each
    suspended for one year.

 4. On 29 July 2011 the claimant was sentenced to a further  three  months'
    imprisonment for assault  occasioning  actual  bodily  harm,  one-month
    imprisonment for assault on a police officer and  a  further  one-month
    imprisonment for resisting arrest - each sentence being concurrent.  On
    12 August 2011 the claimant was sentenced to two  months'  imprisonment
    on  two  counts  of  breaching  a   probation   order   and   one-month
    imprisonment, to be served concurrently, on two counts of  theft.  This
    was followed just seven days later by a sentence of a further one-month
    of imprisonment for disorderly behaviour and two months' imprisonment -
    to be served consecutively - for theft.  Just three days thereafter the
    claimant was sentenced to four months' imprisonment for going  equipped
    for  theft,  three  months'  imprisonment  for  theft,  three   months'
    imprisonment  for  breaching  a  suspended  sentence,   and   one-month
    imprisonment for three  further  instances  of  breaching  a  suspended
    sentence.  Just over two weeks later, on 9 September 2011, the claimant
    was sentenced to another two months' imprisonment for theft  and  on  4
    November 2011 he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for common
    assault, a further three months' imprisonment for a  second  charge  of
    common assault and  two  months'  imprisonment  for  a  conviction  for
    criminal damage, each of which were suspended for two years.

 5. On 20 April 2012 the claimant was sentenced to six months' imprisonment
    for theft, again suspended for two years, and he was also on  the  same
    occasion convicted of attempted criminal damage  and  wrongly  entering
    premises, which led to a community service sentence. This sentence  was
    later  breached,  which  led  to  the  imposition  of  a  fine  in  the
    alternative.  On 7 September 2012  the  claimant  was  sentenced  to  a
    further two months' imprisonment for theft, a sentence which  was  also
    suspended for two years. Thereafter the claimant was sentenced to  four
    months' imprisonment for theft on 18  December  2012,  which  was  once
    again suspended (on this occasion for one year and six months).

 6. Moving on to 2013. In January the claimant was convicted for  theft  on
    two separate occasions, receiving a fine on each. On  3  May  2013  the
    claimant was fined for assaulting a police officer, as  well  as  being
    sentenced to three months' imprisonment  for  resisting  police,  three
    months' imprisonment on each of two instances of breaching a  suspended
    sentence, and a further two months' imprisonment for another breach  of
    a suspended sentence.  Just five days later he  received  fines  and  a
    driving disqualification for motoring offences.

 7. The claimant's last conviction  was  for  grievous  bodily  harm  on  6
    November 2011, for which he was sentenced to one year  of  imprisonment
    and one year and six months on licence.

 8. The claimant has also disclosed that he  had  a  conviction  in  Poland
    prior to coming to the United Kingdom, for drink driving.

SSHD's Decision

 9. In a document headed "Decision to make a Deportation  Order",  dated  2
    September 2014, the Secretary of State wrote to  the  claimant  in  the
    following terms:

         "On 6 November  2013  at  Belfast  Court,  you  were  convicted  of
         grievous bodily harm.  The Secretary of State  has  considered  the
         offence of which you have  been  convicted  and  your  conduct,  in
         accordance with regulation 21 of the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006.  She is satisfied that  you  would  pose  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  interests
         of public policy if you were to be allowed to remain in the  United
         Kingdom and that your deportation is justified under regulation 21.
          She has therefore  decided  under  regulation  19(3)(b)  that  you
         should be removed and an order made in accordance  with  regulation
         24(3), requiring you to leave the United  Kingdom  and  prohibiting
         you from re-entering while the order is in force.  For the  purpose
         of the order section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  will
         apply.

         The Secretary of State proposes to give directions for your removal
         to Poland, the country of which you are a national."

10. Accompanying this document was  a  lengthy  letter  of  the  same  date
    (running to fourteen pages), setting out the reasons why the  Secretary
    of State came  to  this  conclusion.  I  have  taken  full  account  of
    everything said therein.

The Tribunal proceedings thus far

11. The claimant appealed the abovementioned  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimes  on
    2 December 2014 and was  allowed  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary of State appealed this  decision
    with the permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade and the  matter
    came before Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on 12 June 2015.

12. In a decision of the same date (Appendix 1 hereto) Judge Kopieczek  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision. In summary he concluded  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had failed to take into  account  a  number  of
    relevant matters when determining that the  claimant  did  not  pose  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  Judge Kopieczek directed that the re-
    making of the decision be by the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the  matter
    came before me.



The Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006

13. Regulation 21, which is the provision of concern in the instant appeal,
    provides:
         "Decisions taken on public  policy,  public  security  and  public
    health grounds
       21.-(1) In this regulation  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
       decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or
       public health.
       (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.
       (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with
       a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except on serious
       grounds of public policy or public security.
       (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
       grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
       (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  at
       least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
       (b) is under  the  age  of  18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
       necessary in his best interests, as provided for in  the  Convention
       on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General  Assembly  of  the
       United Nations on 20th November 1989.
       (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
       or public security it shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
       preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance with
       the following principles-
       (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
       (b )the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct
       of the person concerned;
       (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned  must  represent  a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one  of
       the fundamental interests of society;
       (d) matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or  which
       relate to considerations of general prevention do  not  justify  the
       decision;
       (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do  not  in  themselves
       justify the decision.
       (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
       policy or public security in relation to a person who is resident in
       the  United  Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take  account   of
       considerations such as the age, state of health, family and economic
       situation of the person, the person's length  of  residence  in  the
       United Kingdom, the person's social and  cultural  integration  into
       the United Kingdom and the extent of the  person's  links  with  his
       country of origin..."



Evidence

Claimant's evidence

14. It is the claimant's evidence that he first came to the United  Kingdom
    on 29 September 2007 and that he has  remained  here  ever  since.   He
    arrived with his ex-wife and their son  (who  was  born  in  Poland  in
    February 2003).  In his written evidence (statement of 2 February 2015)
    the claimant asserts that he split up  from  his  wife  in  2009  as  a
    consequence of being sent to prison.  He and his ex-wife are  still  on
    amicable terms. He has had numerous  jobs  since  his  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom, which have  been  made  up  of  short  term  placements
    obtained through the assistance of an employment agency.  He worked  as
    a kitchen assistant during his most recent  period  of  detention.   He
    also completed ESOL classes in both HMP Maghaberry and HMP  Magilligan.



15. In paragraphs 7 and 8 of his statement of 2 December 2014 the  claimant
    asserts:

         "A lot of my offending has been alcohol related and I accept I have
         an ongoing issue in regards to this.  I have been sober for over  a
         year now and I wanted to do a course in  prison  called  Adept  but
         could not due to the lack of an  interpreter.  There  is  a  strict
         proposed term of my licence of no alcohol and that I would have  to
         attend AA meeting on a compulsory basis.  I know that if I breached
         my licence I would be returned to prison. I  know  that  if  I  did
         breach my licence and I was deported I would  effectively  lose  my
         son.

         My time in prison  on  this  occasion  has  been  a  very  salutary
         experience for me and being separated from my son was  particularly
         hard. I have been an enhanced prisoner on the PREPS scheme  at  the
         prison. This means that I have had positive reports from staff, not
         got into trouble, passed any drugs test as required  and  generally
         being well behaved during  my  time  there.  This  long  period  of
         custody has allowed me to focus ..."

16. The claimant continues by stating that he regrets his  offending,  that
    it has cost him his marriage and possibly his son.  He  maintains  that
    there is a genuine bond between  him,  his  son  and  his  ex-wife  and
    asserts that he wants to have a proper relationship with his son.   His
    son and ex-wife visited him in prison.

17. In a later statement of 29 November 2015  the  claimant  expresses  his
    apologies for his past offending, also stating that he wishes to make a
    better, sober, life for himself.  He further asserts that he  has  been
    employed full-time as a kitchen porter since 21 January 2015,  work  he
    enjoys.  He has been in regular contact with the PBNI, as  required  by
    his licence. The licence also required him  to  abstain  from  alcohol.
    His probation officer is very happy with his progress. He is a  changed
    man and he finally realises that alcohol has  cost  him  his  wife  and
    could cost him his son as well.  He refers to the close nature  of  the
    relationship he has with his son.

18. The claimant  also  gave  oral  evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    confirming that (i) his licence  expired  on  7  April  2016  (ii)  his
    probation officer was happy with his conduct during the course  of  the
    licence and (iii) he now has new employment, working  for  the  Morning
    Star, which he started on 15 June 2016.

19. In cross-examination the  claimant  indicated  that  (i)  he  left  his
    previous  employment  because  it  was  too  difficult  and   demanding
    physically; (ii) he has not drunk alcohol for over three  years;  (iii)
    he is not an alcoholic and has "got rid of that problem."

20. The claimant continued by stating that he  believes  that  all  of  his
    previous convictions had some relationship to this alcohol problem.  He
    did drink alcohol before the split with his wife, but he began drinking
    heavily after the split. The claimant further  disclosed  that  he  had
    been convicted of driving a car under the influence  of  alcohol  while
    living in Poland.

21. The claimant finally stated that he  is  aware  that  drinking  alcohol
    would cause significant problems in his life and it  is  his  intention
    never to drink alcohol again. He was afraid that if he  did,  he  would
    lose contact with his child.   He  recognises  that  his  son  needs  a
    father, and that drinking alcohol had caused him many problems  in  the
    past.

Other Witness Evidence

22. I also have before me an undated written statement from the  claimant's
    ex-wife, broadly concurring with the  claimant's  evidence  as  to  the
    circumstances of their relationship.  She confirms that their son lives
    with her and that  he  has  been  affected  by  the  claimant  drinking
    alcohol. The claimant saw his son once per week, or  every  few  weeks,
    prior to his most recent term of imprisonment.  She took their  son  to
    visit the claimant in prison, and he could not wait for the visits.  He
    loves talking to his father on the phone, and often says that he misses
    his father.

23. The claimant is now involved in their son's upbringing and has  a  good
    influence on him.  He takes care of their son at the weekends,  and  on
    occasion during the week.  She does not travel to  Poland  because  her
    whole family is now living in Belfast.   She believes that the claimant
    and their son have created a special bond.

24. The claimant's son also wrote a short letter for the assistance of  the
    court, which is once again undated.  In it he  states  that  he  really
    loves his father, that he goes to his father's  home  when  he  is  not
    working, his father gives him advice and plays with him. He cannot wait
    to visit his father. He is aware that his father used to drink  alcohol
    and did bad things and that he went to prison because of it. He is also
    aware of the possibility of his father moving to Poland and not  coming
    back. He wants his father here.  He believes his  father  to  be  good.
    When his father was in prison he promised him that if  he  got  out  he
    would stop drinking and would start working.

Other relevant evidence

25. The claimant's bundle also contains a copy of an educational psychology
    report authored by Carmel Rodgers, a qualified  psychologist,  relating
    to the claimant's child. An interview in this regard took place  on  21
    November 2014.

26. Miss Rodgers observes in relation to the claimant's child:

      i) There is a documented history of his  cognitive  ability.  He  does
         well in class and  shows  no  concern  of  social  behaviour  after
         contact with his father;

     ii) He presents as an interesting and initially reticent boy who  needs
         to be encouraged to give his opinions verbally;

    iii) He has no personality defects  or  psychological  disorder.  He  is
         securely attached to his mother and father and his maternal family.
          His psychological needs are met within this family structure;

     iv) There are  problems  with  slight  emotional  confusion  which  are
         primarily due to contact issues with his father and  how  they  are
         being handled. He speaks to his father by telephone most days.   He
         seems to have a strong, genuine, connections to his father;

      v) He may be  experiencing  some  underlying  anxiety,  which  is  not
         uncommon in children with separation anxiety.

27. I have also been provided two documents authored by The Probation Board
    for Northern Ireland ("PBNI").  The first is authored  by  a  probation
    officer based at HMB Magilligan and is dated 21 July 2014. It reads  as
    follows:

         "A risk  management  meeting  was  convened  in  November  2013  in
         relation to the index offence ... He was assessed  as  not  meeting
         the threshold for significant risk of serious  harm  to  others  as
         defined by the Criminal Justice (NI) Order 2008.    The  ...  Order
         2008 defines serious harm to be either 'death or  serious  personal
         injury, whether physical or psychological'.  However, it was  noted
         that if alcohol is involved  in  further  offending  following  his
         release, a risk management meeting should be called as a matter  of
         urgency.  ...  Regarding  his  ACE  assessment  the  likelihood  of
         reoffending is currently assessed as being high within the next two
         years. ...

         PBNI records highlight the concern in  relation  to  Mr  Matusiak's
         abuse of alcohol, which was a factor in the index offence.   During
         interview for the court report he stated that he was  confident  he
         could avoid future consumption of alcohol. In support  of  this  he
         advised that he cannot develops his personal  relationships  should
         he return to drinking, and he aspires to settle with his girlfriend
         and start a family.  Mr Matusiak  remains  confident  that  he  can
         achieve this goal. However this would need to be evidence  when  he
         returns to the community.

         In custody Mr Matusiak presents  as  willing  to  engage  with  his
         sentence plan and has attended multiple ESOL  classes  and  attends
         the gym. He has been on an enhanced regime since 21/08/13,  has  no
         adjudications,  and  all  residential  staff  reports   have   been
         positive.  To date he has passed two drug tests;  the  most  recent
         test was on 23/06/14. Whilst in HMB Maghaberry Mr Matusiak signed a
         disclaimer with AD-EPT on 21/2/14 due to the language barrier.  ...
         "

28. In the more recent report of 12 May 2016 it is observed that during the
    period of supervision the claimant attended  weekly  appointments  with
    the PBNI for the first  sixteen  weeks,  and  fortnightly  appointments
    thereafter.   His  attendance  was  punctual.   He   was   breathalysed
    intermittently at unannounced  dates  and  never  tested  positive  for
    alcohol.  He has employment at a city centre hotel, and has been  given
    increased responsibility there. He has regular ongoing contact with his
    son and appears to take his role as a parent seriously.   A  reasonable
    relationship has been established between the claimant and his  ex-wife
    for the purpose of securing their son's happiness and stability.

29. The report then significantly says as follows:

        "Throughout the licence Mr Matusiak has been challenged  to  address
         his alcohol dependency problem honestly.   He now accepts  that  he
         must maintain sobriety if he is to continue to  enjoy  his  current
         lifestyle. He states that he has abstained from alcohol  for  three
         years and has no wish to put his relationship with his son at risk.



         At the commencement of his sentence in November  2013  Mr  Matusiak
         was assessed as posing a high likelihood of reoffending. ...

         A risk management meeting held at PBNI headquarters on  5  November
         2013 discussed the nature of the index offence  and  other  violent
         convictions Mr Matusiak has accrued.  In the absence of  a  pattern
         of deliberate intent to cause harm to another person,  Mr  Matusiak
         is assessed as not presenting a significant risk of serious harm.

         At the expiry of his licence in April 2016  Mr  Matusiak  has  been
         assessed using a PBNI approved tool as posing a low  likelihood  of
         reoffending. This score  reflects  his  continued  abstinence  from
         alcohol, full-time employment, stable accommodation, a desire to be
         an active parent to his son and no further offending to date.

         Mr Matusiak has had time to reflect  on  the  changes  required  to
         secure a lifestyle free from further offending.  He appears  to  be
         addressing the areas initially targeted with substantial focus  and
         reflected  successful  completion  of  his  determinate   custodial
         sentence."

Discussion and Decision

30. It is not in dispute that the burden lies on the Secretary of State  to
    justify her decision to deport the claimant, and to show that it is  in
    accordance with the law (Straszewski v  Home  Secretary  [2016]  1  WLR
    1173: CA). It is also not in dispute that the claimant is  entitled  to
    only lowest level of protection afforded to EEA nationals i.e. the SSHD
    need only justify her decision on the grounds of public policy.

31. Save in exceptional circumstances the question of whether an individual
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  some
    aspect public policy is to be determined solely  by  reference  to  the
    conduct of the offender and the likelihood of re-offending. It  is  not
    said in this case that such exceptional circumstances exist  such  that
    considerations of public revulsion and deterrence are  to  be  factored
    in.

32. It is clear that if there is no real risk of reoffending then there  is
    no power to deport a national of another Member States on  the  grounds
    of public policy: SSHD v  Dumliauskas,  Wozniak  and  ME  (Netherlands)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 145 at [40]. It is to this aspect of the appeal that  I
    now turn.

33. The starting point in determining the level of the risk of the claimant
    re-offending is most recent assessment of such risk by  the  PBNI.  The
    operative parts of the two reports drawn up by PBNI in relation to  the
    instant claimant are set out above. I do not repeat them here, save  to
    re-iterate the key conclusions. The 2014 report identified there to  be
    a high likelihood of the claimant re-offending within the following two
    years. It also stated that the claimant  did  not  meet  the  statutory
    threshold for there being a significant risk of serious harm to others.



34. By May 2016 the PBNI's  outlook  for  the  claimant  had  significantly
    changed, for the reasons identified in its report.  At  this  time,  it
    was concluded that the claimant posed a low risk  of  re-offending  and
    did not present 'a significant risk of serious harm'.

35. Probation Officers are employed  by  the  public  sector  to  undertake
    assessments of the type identified above, and reports by the  Probation
    Service/PBNI are used throughout the criminal justice system. They  are
    specialists in their field and it is right that their  assessments  are
    to be accorded considerable weight. This is how I have approached  such
    evidence in my deliberations. Nevertheless, I must analyse  for  myself
    the level of risk of the claimant re-offending and the level of harm if
    he does so.

36. As disclosed above, the claimant has an  unenviable  criminal  history,
    with 51 convictions being accumulated  in  the  nine  years  since  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom. He has also disclosed  a  conviction  in
    Poland. The seriousness of these offences is reflected in the sentences
    handed down, a large number attracting a non-custodial sentence, but  a
    not insignificant number leading to sentences of  imprisonment,  albeit
    generally of short duration. The most recent of the claimant's offences
    is clearly the most serious - again reflected in the sentence handed to
    him.

37. The sheer number of offences is obviously a  weighty  consideration  in
    the assessment of the level of risk of the  claimant  re-offending.  He
    has not, though, committed a criminal offence since that for  which  he
    was convicted for in November 2013. Whilst  this  is  a  distinctive  a
    break in the  trend  created  by  the  claimant's  relentless  previous
    criminal behaviour, its relevance is tempered greatly by the fact  that
    he was in detention (either criminal or immigration) until January 2015
    and on licence until April 2016. He has also been under the spectre  of
    deportation since September 2014. There is no doubt that each of  these
    features is capable of operating on the claimant's mind  and  behaviour
    and therefore capable of distorting the  true  picture  of  his  likely
    behaviour absent such features. It is prudent to observe, though,  that
    the PBNI  plainly  had  such  matters  in  mind  when  it  reached  its
    assessment on the level of the claimant's risk of re-offending.

38. It is not in dispute that since shortly after his  release  in  January
    2015 the claimant has been in full  time  employment,  that  employment
    having recently changed in June 2016. His employers  identify  that  he
    has been reliable and hard-working. Such steady employment  was  not  a
    feature of the claimant's circumstances prior to  his  imprisonment  in
    November 2013.

39. A further and significant shift in  the  claimant's  circumstances,  as
    between those in existence in November 2013 and  those  that  currently
    present themselves, is found in the claimant's evidence that he has not
    drunk alcohol since his  detention  in  2013.  This  evidence  was  not
    discredited by Mr Matthews in cross-examination and it is supported  in
    part by the disclosure by the PBNI that it undertook unannounced breath
    tests on the claimant during the period of his licence, none  of  which
    showed a positive result. I accept  the  claimant's  evidence  in  this
    regard, reminding myself once again though that  this  period  includes
    his time detention, his time on licence and the period is he  has  been
    subject to deportation proceedings.

40. Whilst the claimant's assertion that he no longer has  a  problem  with
    alcohol does little to inspire confidence that he fully understands the
    addictive features of such, looking at the evidence as  a  whole  I  am
    persuaded that it is his genuine intention to  maintain  sobriety.  His
    key motivation in doing so is the potential loss of  contact  with  his
    son if he does not, whether as  a  consequence  of  being  deported  or
    through the actions of his ex-wife  in  preventing  such  contact.  The
    claimant's relationship with his son has deepened and I accept that  he
    fully understands that his criminal actions have not only impacted upon
    his immediate  victims  but  also  on  his  immediate  family  members,
    including his  son.  Thus  far  this  driver  has  provided  sufficient
    motivation to the claimant to prevent him  reacquainting  himself  with
    alcohol.

41. I also accept that the  claimant  has  a  desire  to  continue  in  his
    attempts to improve his relationship with  his  son,  and  to  take  an
    active role in his son's upbringing.  Furthermore,  I  accept  that  he
    fully understands that further criminal actions on his part will in all
    likelihood severe that relationship and, importantly, that there  is  a
    link between his alcohol consumption and his  criminal  behaviour  -  a
    link highlighted by the PBNI in both of the reports and also  reflected
    in the terms of the Determinate Custodial Sentence Licence.

42. Given the factual findings made above, in particular in relation to the
    claimant's circumstances since his release from  detention  in  January
    2015 and his intentions  for  future,  and  despite  his  extraordinary
    criminal history (including the numerous breaches of Court  orders  and
    sentencing requirements, and the escalation in the seriousness  of  his
    offending) as well as the existence  of  a  number  of  features  (also
    identified above) which clearly will only operate in the short term  to
    reduce the prospect of him re-offending, I find that there is no reason
    for me to go behind  the  conclusions  of  the  PBNI,  as  Mr  Matthews
    advocated I should do.  Indeed,  on  an  independent  analysis  of  the
    evidence I concur entirely with the conclusions  found  in  the  PBNI's
    report of May 2016 i.e. that the claimant presents a low  risk  of  re-
    offending and does not present a 'significant risk of serious harm'.

43. Looked at within the  framework  of  regulation  21  of  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations I find, looking at  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  that  the
    claimant does not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests   of   society.
    Consequently, his deportation is not justified.

44. For these reasons  the  claimant's  appeal  is  allowed.  However,  the
    claimant should be in no doubt that if he offends again his  claims  to
    be  reformed  will  have  been  shown  to  be   untruthful.   In   such
    circumstances it is difficult to see how he could  successfully  defend
    further attempts to deport him to Poland.

Decision

For the reasons given by UTJ Kopieczek in his decision of 12 June  2015  the
First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.

Upon the decision on appeal being re-made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  it  is
allowed.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

Date 1st August 2016

                                 APPENDIX 1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01754/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision & Directions         |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 12 June 2015                               |                              |
|Ex tempore judgment                           |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MACIEJ MATUSIAK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnyez, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S McTaggart, O'Neill Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State  but  for
    convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Thus, the appellant is  a  citizen  of  Poland  born  on  14
    February 1982.  He is said to have arrived in the UK  on  27  September
    2007.

 2. The basis upon which he finds himself before this Tribunal today  is  a
    decision made  by  the  respondent  on  2  September  2014  to  make  a
    deportation order against him, under the Immigration (European Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").  That decision was made
    following his having committed an offence of grievous bodily harm on  6
    November 2013, resulting in a sentence of one year's imprisonment, with
    one year and six months on licence. His appeal  against  that  decision
    came before First-tier Judge Grimes on  2  December  2014  whereby  she
    allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations and under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.

 3. The respondent challenges that decision on two grounds.  To  summarise,
    the first ground relates to the question of rehabilitation, relying  on
    the decision in Essa (EEA:  rehabilitation/  integration)  [2013]  UKUT
    00316 (IAC). The second grounds raises  the  question  of  whether  the
    First-tier judge was correct in her assessment of whether the appellant
    represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society  as  set  out  in
    regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations.

 4. The following is only a summary of the submissions made by the parties.
    Mr  Diwnyez  relied  on  the  grounds,  developed   further   in   oral
    submissions. Mr McTaggart relied on his very helpful skeleton  argument
    and again supplemented by his oral submissions.   Mr  Diwnyez  did  not
    advance any further argument on the question of rehabilitation,  beyond
    relying on the grounds.

 5. In terms of the second ground it is argued that first,  the  judge  had
    failed to provide adequate reasons for her conclusions in  relation  to
    the risk or threat that the appellant poses. In  particular,  the  fact
    that he may have avoided alcohol up until the time of the  hearing  was
    in a sense not particularly relevant  given  that  he  had  been  in  a
    controlled environment in detention and therefore had not had access to
    alcohol.  It should be noted that in  this  context  that  although  Mr
    McTaggart did at one stage submit that the appellant had been  on  home
    leave, on further enquiry he accepted that that was not the case and  I
    accept from him that that was just a simple error on his part.  He  did
    however, rely on an assessment which apparently said that the appellant
    was suitable for home leave.

 6. Returning then to the arguments advanced on behalf of  the  respondent,
    it is submitted that the  appellant  had  not  sought  to  address  his
    offending and simply being prohibited from consuming alcohol whilst  on
    licence does not detract from what is said to be a high  likelihood  of
    reoffending. That high likelihood of reoffending is an assessment  made
    in a letter dated 21 July 2014 from the Probation  Board  for  Northern
    Ireland ("PBNI"), to be found at Annex F in the respondent's bundle. It
    states as follows: "Regarding his  ACE  Assessment  the  likelihood  of
    reoffending is currently assessed as being high  within  the  next  two
    years." The reasons for that assessment are given.

 7. It is said on behalf of  the  respondent  that  the  appellant  has  an
    escalating pattern of reoffending and previous conditions placed on him
    have not proved any deterrent.  It is said also that the fact  that  he
    remains on licence with various conditions is  indicative  of  a  risk,
    rather than the contrary as suggested  by  the  First-tier  judge.  The
    number of convictions is relied on.   It  is  also  said  that  he  had
    breached two court orders.

 8. Arguments are also advanced  in  the  grounds  as  to  proportionality,
    although  those  arguments  were  not  a  particular  feature  of   the
    submissions relied on behalf  of  the  respondent,  but  not  expressly
    resiled from.

 9. Mr McTaggart referred in detail to the determination.  It is  submitted
    that the judge did  recognise  that  the  appellant  had  a  number  of
    previous convictions and  she  was  careful  to  balance  all  relevant
    factors.  There was a reference to the letter to which I have  referred
    from the PBNI and it was submitted that the judge was cognisant of that
    assessment.  She referred at [18] of the determination to what it  said
    on the appellant's behalf to  have  been  a  very  significant  factor,
    namely that he will be on licence until April 2016  and  liable  to  be
    recalled to prison if he breaches the terms of that licence. The First-
    tier Judge also referred to the fact that the supervising officer would
    be able to test him for alcohol and that this should alert the PBNI  to
    any increased risk which could,  if  appropriate,  lead  to  recall  to
    prison.

10. She concluded that "the licence will for now reduce  the  risk  of  the
    appellant reoffending."  It was also  submitted  that  the  judge  took
    account of the appellant's good prison record and the fact of  his  not
    having consumed alcohol as at the point of the determination.  She also
    took into account his  evidence  and  his  assertions  of  his  genuine
    commitment to refrain from both alcohol and offending.

11. As I indicated to the parties,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did err in law.  It is not necessary for me to determine
    the issue in respect of ground 1 because of my conclusions in  relation
    to ground 2. However, ground 1 may have to be revisited in  due  course
    on another occasion.

12. So far as ground 2 is concerned, it is correct to say  that  the  judge
    recognised at [15] that there had to be an assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant's  personal  conduct  represented  a  genuine,  present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society. However, it does seem to me that the judge failed  to  take
    into account  the  sheer  scale  of  the  appellant's  offending.   His
    offending is evident from the  decision  letter  and  indeed  from  the
    summary of his offending in the refusal letter.

13. In the decision letter his convictions are summarised at page  5.   The
    offences start in October 2009 and continue until November 2013.  There
    are a large number of convictions for a variety of offences and it does
    appear that there are at least two occasions on which he has failed  to
    comply with court orders.

14. Returning then to [15], although the judge recognised that whether  the
    appellant represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat etc, was an issue that needed to  be  determined,  she  divorced
    that issue from the fact of the number of his convictions, because  she
    went on to say that she must also be satisfied that he represents  such
    a threat, and there was then the later assessment of that issue.

15. At [18] it seems to me that she did not actually  assess  the  risk  of
    reoffending.  What she regarded as a significant matter in relation  to
    his licence does not assess the risk. Indeed, I consider that there  is
    some force in the submission made on behalf of the  respondent  to  the
    effect that the fact of his being on licence to some  degree  indicates
    that there is such a risk.

16. I return to the PBNI report which states that the appellant is assessed
    as being a high risk of reoffending within the next two years.   It  is
    precisely for that reason that the conditions are put in  place  during
    his release.  At the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    he had not in fact  been  released  and  that  is  significant,  in  my
    judgement, because on page 2 of the PBNI  letter  it  states  that  the
    appellant remains confident that he can achieve the goal (of abstinence
    from alcohol) but this would need to be evidenced when  he  returns  to
    the community.

17. At the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal he had not in
    fact returned to the community and at [18] of the  determination  there
    is no assessment of risk, only an assessment of what happens if he does
    return to alcohol. There is then a reference to what could be  said  to
    be a reduction of risk but that reduction  starts  from  a  high  base,
    being the risk as  set  out  in  the  PBNI  letter.  There  is  in  the
    determination no assessment of what the actual present risk was on  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In those circumstances, I  am  satisfied  that  where  at  [19]  it  is
    determined that the  appellant  does  not  currently  pose  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society, the judge erred in law. There  was  a
    failure to take into account factors to which I have referred  and  her
    assessment is incomplete.  It  is  incomplete  because,  amongst  other
    things, it fails to take into account the breaches of court orders, the
    scale of his offending and the other issues I have identified. It  also
    fails to take into account the period of time over which the  appellant
    has been offending.

19. The error of law is such as to require the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be set aside, and I do so.  It is not appropriate  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  further  hearing,
    in the light of paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement of 10  February
    2010.The re-making of  the  decision  will  take  place  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

20. The Directions below reflect those given orally at  the  hearing,  with
    the addition of a direction as to preserved findings.

                               DIRECTIONS

    1.   Any further evidence to be relied on by either party must be filed
        and served no later than 14 days before the next date of hearing.

    2.   In respect of any witness whom it is proposed to call to give oral
        evidence, there must be a witness  statement  drawn  in  sufficient
        detail to stand as evidence-in-chief such that  there  will  be  no
        need for further examination-in-chief.

    3.   Evidence must be filed and  served  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
        within the above timescale  of  the  appellant's  progress  in  the
        community on licence.

    4.   The parties must be in a position on the next date of  hearing  to
        make submissions on the question of integration.

    5.   The findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal  are  to  be
        preserved, except as infected by the error of law.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            8/07/15

