

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
DA/01775/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Determination Promulgated        |
|on 8 January 2016                        | On 6 July 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WIKELEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                         Appellant
                                     And

                                   OAO
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                              Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr P Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms E Greenwood of Counsel instructed by G Singh
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   Introduction


     1. In this appeal the Secretary of State appeals against the  decision
        of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Beach) promulgated on 18 February
        2015. The First-tier Tribunal had allowed  the  appeal  by  Mr  OAO
        (hereafter simply "OAO") against the Secretary of State's  decision
        taken on 28 August 2014 to deport him from the United Kingdom (UK).




     2. In summary OAO, who is a citizen of Nigeria, had been convicted  of
        several offences of benefit fraud and had  been  sentenced  to  two
        years' imprisonment in December 2010. OAO  is  currently  the  sole
        carer of his son J, a British citizen now aged 15.  The  First-tier
        Tribunal allowed OAO's  appeal  against  the  deportation  decision
        having found that he satisfied the requirements of Paragraph 399 of
        the Immigration Rules ("the Rules"). In particular, the  First-tier
        Tribunal concluded "it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
        remain in the UK without the person who is to be  deported"  within
        limb (b) of Paragraph 399(a)(ii).

     3. We held a hearing on 6 November 2015 at which  we  ruled  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal's decision had involved an  error  of  law.  We
        concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to  apply  the
        correct legal test under Paragraph  399  and  had  also  failed  to
        provide  adequate  reasons  for  its  decision.  We  made   further
        directions for a resumed hearing which took place before the  Upper
        Tribunal on 8 January 2016.

     4. Having set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  we
        substitute a fresh decision, namely to dismiss OAO's appeal against
        the deportation order.

     5. This appeal also raises an important point of construction relating
        to the meaning of the expression "unduly harsh" in Paragraph 399 of
        the Rules (in effect from 28 July 2014,  Statement  of  Changes  in
        Immigration Rules, HC 395 as amended by HC 532). In addressing this
        question of interpretation we consider the difference  of  approach
        as between the Upper Tribunal's decisions in MAB (para 399; "unduly
        harsh" USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) and KMO (section  117  -  unduly
        harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC).

     6. The legal issue raised by those decisions, in short, is whether the
        assessment  under  Paragraph  399  as  to  the  impact   of   OAO's
        deportation on the child is to be informed by  the  seriousness  of
        the offence committed by the foreign criminal  facing  deportation,
        or whether the assessment is focussed solely on the impact  on  the
        innocent family member (here J), without regard to the  gravity  of
        the offence giving rise to the deportation order.


     7. The decision was made in principle shortly after the  hearing.  The
        delay in this matter has been occasioned by the knowledge that  the
        Court of Appeal were to hear appeals against  the  two  conflicting
        Upper Tribunal decisions in MAB and KMO. That has now occurred  and
        judgment handed down with neutral citation MM (Uganda)  and  anr  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450.

      The background facts

     8. OAO was born in Nigeria in 1964. He came to the UK in August  1986.
        He has what  the  First-tier  Tribunal  rightly  described  as  "an
        appalling immigration history" (at  [54])  -  it  is  said  he  was
        initially given 6 months leave to  enter  as  a  visitor,  although
        there is no proof of this. He has subsequently remained in  the  UK
        without leave and, as the First-tier Tribunal found, "has made very
        little effort to regularise his status in the UK until  deportation
        proceedings were commenced" (at [54]).

     9. OAO married a British national in 1989 and they have five  children
        - an older son (D) and three daughters, all now aged in their  20s,
        and a younger son  (J),  who  is  15.  All  five  children  are  UK
        citizens. The couple separated in 2009, the children remaining with
        their father, and divorced in 2013.

    10. On 15 December 2010 OAO was convicted at Basildon  Crown  Court  of
        six counts of making dishonest representations  to  obtain  benefit
        and two counts of producing/furnishing false documents/information.
        He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for each offence to run
        concurrently. HH Judge Lodge, in his terse but  pointed  sentencing
        remarks, described OAO as "a man who is dishonest to the core". The
        Judge noted that OAO had embarked "on a course of conduct involving
        creating a wholly  fictitious  claim  for  benefit  to  profit  for
        yourself, and you maintained that over a number of  years.  Nothing
        other than a substantial custodial sentence  is  appropriate."  The
        Judge continued "I take the  view  this  is  an  offence  which  is
        fraudulent from the outset, professionally planned,  and  continued
        over a period of time, involving multiple frauds", including  using
        the identities of other people.

    11. OAO was actually in prison for 7 months until late July 2011,  when
        he was released early for good behaviour, with the remainder of the
        term being served on licence. During  his  period  of  imprisonment
        OAO's older son D (then 21) cared for J (then aged  10)  with  help
        from the other siblings and OAO's friends.

    12. On 16 June 2014 OAO was  convicted  at  Isleworth  Crown  Court  of
        possession/control  of  identity  documents  with  intent  and  was
        sentenced to a community order  and  a  curfew  requirement  for  4
        months with electronic tagging.

    13. The relevant chronology in this appeal, taking it  forward  to  the
        Upper Tribunal final hearing, can thus be summarised as follows:


        |Date             |Events                                            |
|10 October 1964  |Claimant's date of birth                          |
|August 1986      |Claimant arrives in UK from Lagos and is          |
|                 |(apparently) granted 6 months leave to enter as a |
|                 |visitor                                           |
|August 1989      |Claimant marries R, a UK national                 |
|November 1989    |Claimant's son D born (now 26)                    |
|June 1991        |Claimant's daughter Da born (now 25)              |
|June 1993        |Claimant's daughter R born (now 23)               |
|September 1994   |Claimant's daughter E born (now 21)               |
|May 2000         |Claimant's son J born (now 16)                    |
|2009             |Claimant and his wife separate                    |
|15 December 2010 |Claimant sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment for   |
|                 |benefit fraud                                     |
|29 July 2011     |Claimant released from prison                     |
|January 2013     |Claimant and wife divorced                        |
|21 October 2013  |Claimant served with deportation order (later     |
|                 |withdrawn)                                        |
|16 June 2014     |Claimant sentenced to community order for further |
|                 |offence                                           |
|30 August 2014   |Claimant served with deportation order            |
|13 January 2015  |First-tier Tribunal hears and allows deportation  |
|                 |appeal                                            |
|16 March 2015    |First-tier Tribunal refuses Secretary of State's  |
|                 |application for permission to appeal              |
|11 June 2015     |Upper Tribunal Judge Storey grants Secretary of   |
|                 |State's renewed application for permission to     |
|                 |appeal                                            |
|6 November 2015  |Upper Tribunal error of law hearing               |
|8 January 2016   |Upper Tribunal resumed hearing                    |

      OAO's Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    14. As noted at [2] above, following the hearing  on  13  January  2015
        OAO's appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  successful.  The
        First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  conclusion  was  summarised  in  the
        following terms:

             "62.  This  is  a  very  finely  balanced   case   given   the
             circumstances of the Appellant and the somewhat  narrow  issue
             before me. However, I find that  the  effect  on  J  of  being
             deprived of a proper parental  relationship  with  his  father
             just outweighs the public interest in deporting the  Appellant
             from the UK. I therefore find that it would  be  unduly  harsh
             for J to remain in the UK without the Appellant."

      The Secretary of State's Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    15. On 16 March 2015 Judge Pooler of the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused
        the Secretary of State's  application  for  permission  to  appeal,
        ruling that Judge Beach's decision was one that was open to her  on
        the evidence and there was no material misdirection of law.

    16. On 11 June 2015 Judge  Storey  granted  the  Secretary  of  State's
        renewed application, concluding that it was arguable the First-tier
        Tribunal had applied the wrong legal test and that  its  assessment
        of Article 8 both within and outside  the  Rules  was  contrary  to
        established case law principles.

    17. As noted at [3] above, on 6 November 2015 we found  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's decision to involve an error of  law.  Thus  the  appeal
        came before us in the Upper Tribunal at  a  renewed  hearing  on  8
        January 2016.

   Summary of the parties' submissions

    18. Mr Duffy, on behalf of the Secretary of State, points out that  OAO
        falls squarely within the terms of section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
        Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") as someone against whom the Secretary  of
        State must make a deportation order.  The  question  therefore,  he
        submits, is whether if J had to live  with  one  or  other  of  his
        siblings (or his mother) that would be  unduly  harsh  on  J,  when
        weighed against that very strong public interest in deportation. Mr
        Duffy further invited us to follow the reasoning in KMO  over  that
        in MAB, not least as the former is  consistent  with  the  relevant
        guidance in the  Immigration  directorate  instructions  (IDI).  Mr
        Duffy further submitted that while J would obviously prefer to stay
        with his father, and the adult siblings would obviously prefer  not
        to have the burden of caring for a 15 year old, that did  not  make
        the situation harsh, let alone unduly so, given the wider  context.
        Mr Duffy further argued that if we were unwilling to make a finding
        of fact that one of the siblings would care for J, J's mother still
        has parental responsibility for him although she lives  apart  from
        OAO and J. If the siblings did not assist, she would have  to  step
        in and resume care of J, which could not be "unduly harsh" on  him.
        Finally,  Mr  Duffy  submitted  there  were  no  "very   compelling
        circumstances" over and beyond Paragraphs 399  or  399A  such  that
        deportation should not be ordered.

    19. Ms Greenwood, on behalf of OAO, maintained the central and original
        ground  of  appeal,  namely  that  deportation  would  not  be   in
        accordance with Paragraph 399 of the Rules and that it would  be  a
        breach of OAO's rights under Article 8 ECHR. Her detailed  skeleton
        argument and oral submissions set out the relevant facts and  legal
        provisions. As regards the  point  of  construction  at  stake,  Ms
        Greenwood asked us to follow the reasoning in MAB in preference  to
        that in KMO, as official guidance cannot as a matter of law dictate
        the meaning of ordinary words. Her primary argument as to the facts
        was that the impact of OAO's deportation  on  J  would  necessarily
        involve undue hardship for J, given the strength of the  father-son
        bond and J's present needs. She further argued  that  the  evidence
        showed that if OAO were deported, J would not be cared for  by  any
        of his siblings or  his  mother.  In  support  of  OAO's  case,  Ms
        Greenwood called OAO himself to give evidence as well as Mr A, Da's
        partner; both had also made witness statements. We refer  to  their
        evidence further below. If these arguments did not find favour,  Ms
        Greenwood contended that there were very  compelling  circumstances
        (namely the interference with the private life of  J,  E  and  OAO)
        which outweighed the public interest in deportation in  this  case.
        She therefore asked us to reach the same decision as the First-tier
        Tribunal, namely to allow OAO's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
        State's deportation order.

   The legal framework

    20. The 2007 Act makes provision for the automatic deportation  of  any
        individual who is a "foreign criminal", i.e. someone who is  not  a
        British citizen, is convicted in the UK of an offence and  (in  the
        terms of 'Condition 1') is sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
        at least 12 months (see section 32(1)). OAO in  this  case  plainly
        fits that definition. Furthermore, section 32(5) mandates that "the
        Secretary of State must make a deportation order in  respect  of  a
        foreign criminal". This statutory requirement is subject to certain
        exceptions as set out in section 33. The only such provision  which
        may be in play in the present case is 'Exception 1', which  applies
        "where  removal  of  the  foreign  criminal  in  pursuance  of  the
        deportation order would breach (a) a  person's  Convention  rights"
        (section 33(2)(a)). Those rights, as protected by the Human  Rights
        Act  1998,  obviously  include  the  right  to   respect   for   an
        individual's  "private  and  family  life"  under  Art.  8.  It  is
        axiomatic that interference with that right may be justified if  it
        is in accordance  with  the  law,  for  a  legitimate  aim  and  is
        proportionate (see Art. 8(2)).

    21. Paragraphs 396-400 of the Rules, as first inserted with effect from
        9 July 2012 and as amended with effect from 28 July 2014,  set  out
        the weight to be given to the public interest in deportation  where
        an Art. 8 claim is made. Paragraph 396 is the starting  point,  and
        reinforces section 32(5) of the 2007 Act:

             "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall
             be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the
             public interest to deport where the Secretary  of  State  must
             make a deportation order in accordance with Section 32 of  the
             UK Borders Act 2007."

    22. Paragraph 397 in turn reinforces the exception  in  section  33(2),
        stipulating that  "a deportation order will  not  be  made  if  the
        person's removal pursuant to the order would  be  contrary  to  the
        UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention or the  Human  Rights
        Convention". Paragraph A398 then defines the scope  of  application
        of the rules governing deportation and Art. 8.

    23. Paragraph 398 provides as follows:
             "Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and
                  (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive
                  to the public good and in the public interest because they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
                  (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive
                  to the public good and in the public interest because they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or
                  (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive
                  to the public good and in the public interest because,  in
                  the view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has
                  caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender  who
                  shows a particular disregard for the law,
             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

    24. There is no suggestion in this case that Paragraph 399A applies, as
        that requires that the individual in question  has  been  "lawfully
        resident in the UK for most of his life", which is plainly not  the
        case for OAO.

    25. Accordingly the question for us is whether  Paragraph  399  applies
        and, if not, whether there are "very compelling circumstances" over
        and  above  those  matters  such  that  the  public   interest   in
        deportation is outweighed.

    26. Paragraph 399(b) applies where the person liable to deportation has
        a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  partner  who  is  a
        British citizen or  settled  in  the  UK.  It  accordingly  is  not
        relevant on the  present  facts.  Paragraph  399(a)  applies  where
        children are concerned:
             "399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)
         applies if -
             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
             the UK, and
                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                  (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                  immigration decision; and in either case
                      (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                      the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and
                      (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to be deported".

    27. We interpose that it is not in dispute that OAO has a "genuine  and
        subsisting parental relationship" with J  and  also  that  J  is  a
        British citizen, so Paragraph 399(a)(i) is satisfied. There is,  in
        addition, no suggestion that J either would or should  relocate  to
        Nigeria. The primary question for us,  therefore,  is  whether  "it
        would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the
        person who is to be deported" within  the  terms  of  limb  (b)  of
        Paragraph 399(a)(i).

    28. There is one remaining important aspect of the legal  framework  we
        must mention. Section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  entitled
        "Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations", inserted a
        new  Part  5A  (comprising  new  sections   117A-117D)   into   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act".  The
        scope of the new provisions is defined by section 117A:

             "117A   Application of this Part

             (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
                  (a) breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and
                  (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.
             (2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
                  (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in  section
             117B, and
                  (b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of   foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.
             (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2)."

    29. In accordance with section 117A(2)(a), section 117B thus sets out a
        number of generally applicable public interest considerations which
        potentially apply in all cases. We do not set it out here  in  full
        as it was not suggested that the  outcome  of  the  present  appeal
        turned to any material extent on those provisions.

    30. In accordance with section 117A(2)(b), section  117C   provides  as
        follows:

             "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.
             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.
             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.
             (4) Exception 1 applies where-
                  (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
                  most of C's life,
                  (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the  United
                  Kingdom, and
                  (c) there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.
             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.
             (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.
             (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

    31. The definition of the term "foreign criminal" is  to  be  found  in
        section 117D(2) and for present purposes is the same as that to  be
        found in section 32(1) of the 2007 Act.  It  therefore  encompasses
        OAO. As J is aged under 18, is a British citizen and has  lived  in
        the UK for a continuous period of seven years or more (indeed,  for
        all his life), he in turn is a "qualifying  child"  within  section
        117D(1) for the purpose of 'Exception 2' in section 117C(5).

    32. We have to give effect to both the new statutory regime set out  in
        Part 5A and to the provisions of the Rules as amended,  given  that
        we are re-making the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (YM  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  1292).
        The main focus of the submissions to us centred around  the  Rules,
        and especially Paragraph 399, so for convenience we start there.

   Discussion: "unduly harsh" and Paragraph 399 of the Rules

    33. We have identified the principal point of construction at issue  at
        [5] and [6] above as being  the  proper  approach  to  the  "unduly
        harsh" test in Paragraph 399(a) (although the context is different,
        there is no suggestion that as a matter of principle the expression
        means anything different when used in Paragraph 399(b)).  As  noted
        above, Ms Greenwood urged that  we  follow  MAB  whereas  Mr  Duffy
        invited us to follow KMO.

    34. The headnote to the decision in MAB by the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
        Tribunal Judge Grubb and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Phillips)
        reads as follows:
             1. The phrase "unduly harsh" in para 399  of  the  Rules  (and
             s.117C(5) of  the  2002  Act)  does  not  import  a  balancing
             exercise requiring the public interest to be  weighed  against
             the circumstances of the individual (whether child or  partner
             of the deportee). The focus is solely upon  an  evaluation  of
             the consequences and impact upon the individual concerned.

             2. Whether the consequences of  deportation  will  be  "unduly
             harsh" for an individual involves  more  than  "uncomfortable,
             inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome or merely  difficult  and
             challenging" consequences  and  imposes  a  considerably  more
             elevated or higher threshold.

             3. The consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if  they
             are "severe" or "bleak" and they will be "unduly" so  if  they
             are 'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into  account
             of all the circumstances of the individual.

             (MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]  UKUT
             223 (IAC) at [46] and BM and others (returnees - criminal  and
             non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 293 (IAC) at [109] applied.)

    35. However, the headnote to the decision  in  KMO  by  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Southern reads as follows:

             The Immigration Rules, when applied  in  the  context  of  the
             deportation of a foreign criminal, are a complete code.  Where
             an assessment is required to be made as to  whether  a  person
             meets the requirements of para 399 of the  Immigration  Rules,
             as that comprises an assessment of that person's  claim  under
             article 8 of the ECHR, it is  necessary  to  have  regard,  in
             making that assessment, to the matters to which  the  Tribunal
             must have regard as a consequence of the provisions of  s117C.
             In particular, those include that the more serious the offence
             committed, the greater is the public interest  in  deportation
             of a foreign criminal. Therefore, the  word  "unduly"  in  the
             phrase "unduly harsh" requires consideration  of  whether,  in
             the light of the seriousness of the offences committed by  the
             foreign criminal and the public interest  considerations  that
             come into play, the impact on the child, children  or  partner
             of the foreign criminal  being  deported  is  inordinately  or
             excessively harsh.

    36. For convenience in our decision - although  these  terms  were  not
        suggested by the advocates - we label MAB as  the  "subjective"  or
        "child-focussed"  approach  and   KMO   as   the   "objective"   or
        "polycentric" approach.

    37. Before considering the differences between those two approaches, it
        is important to note that  there  is  a  degree  of  common  ground
        between the two  previous  authorities,  as  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
        Southern recognised in KMO at para 26:
             "Although ... I respectfully depart from the approach advocated
             by the Tribunal in MAB I do adopt the other guidance offered by
             that decision:




                  '2.  Whether  the  consequences  of  deportation  will  be
                  "unduly  harsh"  for  an  individual  involves  more  than
                  "uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable,  unwelcome  or
                  merely difficult and challenging" consequences and imposes
                  a considerably more elevated or higher threshold.




                  3. The consequences for an individual will be  "harsh"  if
                  they are "severe" or "bleak" and they will be "unduly"  so
                  if they are "inordinately" or "excessively"  harsh  taking
                  into account all of the circumstances of the individual.'


             Although  I  would  add,  of  course,   that   'all   of   the
             circumstances' includes the criminal  history  of  the  person
             facing deportation."

    38. For the avoidance of doubt, and putting to one side for the  moment
        the question of the precise scope of the circumstances to be  taken
        into account, we also agree with the summary in paras 2  and  3  of
        the headnote to MAB, as approved in KMO, which reflects  the  plain
        meaning of the language used in both the  primary  legislation  and
        the Rules.

    39. At this stage, however, we should also make it clear that we do not
        follow KMO in preference to  MAB  simply  on  the  basis  that  the
        former's approach is  consistent  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
        published guidance in the IDI, as Mr Duffy sought to  persuade  us.
        To that extent we agree with Ms  Greenwood's  submission  that  the
        Home  Office  guidance  cannot  be  determinative  in  matters   of
        interpretation (see also MAB at paras 67-70 and KMO at para 25).

    40. We now turn to  consider  the  divergence  between  the  approaches
        adopted in MAB and KMO  respectively.  But,  before  doing  so,  we
        should refer to the decision of the Chamber President (McCloskey  J
        and Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins) in  MK  (section  55  -  Tribunal
        options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC), an authority  relied
        on in both MAB and KMO (albeit to different ends).

    41. MK was  not  actually  a  case  in  which  Paragraph  399  featured
        prominently at all. The appellant, who had been sentenced  to  five
        years' imprisonment in 2002 for robbery  and  other  offences,  had
        'turned his life round' on release from custody, only to be  served
        with a deportation order in 2013. Given the length of his sentence,
        he fell within the terms of  Paragraph  398(a)  and  so  could  not
        directly invoke Paragraph 399. It followed his  appeal  could  only
        succeed if there were "very compelling circumstances over and above
        those described in paragraphs 399 and  399A".   On  appeal  to  the
        Upper Tribunal, the two central issues  were  (i)  the  nature  and
        import of the two-fold  statutory  duties  in  section  55  of  the
        Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration;  and  (ii)  the  powers  of
        Tribunals,  and  the  relevant  considerations  to  be  taken  into
        account, in deciding  whether  or  not  to  remit  such  cases  for
        reconsideration and fresh decision. This much is evident  from  the
        headnote to the Upper Tribunal's decision, which makes no reference
        to Paragraph 399 or indeed to the "unduly harsh" test. However,  in
        proceeding to redetermine the original appeal, the  President  made
        observations on the application of the "unduly harsh" test  to  the
        children in question on the facts of that case (see at paras  42(v)
        and 47).

    42. Both MAB and KMO were cases in which Paragraphs 398(b)  and  399(a)
        were directly in point. In MAB the appellant had been sentenced  to
        three years' imprisonment for sexual  offences  involving  children
        under the age of 13 and was served with a  deportation  order.  The
        First-tier Tribunal accepted that it would be "unduly harsh" within
        Paragraph 399(a) of the Rules for the  appellant's  three  children
        (aged 20, 17 and 13; no point was taken on the age of the eldest  -
        see para 76) to remain in the UK if he  were  deported.  The  Upper
        Tribunal held that the Judge below had erred in law by  failing  to
        give adequate reasons and  in  reaching  an  irrational  conclusion
        about the impact of  deportation  on  the  children.  The  Tribunal
        proceeded to  re-make  the  decision  in  question,  in  the  event
        dismissing the appeal against the deportation order.

    43. In KMO the appellant had been sentenced to 20 months'  imprisonment
        for  the  offence  of  conspiracy   to   dishonestly   make   false
        representations (in connection  with  planning  a  major  financial
        fraud: see para 36). The appellant had a 17-year-old  step-daughter
        and four younger children (aged 10, 6, 4 and 2). He was served with
        a deportation order. The First-tier Tribunal  allowed  his  appeal,
        finding  that  deportation   would   involve   a   disproportionate
        interference with Art 8 rights because the family would  be  broken
        up. The Upper Tribunal held that the Judge below had erred  in  law
        by, inter alia, failing to make any finding as to whether it  would
        be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without  their
        father. Again, as in MAB, the Tribunal  proceeded  to  re-make  the
        decision in question, dismissing the appeal against the deportation
        order.

    44. Thus both cases involved appellants whose criminality  fell  within
        the terms of Paragraph 398(b) - having resulted in  a  sentence  of
        imprisonment of more than 12 months but less than  four  years.  In
        both cases therefore Paragraph 399(a) fell  to  be  considered.  In
        both cases the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeals, but in both
        instances the Secretary of State's further  appeals  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal were successful, both on the law and as to the merits. The
        practical outcomes of  the  two  cases  were  thus  the  same.  The
        difference lies in the legal approach by which the  Upper  Tribunal
        arrived at that outcome in each case.

    45. The Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  rejected  the  Secretary  of  State's
        submission that whether consequences were "unduly harsh" could only
        be determined by looking at the magnitude of  the  public  interest
        furthered by  the  individual's  deportation,  and  that  the  more
        serious the crime the greater must be the consequences for them  to
        be  properly  characterised  as  "unduly  harsh".  Rather,  as  the
        headnote accurately summarised at para 1:
             1. The phrase "unduly harsh" in para 399  of  the  Rules  (and
             s.117C(5) of  the  2002  Act)  does  not  import  a  balancing
             exercise requiring the public interest to be  weighed  against
             the circumstances of the individual (whether child or  partner
             of the deportee). The focus is solely upon  an  evaluation  of
             the consequences and impact upon the individual concerned.

    46. The Upper Tribunal in MAB advanced three main reasons for  arriving
        at this conclusion that a  subjective  or  child-focussed  approach
        applied. First,  this  reading  was  said  to  be  consistent  with
        existing authority, and especially the Chamber President's decision
        in MK (see para 40 above, and also McCloskey J's decision in BM and
        Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG  [2015]  UKUT
        293 (IAC); see MAB at paras 55-66). Second, it was said Part 5A  of
        the 2002 Act has no relevance to Stage 1 of the  assessment  ('does
        the claimant succeed under Paragraph 399  or  399A?');  rather,  it
        only becomes relevant at Stage 2, where the court  or  tribunal  is
        considering the issue of proportionality (see MAB at paras  48  and
        71). Third, the child-focussed approach, shorn of a wider balancing
        exercise, was consistent with the understanding of the term "unduly
        harsh" in refugee law, and it would not  be  prudent  to  have  two
        different approaches to the meaning of the very same phrase in  two
        immigration contexts (see MAB at para 73).

    47. In contrast the Upper Tribunal in  KMO  adopted  the  objective  or
        polycentric   approach,   taking   into   account   all    material
        considerations in the balancing exercise. The Tribunal's conclusion
        is summarised at para 24:
             "24. The Immigration Rules, when applied in the context of  the
             deportation of a foreign criminal, are a complete  code.  Where
             an assessment is required to be made as  to  whether  a  person
             meets the requirements of para 399 of the Immigration Rules, as
             that comprises an  assessment  of  that  person's  claim  under
             article 8 of the ECHR, it  is  necessary  to  have  regard,  in
             making that assessment, to the matters to  which  the  Tribunal
             must have regard as a consequence of the provisions  of  s117C.
             In particular, those include that the more serious the  offence
             committed, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             a foreign criminal. Therefore, the word "unduly" in the  phrase
             "unduly harsh" requires consideration of whether, in the  light
             of the seriousness of the offences  committed  by  the  foreign
             criminal and the public interest considerations that come  into
             play, the impact on the  child,  children  or  partner  of  the
             foreign criminal being deported is inordinately or  excessively
             harsh."





    48. The Upper Tribunal in KMO accordingly  respectfully  differed  from
        the view taken by the panel  in  MAB  (see  para  22).  As  regards
        existing authority, Upper Tribunal Judge Southern  considered  that
        the case law relied upon did not on  closer  scrutiny  support  the
        subjective or child-focussed approach (see KMO  at  para  21).  The
        Upper Tribunal in KMO also concluded that  the  two-stage  approach
        did not mean that the issue of proportionality only arose at  Stage
        2 (see paras 13-19). Finally, the position with regard  to  refugee
        law was distinguished on two grounds (at para 20).

    49. We consider that the Upper Tribunal in KMO was correct in  adopting
        what we have characterised as the objective or polycentric approach
        to the application of the "unduly harsh" test in Paragraph 399.  We
        do not find the Tribunal's analogy in  MAB  with  the  position  in
        refugee law persuasive for the reasons identified in KMO  (at  para
        20). The different contexts may mandate different approaches to the
        phrase "unduly harsh" and on this third point  we  cannot  usefully
        add to the reasons given in KMO. We  therefore  focus  in  our  own
        analysis on the other two main justifications advanced in  MAB  for
        adopting an exclusively child-focussed approach  to  the  statutory
        test.

    50. The first turns on the  significance  of  the  Chamber  President's
        decisions in MK and in  BM  and  Others.  Put  simply,  we  do  not
        consider that the passages cited from either decision can bear  the
        weight accorded to them in MAB.

    51. As we have noted above, MK was  a  Paragraph  398(a)  case,  not  a
        Paragraph 398(b) case. It followed that the appellant's  Article  8
        argument  could  only  exceed  if  there  were   "very   compelling
        circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
        399A" (emphasis added). MK was accordingly a clear Stage 2 case  in
        which proportionality and the balancing test was always going to be
        central to, and determinative of, the analysis. Any  discussion  of
        paragraph 399  was  necessarily  part  and  parcel  of  that  wider
        consideration, and so the Chamber President's observations  on  the
        meaning of "unduly harsh" must be considered in that wider context,
        rather than in splendid isolation.

    52. The Upper Tribunal in MAB placed considerable emphasis  (see  paras
        57-66) on para  46  of  the  decision  in  MK,  where  the  Chamber
        President opined as follows (the reference  to  the  two  questions
        posed in para 44(d) is a misprint for para 45(d), citing the  tests
        set out in limbs (a) and (b) respectively after para 399(a)(ii):
             "46. The determination of the two questions which we have posed
             in [44](d) above requires an evaluative assessment on the  part
             of the Tribunal. This is to be contrasted with a  fact  finding
             exercise. By way of self-direction, we are mindful that "unduly
             harsh"  does  not  equate  with  uncomfortable,   inconvenient,
             undesirable  or  merely   difficult.   Rather,   it   poses   a
             considerably more elevated threshold. "Harsh" in this  context,
             denotes something severe, or bleak. It  is  the  antithesis  of
             pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore,  the  addition  of  the
             adverb "unduly"  raises  an  already  elevated  standard  still
             higher. Approached in  this  way,  we  have  no  hesitation  in
             concluding that it would be unduly harsh for either of the  two
             seven  year  old  British  citizen  children  concerned  to  be
             abruptly uprooted from their United Kingdom  life  setting  and
             lifestyle and  exiled  to  this  struggling,  impoverished  and
             plague stricken west African  state.  No  reasonable  or  right
             thinking person would consider this anything less than cruel."

    53. However, for the reasons above we agree with the view expressed  in
        KMO that the absence here of any reference to the  public  interest
        in deportation does not mean that the expression "unduly harsh"  in
        Paragraph 399(a) has to be read in  an  exclusively  child-focussed
        way. This is because in any event the public interest  was  "to  be
        factored into the assessment that  had  to  be  carried  out  under
        paragraph 398" (i.e. the "very compelling circumstances" test).

    54. The main focus of paragraph 46 of MK was  the  possibility  of  the
        child's return to Sierra Leone in the context  of  the  test  under
        limb  (a)  following  Paragraph  399(a)(ii).  On  the   alternative
        hypothesis under limb (b), where the appellant is deported but  the
        child remains, the Chamber President observed as follows at para 47
        (emphasis added):

             "47. The final question is whether it would be unduly harsh for
             either child to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
             Appellant. This is a different question from that considered in
             [46]  above.  We  have  identified  a  range   of   facts   and
             considerations bearing on this issue. Once again, an evaluative
             judgment on the part of the Tribunal is required. In performing
             this exercise we view everything in the  round.  The  Appellant
             plays an important role in the lives of both children concerned
             particularly that of his  step  son.  He  is  the  provider  of
             stability, security, emotional support and financial support to
             both children. We have rehearsed above the various benefits and
             advantages which he brings  to  the  lives  of  both  children,
             coupled with his personal  attributes  and  merits.  We  remind
             ourselves of section 55 of the 2009  Act.  We  acknowledge  the
             distinction between harsh and unduly harsh. We remind ourselves
             again of the potency of  the  main  public  interest  in  play,
             emphasised most recently by the Court of Appeal in  SSHD  v  MA
             (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ 1192.  The  outcome  of  our  careful
             reflections in this difficult and borderline  case  and  in  an
             exercise  bereft  of  bright  luminous  lines  is  as  follows.
             Balancing all of the facts and factors, our conclusion is  that
             the severity of the impact  on  the  children's  lives  of  the
             Appellant's abrupt exit with  all  that  would  flow  therefrom
             would be of such proportions as to be unduly harsh."

    55. The italicised phrases in this passage are all  consistent  with  a
        polycentric approach to the application of the "unduly harsh"  test
        in Paragraph 399, which requires  an  evaluation  of  all  relevant
        factors, and not simply those which are confined exclusively to  an
        evaluation of the consequences and impact for the child  concerned.
        If that were so, then the Chamber President's express reference  to
        "the potency of the main public interest in play" would necessarily
        have involved an error of law at this stage of the  analysis.  With
        respect, we find that it is not the case.

    56. Nor do we find that the Chamber President's decision in BM advances
        the argument for an  exclusively  child-focussed  approach  to  the
        "unduly harsh" test in  Paragraph  399(a).  BM  and  Others  was  a
        country guidance case about Article 3 claims in the context of  the
        risks faced by failed asylum seekers on being returned by the UK to
        the Democratic Republic  of  the  Congo  (DRC).  One  of  the  five
        appellants (BBM), who had been sentenced to a total of  16  months'
        imprisonment for offences relating to false identity documents, had
        a potential Article 8 claim. In the passage in question  the  Upper
        Tribunal was considering whether or not BBM's claim  could  succeed
        under 'Exception 2' in section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act. McClosky  J
        observed as follows (emphasis added):
             "109. Given the invocation of "Exception 2", we must assess the
             likely impact of the Appellant's deportation on his spouse.  In
             order for the exception to apply, the impact  must  qualify  as
             "unduly harsh". We consider that  this  does  not  equate  with
             uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome  or  merely
             difficult and challenging. Rather, it poses a considerably more
             elevated threshold. "Harsh", in this context, denotes something
             severe, or bleak, the antithesis of  pleasant  or  comfortable.
             Furthermore, the addition of  the  adverb  "unduly"  raises  an
             already elevated standard still  higher.  The  members  of  the
             family unit  in  question  are  but  two.  We  acknowledge  the
             likelihood of this changing in  the  very  near  future,  while
             adding  that  section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   an
             Immigration Act 2009 has no application to a child en ventre sa
             m�re."

    57. In our view the underlined passage sets out the definitive approach
        to the meaning of the phrase "unduly harsh", as was acknowledged in
        both MAB  and  KMO  (and,  for  that  matter,  in  this  decision).
        Paragraph 109 of BM and Others thus provides a helpful gloss on the
        meaning of "unduly harsh" but goes no further than  that.  It  does
        not  purport  to  seek  to  confine  the  assessment   of   whether
        consequences are "unduly harsh" by reference only to the impact  on
        the child (or partner) concerned.  Indeed, it  is  plain  from  the
        following paragraph of the Chamber President's  decision  that  the
        Upper Tribunal took into  account  all  factors  in  the  round  in
        deciding whether the "unduly harsh" test in Exception 2 (and so  by
        inference Paragraph 399(a)) as satisfied:

             "110. We accept that life will be very difficult for  a  young,
             single mother who will have the additional burden  of  grieving
             her husband's  departure  abroad  in  circumstances  where  the
             prospects of future reunification  are  unfavourable.  However,
             these  we  consider  to  be  typical  effects  of  a  husband's
             deportation and Parliament has decreed that cases of this  kind
             are insufficient to outweigh the public interest.  Furthermore,
             we take into account the availability of strong family  support
             to the Appellant's spouse, as we have found above. To  this  we
             add that she is a graduate who has evidently  been  in  regular
             employment and it is, therefore, predictable that she  will  be
             able to support herself and her child. We do not  overlook  the
             duration of this relationship or its various qualities, all  of
             which we have acknowledged above. However, our  conclusion  is,
             balancing all of  the  relevant  facts  and  factors  that  the
             statutory  public  interest  must  prevail  by  some   measure.
             Accordingly, this  Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR
             fails."

    58. The second principal reason relied upon in  MAB  for  adopting  the
        exclusively child-centred approach to the meaning of "unduly harsh"
        was the Tribunal's finding that Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  has  no
        relevance to Stage 1 of the assessment ('does the claimant  succeed
        under Paragraph 399 or 399A?') and only becomes relevant at Stage 2
        ('are there "very compelling circumstances" above and beyond  those
        itemised in Paragraphs 399 or 399A?').

    59. The Upper Tribunal in KMO, notably at para 13, disagreed with  that
        approach:

             "... If that  were  correct,  the  result  would  be  somewhat
             remarkable in that a clear presumption  enshrined  in  primary
             legislation would be displaced by an  immigration  rule.  That
             approach seeks to disregard  the  unambiguous  requirement  of
             s.117A(2) that in considering the  public  interest  question,
             the court or tribunal must (in  particular)  have  regard  to,
             inter alia, the statement of principle found in s117C(2)  that
             the more serious  the  offence,  the  greater  is  the  public
             interest in deportation."

    60. The Upper Tribunal in KMO went on to observe:




             "17. There  is  nothing  in  the  rules,  or  the  statute,  to
             eliminate  from  an  assessment  of  what  is  "unduly   harsh"
             considerations of the seriousness of the offence committed. Put
             another way, it is not at all difficult to see that what may be
             an unduly harsh consequence in the  context  of  a  person  who
             faces deportation because of imprisonment for 12 months for  an
             offence  that  does  not  involve  violence,  drugs  or  sexual
             connotations may not be unduly harsh in the case  of  a  person
             who,  by  reason  of  committing  such  an   offence,   plainly
             represents a serious risk to the public if allowed to remain."




    61. We are also conscious that the Upper Tribunal addressed the  inter-
        relationship between the Rules and Part 5A in  Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department v Bossade [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC), although
        the main focus there was Paragraph  399A.  This  decision  was  not
        cited in MAB, being promulgated on the very same day, and was  also
        not discussed in KMO  either.  Bossade  reiterated  the  two  stage
        approach that must be conducted in  deportation  cases.  The  first
        stage is to decide whether the claimant  meets  the  conditions  of
        e.g. Paragraphs 398 or 399. The second stage is the proportionality
        assessment, but both stages must take place within the Rules. There
        is no freestanding Article 8 assessment in deportation cases.

    62. We respectfully take the view that the divergence of views  between
        MAB and KMO on this point is a somewhat arid jurisprudential debate
        which (in many cases at least) may have  little  direct  impact  on
        outcomes. In doing so, we recognise, of course, in the  context  of
        deportation that the Rules represent a  complete  code  as  far  as
        Article 8 is concerned (see MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
        1192). But the Part 5A factors are plainly important matters  which
        we are required to take  into  account  in  making  such  decisions
        within the framework of the Rules. The point is rather  that  while
        Part 5A tells us what is in the public interest,  it  does  not  in
        terms tell us how  to  balance  that  public  interest  against  an
        individual's Article 8 rights. Even if the purist's  view,  as  set
        out in MAB is conceptually correct, we do not consider that it  can
        detract from the plain meaning of  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"  or
        alter the polycentric approach we have identified.

    63. As it is, we are  inclined  to  agree  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's
        analysis in KMO at paragraphs 8-19, for the reasons set out  there.
        The test in both section  117C(5)  and  Paragraph  399  is  plainly
        whether the impact of deportation on the  remaining  family  member
        (whether child or partner) would  be  "unduly  harsh",  not  simply
        "very harsh". In our judgment the word "unduly" emphasises that the
        impact of deportation on family members must be considered  in  the
        round including, amongst other relevant matters, the principle that
        the more serious the offence, the greater the  public  interest  in
        deportation. As the Upper Tribunal's in KMO  neatly  explained  (at
        para 14), "the public interest question inhabits para 399 and  399A
        just as surely as it does in para 398". To put it another  way,  we
        do not accept the view  that  "unduly  harsh"  represents  a  fixed
        threshold; it must be a variable benchmark - so, as  KMO  explains,
        what is "unduly harsh" for the family member of  a  shoplifter  may
        not be "unduly harsh" for the family member of a robber or rapist.

    64. In any event, we note that neither of  the  parties  in  this  case
        advanced arguments based on the more nuanced discussion in Bossade.
        Ms Greenwood proceeded  on  the  pragmatic  basis  that  we  should
        consider the Rules in the context of Part 5A and we do so.
    65. For all these reasons we agree with the Upper Tribunal in  KMO  and
        respectfully disagree with the decision in MAB  as  to  the  proper
        approach to the "unduly harsh" test as contained in section 117C(5)
        of the 2002 Act and Paragraph 399 of the Rules. We also  note  that
        the Court of Appeal allowed the Secretary of States  appeal  in  MM
        (Appeal allowed and remitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  further
        consideration)) and dismissed that of the appellant in KO:  (Appeal
        dismissed) finding that the decision in KMO sets  out  the  correct
        approach to be adopted in law. The Court stating:


        26.  For all these reasons in my judgment MAB was  wrongly  decided
             by the Tribunal.  The expression  "unduly  harsh"  in  section
             117C(5) and Rule 399(a) and (b) requires regard to be  had  to
             all the circumstances including the criminal's immigration and
             criminal history.



   Remaking the decision on appeal

   The legal framework

    66. The starting point is  that  OAO  satisfies  the  definition  of  a
        "foreign criminal" in section 32 of the 2007 Act. Accordingly,  the
        presumption is that he is subject to automatic  deportation  unless
        one of the exceptions apply (see also Paragraph 396 of the Rules).

    67. The only exception potentially applicable in the  present  case  is
        where OAO's removal under  a  deportation  order  would  breach  an
        individual's Convention rights ('Exception 1' in section  33(2)  of
        the 2007 Act; see also Paragraph 397)).  We  recognise  it  is  J's
        Convention rights, in particular his right to  family  life,  which
        are primarily in issue.

    68. In considering under the  Rules  whether  an  immigration  decision
        breaches any person's Article 8 rights (and so  would  be  unlawful
        under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998), and  in  considering
        the public interest question, i.e. whether  any  interference  with
        Article 8 rights is justified (under ECHR Article  8(2)),  we  must
        have regard to the factors enumerated in Part 5A of  the  2002  Act
        (see also Paragraph  A398).  In  short,  they  inform  but  do  not
        determine the balancing exercise  conducted  under  the  Rules.  We
        accept the need to consider article 8 aspects through the prism  of
        the Rules as the Rules relating to deportation are a complete code.

    69.  We  have  taken  into  account   the   general   public   interest
        considerations as set out in  section  117B  but  neither  advocate
        sought to persuade us that any of  the  matters  listed  there  was
        likely to be decisive in the circumstances of the present appeal.

    70.  We  also  acknowledge  Parliament's  categorical  and  unambiguous
        declaration that the deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the
        public interest, the more  so  according  to  the  gravity  of  the
        offence concerned (section 117C(1) and  (2)).  We  return  to  this
        issue later in our analysis. As OAO's sentence of imprisonment  did
        not exceed four years, the  public  interest  requires  deportation
        unless either 'Exception  1'  or  'Exception  2'  applies  (section
        117C(3)). There is no  suggestion  that  the  former  exception  is
        relevant.

    71. It follows that the central  issue  to  be  determined  is  whether
        Exception 2 in section 117C(5)  applies.  This  requires  that  the
        claimant [C] has "a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
        with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation  on  the
        ... child would be unduly harsh". This is echoed  by  the  parallel
        requirement in the Rules at Paragraph 399 that "it would be  unduly
        harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person  who  is
        to be deported". There is no issue over  the  other  conditions  in
        either section 117C(5) or Paragraph 399; the sole issue is  whether
        OAO's deportation would be "unduly harsh" for J.

    72. As already  noted,  we  also  recognise  that  in  the  context  of
        deportation the Rules represent a complete code (see MF (Nigeria) v
        SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192).

   The evidence

    73. We took into account all the documentary evidence on file. We refer
        to it further below in our findings of fact. At the outset  of  the
        hearing Ms Greenwood applied to have two further documents admitted
        into  evidence.  The  first  was  a   Recognition   of   Attainment
        certificate awarded to  J  by  his  school  in  December  2015  (in
        Business Studies). The second was J's timetable for  mock  Year  11
        examinations, which explained his absence from the hearing we held.
        Mr Duffy did not  object  to  either  and  they  were  admitted  in
        evidence.

    74. As previously noted, we heard oral evidence from both OAO and  from
        Mr A, the partner of Da, one of his  daughters  (i.e.  one  of  J's
        sisters).

    75. OAO confirmed the contents of his witness  statements,  subject  to
        one minor typographical error. He confirmed that two of  his  adult
        children (including his oldest son, who had looked after J when  he
        had been imprisoned) now lived in the USA. His oldest daughter  was
        working full-time in London and living  with  Mr  A.  His  youngest
        daughter was at University  in  Leicester,  and  was  returning  to
        London next year to take up a training contract. He said  that  J's
        progress at school and behaviour had been affected by the  prospect
        of his deportation, and that he had been  advised  to  conceal  his
        feelings about this so as not to upset J. As  a  result,  he  said,
        there had been some improvement in J's attitude to school.

    76. When questioned by Mr Duffy,  OAO's  attention  was  drawn  to  the
        apparent conflict between J's letter (in which he said he  saw  his
        mother only at Christmas) and his own statement,  when  he  said  J
        only spoke to her at Christmas.  OAO replied that perhaps J saw her
        when he himself was not around. He repeated that J's mother did not
        wish to participate in family life with J and his siblings and  the
        feeling was mutual. He said he did not stop J seeing his mother and
        that she sent J Christmas and birthday cards.

    77. Mr A also gave evidence. He explained that he was  the  partner  of
        one of OAO's daughters and that they shared a small  one-bed  flat.
        It would not be possible for them to look after J  and  he  himself
        had little contact with J.

   The parties' submissions

    78. Mr Duffy's submission was essentially that this was a family  which
        had pulled together to look after J when OAO had been imprisoned in
        2010/11 and the reality is that they would do the same in the event
        that OAO were deported. He argued that one or other or both of  the
        UK-based siblings would feel compelled to care for J for  the  rest
        of his minority. He accepted it would be difficult and inconvenient
        for the siblings, but that was not the test, which was whether  the
        impact would be  unduly  harsh  on  J.  Failing  that,  J's  mother
        retained parental responsibility. He suggested that there had  been
        some minimisation of the  extent  of  contact  between  J  and  his
        mother. Although J may not have as strong a relationship  with  his
        mother as his father, it could not be unduly harsh for  J  to  live
        with her. Mr Duffy noted that  the  sentence  of  imprisonment  was
        twice the threshold in the Rules, and so the test for  whether  the
        impact  of  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  was  accordingly
        heightened. Furthermore, there was no  scope  for  any  exceptional
        circumstances to come into play at the second stage of an Article 8
        consideration; the case was all about whether the impact was unduly
        harsh or not.

    79. Ms Greenwood's submission was that it would be unduly harsh  for  J
        to remain in the UK in OAO's absence. The reality was that OAO  had
        brought J  up  as  a  single  parent.  Their  father-son  bond  was
        exceptionally close; J  had  particular  needs,  supported  by  the
        school's evidence, and was at a critical stage in his education and
        needed OAO's guidance  and  support  on  a  day-to-day  basis.  J's
        siblings were not able to step in as they had 5  years  ago  -  two
        were living overseas and the other two were not in  a  position  to
        care for J, given their own  circumstances.  Further,  and  in  any
        event,  Ms  Greenwood  argued  that  the  impact  on  the   sibling
        relationship would be damaging as either of those living in the  UK
        would have to make substantial personal sacrifices to  do  so.  J's
        mother had played no real part in his  life  for  some  years  now;
        moreover she had not stepped in when OAO had been  imprisoned,  and
        it was unrealistic to expect her to do so now. In the  alternative,
        Ms  Greenwood  argued  that   deportation   would   amount   to   a
        disproportionate interference in OAO's family  life  with  his  two
        youngest children, and so there were very compelling  circumstances
        that outweighed the public interest in deportation.

   Findings of fact

    80. We agree with Mr Duffy that on the balance of probabilities in  the
        event of OAO  being  deported  one  or  other  of  J's  UK-resident
        siblings would step in and assume care of J. This happened when OAO
        was imprisoned and  when  the  burden  involved  was  substantially
        greater, given that J was then aged 10. He is now aged 16 and while
        that age gives rise to other needs, in general terms a  16-year-old
        inevitably  requires  less  supervision  than  a  10-year-old.  The
        evidence of the siblings and Mr  A  was  framed  in  terms  of  the
        difficulty and inconvenience of having to care for J,  rather  than
        an outright refusal. We accept that taking care of J will involve a
        burden, but that does not make it unduly harsh for J. Ms  Greenwood
        invited us to find that the sibling relationship would be harmed by
        an older sibling have to assume a parental role.  In our view  that
        submission  was  at  best  asking  us   to   draw   an   inference.
        Realistically, we regard it as pure speculation. We  also  bear  in
        mind that if OAO is deported he will be able  to  maintain  contact
        with J by telephone and social media. We  accept,  obviously,  that
        such contact will not  be  as  close  and  intimate  as  day-to-day
        contact, but it remains a valuable means of communication. We  were
        also asked to find that  J's  older  sisters  would  be  unable  to
        provide the  proper  level  of  discipline,  bearing  in  mind  the
        evidence of fluctuation in J's  school  performance.  We  were  not
        persuaded that there was any causal correlation between  a  dip  in
        J's performance and  the  ongoing  uncertainty  over  his  father's
        immigration status. It is a simple fact of life that  teenage  boys
        moving from year 10 to year 11 often display fluctuations in  their
        academic performance. We do not find, based on the school  reports,
        that J is a boy who is at any significant risk of  "going  off  the
        rails" so much so that only his father can provide the right  level
        of parental discipline.

    81. If for whatever reason it is truly impossible for J to be cared for
        by one of his older siblings, we consider it likely that J's mother
        will step in. We recognise that we had very little  evidence  about
        the mother's circumstances. However, there is clearly  an  enduring
        relationship between J and his mother. It is in  the  interests  of
        OAO to downplay the extent and nature of that relationship,  as  we
        found he did in his evidence about whether J saw or merely spoke to
        his mother at Christmas. Ms Greenwood referred several times to J's
        mother having "abandoned" him, putting him emotionally at  risk  if
        he then had to rely  on  her  for  care.  We  took  the  view  that
        "abandoned" was a value-laden term to describe the circumstances of
        the parental separation. We had no report of an expert social  work
        assessment before us allowing us to draw any such inference. It was
        equally plausible that J's mother felt she had no  alternative  but
        to leave and that her relationship with J would be fully revived in
        OAO's absence in the event he is deported. If we considered on  the
        balance of probabilities that it was likely that J would end up  in
        care if his father is deported, we might have been inclined to find
        separation would be unduly harsh. However, given what happened when
        OAO was imprisoned, and given the existing family ties, we  do  not
        think that is a realistic possibility.  Once some form of  adequate
        care is available, the only significantly adverse effect on J would
        be the fact that he would no  longer  be  able  to  live  with  his
        father. As Mr Duffy argued, that is  the  ordinary  and  inevitable
        consequence of deportation.

    82. There are a number of further considerations we must bear  in  mind
        in making the relevant assessment. The two most important relate to
        OAO's offending and to his immigration history.

    83. OAO's criminal record is referred to above at paragraphs 9 and  11.
        The Crown Court Judge's sentencing remarks speak for themselves and
        do not need to be repeated here. Those remarks, and the  length  of
        the sentence, make it clear the criminal course of conduct involved
        a series of very serious benefit offences; this was  not  simply  a
        failure to report a change of circumstances to the authorities, but
        rather a sophisticated and calculated fraud on the public purse. We
        recognise that OAO was released  from  prison  early  due  to  good
        behaviour, but the fact remains that the index offences warranted a
        two-year jail term, comfortably in excess of the 12-month threshold
        for  a  presumption  of  automatic  deportation.  Contrary  to   Ms
        Greenwood's submission, we do not accept that OAO has shown genuine
        remorse for his offending. In that context  we  note  that  he  had
        continued to deny at the First-tier Tribunal hearing  that  he  had
        fraudulently   used   another's   identity   to   claim   benefits,
        notwithstanding the clear finding to the contrary  referred  to  in
        the sentencing remarks. Rather, we find that OAO  has  persistently
        sought to minimise his offending behaviour. The  conviction  for  a
        further offence of identity fraud in 2014 when he must  have  known
        he was at risk of deportation is not simply  "worrying",  as  Judge
        Beach found. It demonstrates a flagrant disregard for the  law.  We
        consider there is a real risk of further offences being  committed,
        especially around identity fraud.

    84.  As  regards  his  immigration  history,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        accurately  described  this  record  as  "appalling"   (at   [54]).
        Accepting for the present that his original entry was lawful  under
        a visitor's visa - and there is no persuasive evidence either way -
        the fact remains that OAO has not been lawfully resident in the  UK
        for the best part of 30 years. On the evidence  before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal, we agree with Judge Beach's doubts as to whether OAO
        had ever made  an  application  to  regularise  his  status  before
        deportation proceedings commenced.

   Conclusion on Paragraph 399

    85. We have identified a range of facts and circumstances. We now  have
        to evaluate all these matters in the round. We recognise  that  OAO
        plays an important role in J's life. We also  remind  ourselves  of
        section 55 of the 2009 Act. We acknowledge that it will be harsh on
        J if his  father  is  deported.  However,  it  is  inevitable  that
        deportation breaks up families - the family is broken  up  "because
        of the appellant's bad behaviour. That is  what  deportation  does"
        (AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 248 per Sedley LJ). We find that, as
        before, the family will find a way to care for J.  We  also  remind
        ourselves of the potency of the public interest in  deportation  of
        foreign criminals. We have taken into account the  gravity  of  the
        offences committed. Taking all relevant factors into account, while
        we find it will be harsh on J if his father is deported, we  cannot
        say that it will be unduly harsh.

   Are there "very compelling circumstances" even if Paragraph  399  is  not
   met?

    86. That leaves us with one final question to address.  Given  that  we
        have concluded that it would not be unduly harsh for J to remain in
        the  UK  without   his   father,   are   there   "very   compelling
        circumstances" beyond those described in Paragraph 399 of the Rules
        such that the public interest in deportation is outweighed?

    87. We can deal with  this  point  shortly.  Section  117B(4)  and  (5)
        stipulate that we should accord little weight  to  a  private  life
        formed when  OAO's  presence  in  the  UK  was  unlawful  or  their
        immigration status precarious. There  is  nothing  in  the  matters
        referred to by Ms Greenwood that makes the present case exceptional
        in any way. We agree with Mr Duffy that the circumstances  of  this
        case are such that in practice the appeal stands or  falls  on  the
        unduly harsh test. There is nothing that comes  remotely  close  to
        displacing the public interest arguments. For the reasons  we  have
        already set out, we find that it falls.
      Decision

    88. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We have  set
        aside the decision of the original Judge. We remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity


    89. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. In all the circumstances we do make such an order pursuant to
        rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure   (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Wikeley

Dated the 5 July 2016



