
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01901/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd June 2014                                |On 12th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                ARTON HALILI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Alexander, Counsel instructed on behalf of BG
Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Kosovo born on 3rd December 1982.   This
    is an appeal against a determination  of  the  panel  of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Braybrook  and  Mr  J  H
    Eames (hereinafter referred to as "the panel") who in  a  determination
    promulgated on 6th March 2014 dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against
    the decision of the Respondent that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
    2007 applied to the Appellant.

The background to the appeal:

 2. The background factors can be summarised  as  follows.   The  Appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom  in  1998  along  with  his  parents  and
    siblings.  His father claimed asylum with the Appellant as a dependant.
     This was refused but ELR was granted to the family unit until the year
    2000 and indefinite leave to remain was subsequently  granted  on  17th
    June 2005.

 3. On 4th November 2005, the Appellant applied for a  travel  document  to
    Kosovo to attend the funeral of his grandparent.

 4. On 19th April 2012 the Appellant was convicted at Isleworth Crown Court
    of one offence of possession of  a  firearm  with  intent  contrary  to
    Section 16 of the Firearms Act 1968 having entered  a  guilty  plea  to
    that offence.  On 17th July 2012 he was sentenced  at  Isleworth  Crown
    Court by Her Honour Molyneux to a sentence of two years'  imprisonment.
    The judge's sentencing remarks were set out in the Respondent's  bundle
    and recited at paragraph [3] of the panel's determination.   The  judge
    stated:-

         "You have pleaded guilty to carrying an imitation firearm with  the
         intention of causing a person to believe  that  violence  would  be
         used.  On 1st  February  this  year  you  went  to  an  address  in
         Southall.  There was  an  argument.   You  took  out  an  imitation
         firearm, an imitation gun, which looked to those people  as  if  it
         was a real gun and you threatened them: 'come any closer and I will
         shoot.'  You have pleaded guilty on a basis of plea  and  you  have
         accepted that you wanted them to believe  that  violence  would  be
         used.  There was a fight, which followed; in  the  course  of  that
         fight you yourself received injury.  In passing sentence  upon  you
         the court takes account of and gives you credit for  the  following
         matters.   In  the  first  place  and  perhaps,  of  the   greatest
         importance, you are a young  man  29  years  of  age  and  you  are
         previously of good character.  This is the first time you have been
         convicted of a criminal offence.  Not only is it the first time you
         have been convicted of a criminal offence, but I have read  letters
         from people who know you well and who speak very highly of you.   I
         know that you have suffered difficulties in your own life and  this
         offence is very much out of character for you.  You were doing your
         best to earn a living and to lead a good and useful life as part of
         the community.  Secondly you receive a discount from  the  sentence
         because you have pleaded guilty to the offence.  Today was to  have
         been the day of your trial; however you receive a greater  discount
         than you would ordinarily be the case, having entered a plea today,
         on the basis that it is only very recently that the status of  this
         firearm was confirmed by expert evidence.  It is also right to  say
         that you have pleaded guilty even though  you  know  of  the  great
         difficulties which the crown  have  experienced  in  getting  their
         witnesses to court and you know that they may well  not  have  been
         prepared to go ahead and give evidence.  You have expressed remorse
         for what you have done.  The offence  to  which  you  have  pleaded
         guilty is so serious that only a custodial sentence is appropriate.
          I have reviewed the authorities of cases of this kind and you have
         heard me  discussing  those  authorities  with  your  Counsel.   Of
         course, each case has to be decided on its  own  facts.   There  is
         what is known as a guideline case, which is called R v Avis,  which
         requires courts to ask and answer  the  following  four  questions.
         Firstly, what type of firearm are we talking about?  In  your  case
         it is an imitation firearm, albeit it looked like a gun  to  people
         who saw it.  What use did you make of it?  Well, you took  it  with
         you to that address in case there was  going  to  be  an  argument.
         That, as your Counsel said, was the wrong choice for  you  to  have
         made.  You did use the firearm to threaten, albeit, you used it  to
         stop what you thought was going to be an attack upon you.  There is
         an extent to which, therefore you used it defensively  rather  than
         aggressively and, of course as I have already said you are a man of
         previously good character.  I have taken  all  those  matters  into
         account and your sentence will be one of two  years  in  custody.."



 5. The  Appellant  was  duly  informed  of  his  liability  for  automatic
    deportation and was served with a liability  to  automatic  deportation
    questionnaire which was returned on 15th November 2012 stating that  he
    had  a  fear  of  return  to  Kosovo.   The  Appellant  was   therefore
    interviewed for  an  asylum  claim  on  15th  May  2012,  however,  the
    Appellant informed the Immigration Officer that  he  did  not  wish  to
    claim asylum.

 6.   On 22nd August 2013, a deportation order was made against him.

 7.   The basis of the appeal against the deportation order  is  that,  the
    Appellant claims that the deportation will breach his right  to  family
    life in the United Kingdom  relying  upon  his  relationship  with  his
    family members and a partner, a British citizen.

The findings of the panel:

 8. Having considered the evidence and in particular the oral  evidence  of
    the Appellant, his  partner  Miss  Zavareh  and  the  evidence  of  his
    cousin's wife Mishel Hathiram, the panel  set  out  their  findings  at
    paragraphs [8-21] of the determination.

 9.   The findings of the panel can be summarised as follows:-

      1) It  was  conceded  that  the  Appellant  is  subject  to  automatic
         deportation and that paragraph 398(b) applied to the Appellant  and
         that his deportation was conducive to the public good.   The  panel
         considered paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules which were said not
         to apply to the Appellant [9].

      2) In respect of the nature and seriousness of the offence, the  panel
         took into account the mitigating factors in the sentencing remarks,
         observing that this was a first offence, the guilty  plea  and  the
         remorse shown.  However they noted that  the  offence  was  not  an
         action taken on the spur of  the  moment  but  the  result  of  the
         Appellant obtaining and travelling  in  a  premeditated  way  to  a
         meeting in Southall with an imitation weapon.  They also noted that
         despite  the  mitigation,  the  offence  was  serious   enough   to
         necessitate a two year sentence although Counsel had submitted that
         the maximum sentence for the index offence was ten years  and  thus
         the panel accepted that in this context the  sentence  was  at  the
         lower end of the scale.

      3) They considered the likelihood of  the  Appellant  re-offending  at
         [11] taking into account the OAYSys Report at [4] and at [12].   He
         was assessed as a low risk of offending but a medium risk  of  harm
         to the public and the panel found that the assessment continued  at
         the same level in the most recent report from the probation officer
         (which was dated 17th February 2014).  The  panel  also  took  into
         account at [12] that the motive for his crime recorded in the OASys
         was that he went to confront people supplying him with cannabis  in
         Southall but there was no reference to his use of cannabis  in  the
         most recent and final report from his probation officer.  The panel
         had regard at [12] that during his period on licence  he  had  been
         fully compliant with reporting instructions, and had  engaged  well
         to address his offending behaviour.  There had been  no  breach  of
         any  licence  conditions.   However  in  respect  of  risk  of  re-
         offending, at [16] they concluded on the evidence  that  there  was
         some risk of re-offending based on the OASys Report  at  [4],  [11]
         and [12].  They took  into  account  at  [13]  that  the  documents
         provided demonstrated that the Appellant's drug taking had  been  a
         significant factor in his life and had led to the index offence but
         there had been no reference at all to this in his witness statement
         or his oral evidence as to his present situation  in  this  respect
         nor had he taken any courses relating  to  drug  taking  whilst  in
         custody.  At [14] the panel considered  the  circumstances  of  the
         Appellant, that he had lived with his parents and whilst they  were
         at court they did not give evidence but had supported him at  trial
         but there was nothing to show that they had any real  knowledge  of
         the Appellant's day-to-day lifestyle or influence on  him  and  the
         panel at [16] whilst accepting that  he  had  support  from  family
         members that there was little evidence as to the extent they  would
         be able to assist if the pressures which had prompted  his  current
         offence resurfaced or if he was tempted to  renew  links  with  his
         social circle.  Based on those matters, the panel found that  there
         was some risk of re-offending [at 16].

      4) The panel took into his  relationship  with  his  immediate  family
         noting that there was no specific evidence from any  family  member
         except Miss Hathiram (his cousin's wife).  The panel found  on  the
         evidence that whilst they accepted there were emotional bonds, they
         were adult relationships and there was  no  element  of  particular
         dependency.

      5) At [18] the panel took into  account  the  relationship  with  Miss
         Zavareh.   They  observed  there  had  been  no  reference  to  the
         relationship in the  Appellant's  response  to  the  Respondent  in
         September 2012 and no mention of the relationship in the Grounds of
         Appeal.  They found that the relationship developed only  after  he
         had been released from prison in  2013  and  the  duration  of  the
         relationship had been almost a year.  They did  not  live  together
         nor had they ever cohabited she now  living  in  Cambridge  at  her
         parents' home and thus they did not meet  as  frequently  but  meet
         once per week.  The panel  found  that  whilst  it  was  a  genuine
         relationship it was of limited duration and there were difficulties
         such as the need to find employment and housing in the  same  area.
         They took into account that the relationship began at a  time  when
         they were both well aware of his precarious immigration status  (on
         the basis that he was facing deportation) but did not consider that
         they could give the relationship  any  significant  weight  in  the
         balancing exercise.

      6) At [19] the panel reached a conclusion on the evidence before  them
         that whilst he had been in the United Kingdom since 1998, there was
         little to indicate that he was economically or socially  integrated
         and took into account  the  evidence  before  them  concerning  the
         employment that he had had in the United Kingdom.

      7) They took into account  the  length  of  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom since 1998 and that he had remained in the UK lawfully.

      8) They took into account his  ties  in  the  country  of  destination
         namely Kosovo and found that whilst he had had  some  education  in
         the UK having left Kosovo at age 15 the bulk of his education would
         have taken place there.  His immediate family including his parents
         and brothers and sisters are in  the  UK  but  found  that  he  had
         maternal grandparents and a paternal uncle in Kosovo.   That  uncle
         had three children including a  20  year  old  son  with  whom  the
         Appellant spoke on the telephone.  The evidence indicated there was
         regular contact between his family and family members who  remained
         in Kosovo and both his father and mother had returned;  his  mother
         regularly to see her parents and his brother had been to Kosovo but
         was married to an Albanian  so  therefore  went  to  Albania.   The
         Appellant himself had stayed with maternal grandparents when he had
         returned in 2005 and he had returned five months later and stayed a
         week seeing a school friend.  Miss Hathiram said her  husband  (the
         Appellant's cousin) went back to Kosovo about twice a year  to  see
         his family and for  holidays.   Thus  the  panel  found  there  was
         considerable evidence of continued contact with and visits  by  his
         family and family members to  Kosovo  thus  he  would  be  able  to
         maintain regular contact.

      9) The panel found that he would be  able  to  re-integrate  socially,
         economically and linguistically in Kosovo and whilst they  did  not
         underestimate the upheaval for the Appellant in such a removal,  he
         was fit and overall of an age when he could  re-adapt  to  life  in
         Kosovo.

     10) Having considered all  the  factors  and  taken  into  account  the
         "considerable  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
         deportation  appeals"  they  did  not  find  that  there  were  any
         compelling reasons identified to outweigh the  public  interest  in
         deportation.

10. Thus the panel reached the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  removal
    would not be in breach of Article 8.

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Cheales)  on  3rd  April
    2014.  The reasons for that decision are as follows:-

         "In his grounds for onward appeal, the Appellant asserts  that  the
         judge's conclusion in relation  to  the  Appellant's  risk  of  re-
         offending is irrational, had made erroneous findings on whether  he
         is socially and economically integrated.   He  failed  to  consider
         Article 8 in the light of the guidance in Beoku-Betts  [2008]  EWCA
         1900 and to take into account the findings in MM [2013] EWCA 1900.

         It is arguable that the Tribunal's findings that there is little to
         indicate that the Appellant is economically and socially integrated
         into the UK  do  not  take  into  account  the  judge's  sentencing
         remarks, the Appellant's relationship with a British  national  and
         the evidence of his employment.  All grounds are arguable."

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

12. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Alexander  appeared
    on behalf of the Appellant, who did not appear at the court  below  and
    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  Mr Alexander relied upon the four Grounds of  Appeal  that  had
    been advanced on behalf of the Appellant.  In relation to Ground 1,  he
    submitted that the finding at [16] that there  was  some  risk  of  re-
    offending and thus was  a  factor  in  favour  of  deportation  was  an
    irrational conclusion to have reached on the  evidence.   He  submitted
    that it was unclear why there would be some risk  of  re-offending  but
    that the evidence of the probation officer which was a positive  report
    in a letter dated 17th February  2014  referred  to  the  risk  of  re-
    offending as low and the risk to members of the public as medium.   The
    probation officer made it clear that the  Appellant  was  motivated  to
    address his offending behaviour.  He was no longer under licence it had
    expired and that was relevant to the risk of re-offending thus  it  was
    submitted that the judge failed  to  properly  take  into  account  the
    evidence, the conclusion was  irrational  and  he  had  not  given  the
    evidence the weight that it should have.

13.  In respect of Ground 2 at paragraph [19] the judge concluded that  the
    Appellant had been in the UK  since  1998,  but  there  was  little  to
    indicate that he was "socially or economically integrated."  That was a
    finding that was not justified on the evidence and in this respect  the
    panel failed to take into account the remarks of the sentencing  judge,
    failed to take into account  the  relationship  with  Miss  Zavareh,  a
    British national which was  evidence  of  social  integration  and  the
    evidence of Miss Hathiram about his ability to work and employment.  In
    the grounds it is further submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  make
    findings about that evidence of employment.  It  is  further  submitted
    that the Appellant gave his evidence in English.  Thus it was submitted
    that  the  panel  had  erred  in  concluding  that  he  had  failed  to
    demonstrate integration  and  that  had  had  negative  impact  on  the
    Appellant's case.

14.   In respect of Ground 3, Mr Alexander submitted that the panel  failed
    to apply the ratio in the decision of Beoku-Betts (as  cited)  and  had
    failed to take into account  the  Article  8  rights  of  other  family
    members including his partner, father,  mother,  brothers,  sister  and
    Miss Hathiram.  It was submitted that the argument was based  primarily
    on the close nature of the relationships within  the  family  unit  and
    thus it was incumbent on the panel to deal with this as an issue.

15. As to Ground 4 the  panel  did  not  take  into  account  the  argument
    following the judgment of Mr Justice Blake in MM and  Others  that  the
    Respondent had  to  show  "compelling  justification  for  requiring  a
    British citizen to leave the UK in order to continue  his  relationship
    with a non-British national."  It was argued that  the  Respondent  had
    failed to show to such a compelling justification  notwithstanding  the
    criminal offence he had committed.

16. Mr Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State had provided  a  Rule  24
    response.  He relied upon the contents of that document.  In  addition,
    he submitted that there was no material error of law disclosed  in  the
    decision of the panel.  He submitted the starting point was that it had
    been accepted that the Immigration Rules could not be met and therefore
    as the panel stated, "very  compelling  reasons  will  be  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation" see  [21].   He  submitted
    the panel had considered correctly the decision in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192 and properly  considered  the  relevant  factors  to  the
    appeal.  As to Ground 1, the panel correctly considered the risk of re-
    offending  taking  into  account  the  OASys  Report  of  January  2013
    assessing his risk of reconviction as low but risk of serious  harm  to
    the public as medium.  The report noted that the  offence  was  "fairly
    specific" and related to problems with those  supplying  the  Appellant
    with drugs" and considered at [7] the report dated 17th February  2014.
    Thus it was open to the panel to find on the evidence before them  that
    there was some risk of re-offending as there was little straightforward
    evidence that the family would be able to assist if renewed links  with
    the previous social circle.  Thus it was submitted the findings made by
    the  panel  were  based  on  the  evidence  presented  both  oral   and
    documentary and the fact that there was nothing in  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant's drug habits had dissipated and that he had not attended
    any courses, that on the evidence provided it was open to the panel  to
    find that there was some risk of re-offending and that no error of  law
    was disclosed in relation to that issue.

17. As to Ground 2, the panel considered  the  employment  history  of  the
    Appellant at [19] and reached the conclusion, which was  open  to  them
    that although being in the UK since 1998 there was little  evidence  to
    indicate that he was economically and socially integrated.  This was  a
    finding open to the panel to make based on the lack of evidence of work
    qualifications or employment in the fourteen years  reaching  majority.
    The panel also had regard to the sentencing  remarks  when  considering
    integration at [3].

18. As to Ground 3, it  was  submitted  that  the  grounds  were  simply  a
    disagreement with  the  findings  made  by  the  judge  concerning  the
    evidence relating to the family members.   The  judge  found  that  the
    parents, who did not give evidence had nothing to show  that  they  had
    any real knowledge of the Appellant's lifestyle or influence on him and
    that there was no dependency [17].  As to  the  relationship  with  his
    partner that was dealt with at [18] and noting  that  the  relationship
    only began on the Appellant's release from prison in  2013,  that  they
    had never co-habited and the  panel  referred  to  the  time  that  the
    relationship began and the precariousness of  the  relationship  as  it
    began  at  a  time  when  the  Appellant  was  subject  to  deportation
    proceedings.  In those circumstances, the decision of Kabia applied and
    that it could not be  said  that  there  were  circumstances  in  which
    deportation would result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the
    individual  or  the  family  such  that  a  deportation  would  not  be
    appropriate."  The panel by way of  contrast  considered  the  ties  in
    Kosovo at [20] finding that he had social  and  linguistic  and  family
    ties to Kosovo.  As to Ground 4, it was submitted  that  as  the  panel
    found that little weight could be placed on  the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and his partner, it was not  open  to  the  Appellant  to
    argue that the decision of MN had any bearing on the appeal  which  was
    not a deportation appeal.

19. By way of reply Mr Alexander submitted that the panel did not take into
    account all the relevant factors and  the  issue  of  re-offending  was
    required to be addressed.  The public interest should be looked at in a
    positive way and that  in  respect  of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his partner insufficient weight had been attached to  the
    relationship when making the overall findings.   Thus  he  invited  the
    court  to  find  that  there  were  errors  of  law  in   the   panel's
    determination and that it should be set aside.

20. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions:

21. I have given careful consideration to the grounds advanced on behalf of
    the Appellant but have done so in the light of  the  evidence  and  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal panel.  It is plain  from  the
    determination that this was a case in which it was conceded by  Counsel
    that the Appellant could not meet paragraphs 399 and 399A and thus  the
    focus was on the concluding sentence of paragraph 398:

         "The Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

22. As the panel referred later to at [21] MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192, those circumstances have to be (with emphasis added):

         "...  sufficiently  compelling  (and  therefore   exceptional)   to
         outweigh the public interest in deportation ..."

23. In R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)  Sales  J  considered  the
    meaning of "exceptional circumstances" and concluded that in order  for
    the discretion to be exercised outside the Rules, there  needed  to  be
    particular features of the case of a  compelling  nature  demonstrating
    that removal would be unjustifiably harsh.  In MF (Nigeria)  the  Court
    of Appeal endorsed this approach whilst stressing  that  this  did  not
    mean that a test of exceptionality was being applied, but rather,  that
    in cases falling outside the Rules, the scales are weighed very heavily
    in favour of deportation and something very compelling is  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in removal.

24. There is no dispute that the panel did not apply the correct law and  I
    have considered the grounds advanced on behalf of the Appellant in that
    legal context.

25. I have set out earlier in the determination the findings of  fact  made
    by the panel.  I have therefore considered the grounds.   Dealing  with
    Ground 1, it is asserted  that  the  findings  made  by  the  panel  in
    relation to risk of re-offending  are  irrational.   Mr  Alexander  has
    referred to the  evidence  before  the  panel  including  that  of  the
    probation officer which assessed him as posing  a  "low"  risk  of  re-
    offending  and  that  he  had  been  fully  compliant  with   reporting
    instructions and engaged well to address his  behaviour  and  thus  the
    conclusion at [16] that there was some  risk  of  re-offending  was  an
    irrational conclusion.

26. I am satisfied that the finding of the panel, that there was some  risk
    of re-offending, was not irrational but was one that was justified from
    the evidence before them.  Nor can it be said that the conduct  of  the
    Appellant since his conviction had  not  been  taken  into  account  in
    reaching  the  assessment  or  that  it  had  not   been   taken   into
    consideration in the proportionality balance.  The panel were  entitled
    to have regard to the evidence as a whole and at [4] made reference  to
    the OASys Report from January 2013 which assessed the Appellant's  risk
    of re-conviction as low but went on  state  that  as  to  the  risk  of
    serious harm to the public, this was assessed at a medium  level.   The
    report noted that those who would be at risk would be "public  by  whom
    Mr Halili might feel threatened  In his account  the  circumstances  in
    which this offence was committed were fairly specific  and  related  to
    problems with those who had been  supplying  him  with  cannabis.   The
    nature of the risk is threat of violence or assault.   In  Mr  Halili's
    account the risk will be if he is using cannabis  and  so  coming  into
    contact with dealers who are operating outside the law and may threaten
    or put him under pressure.  The risk is not deemed imminent due  to  Mr
    Halili  currently  being  detained  in  custody."  At  [11]  the  panel
    considered the likelihood of the Appellant re-offending and again  took
    into account the OASYs Report  pr�cised  at  [4]  and  also  took  into
    account the most recent report,  which  has  been  identified  as  17th
    February 2014, that the assessment made that the risk  of  re-offending
    was low but there was a medium risk of  harm  to  the  public  if  such
    offending took place was medium, had remained the same.

27.   Contrary to the grounds, the panel plainly had regard  and  expressly
    took into account his progress and conduct since his conviction at [12]
    where the panel noted that there had been no further offending  and  no
    breach of his licence conditions and the positive elements set  out  in
    the letter.

          It was open to the panel to take into account the circumstances of
         the offence when reaching a  conclusion  as  to  the  risk  of  re-
         offending.  As  identified  in  the  OASys  Report  to  which  they
         properly had regard, the offence was fairly specific and related to
         problems with those supplying the Appellant with  drugs.   In  this
         context at [16] the panel concluded that  on  the  evidence  before
         them, there was "some risk of re-offending" and this was  based  on
         their findings at [12], [13], [14] and [15].  The panel  took  into
         account that  as  the  circumstances  of  the  offence  related  to
         problems of drugs, the Appellant had not been able to benefit  from
         any courses to lessen any risk in that respect [13] and it was open
         to the  panel  to  find  on  the  evidence  before  them  that  the
         Appellant's drug taking must have been a significant factor in  his
         life and had led  to  the  index  factor  but  that  there  was  no
         reference at all in his witness statement or oral  evidence  as  to
         his present situation in this respect (see  [13]).   There  was  no
         evidence from his partner on this point (at [13]) and  in  relation
         to his parents, the panel observed [14] there was nothing  to  show
         they had any real knowledge of the Appellant's day-to-day lifestyle
         or any influence on him.  Thus it was open to the panel at [16]  to
         conclude from the evidence before them that  whilst  the  Appellant
         did have  such  support  from  family  members  there  was  "little
         straightforward evidence as to the extent they  would  be  able  to
         assist if the pressures which  had  prompted  his  current  offence
         resurfaced or if he was tempted to  renew  links  with  his  social
         circle."  In those circumstances it could not be properly said that
         the panel had reached an irrational finding  on  the  risk  of  re-
         offending.  It was open to the panel to find on that evidence  that
         there was some  risk  of  re-offending  and  indeed  that  was  the
         conclusion of the probation officer.

    It is further submitted that  there  will  always  be  a  risk  of  re-
    offending due to the presence of some criminality and it is not  simply
    enough for a judge to state that there is a risk of re-offending  which
    points in favour of deportation.  I have considered that submission but
    find that it fails to take into  account  properly  the  issue  of  the
    public interest.  The justification for  deportation  is  not  only  by
    reason of the Appellant's conduct and in the light of the risk  of  re-
    offending but as said in AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  1634  at  paragraph
    24:

         "Deportation in pursuit of the legitimate aim of  preventing  crime
         and disorder is not, therefore, to be seen as  one  dimensional  in
         its effect.  It has the effect not only of removing the risk of re-
         offending by the deportee himself,  but  also  of  deterring  other
         foreign nationals in a similar position.  Furthermore,  deportation
         of foreign criminals preserves public confidence  in  a  system  of
         control whose loss would itself tend towards crime and disorder."

28. The importance of  those  considerations  was  emphasised  also  in  JO
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10 and the same approach was  taken  by
    the Upper Tribunal in the  decision  of  Masih  (Deportation  -  Public
    Interest - Basic Principles) (Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 46 (IAC)  in  which
    guidance summarised in the head note at

      1) In the case of automatic deportation, full account must be taken of
         the strong public interest in removing foreign  citizens  convicted
         of serious offences, which lies  not  only  in  the  prevention  of
         further offences on the part of the individual  concerned,  but  in
         deterring  others  from  committing  them  in  the   first   place.



      2) Deportation of foreign criminals expresses  society's  condemnation
         of serious criminal activity and promotes public confidence in  the
         treatment of foreign citizens who have committed them.

    That was an exercise carried out by  the  panel  when  considering  the
    issue of risk of re-offending  and  they  plainly  had  regard  to  the
    circumstances of the offence at [10].  There is no error  disclosed  by
    Ground 1.

29. Turning to Ground 2, it criticises the panel's findings  at  [19]  that
    the Appellant had been in the UK since 1998 but that there  was  little
    to indicate that he was  "economically  or  socially  integrated,"  and
    failing to take into account the sentencing remarks,  the  relationship
    with Ms Zavareh and the evidence of Mishel Hathiram.  Having considered
    the submissions set out and recited earlier in the determination, I  am
    satisfied that this was a finding that was open to the panel  to  make.
    Contrary to the grounds, the panel plainly had regard to the sentencing
    judge's remarks not only did they set them out with some  particularity
    at [3] but expressly took them into account at [10]. It  is  not  clear
    from the sentencing remarks (where the judge  stated  "you  were  doing
    your best to earn a living and to live a good and useful life  as  part
    of the community") as to  the  evidence  in  support  of  that  factual
    statement; whether it was contained in the pre-sentence  report  (which
    is not before the First-tier Tribunal panel or this Tribunal)  or  from
    mitigation. However what is plain is that the  panel  nonetheless  took
    that into account.  The panel also had regard to the relationship  with
    his partner and findings  were  made  therein  at  [18]  this  being  a
    relatively recent relationship, of limited duration and  one  in  which
    they had never co-habited.  The panel also  considered  the  employment
    history of the Appellant at [19].  Whilst the grounds submit  that  the
    evidence of Miss Hathiram about his past and present employment had not
    been taken into account and no findings were  made,  that  is  not  the
    position on a careful consideration of paragraph [19].  The panel found
    that in his questionnaire to the Respondent the Appellant  stated  that
    he had worked since he was 20-21 in a car  wash.   The  Respondent  had
    stated there was no evidence of this.  In  his  witness  statement  the
    Appellant asserted he worked as a wood floorer with a company but  that
    this was casual work and that this was "recent employment  and  I  have
    not been with them very long."  His partner in  the  witness  statement
    referred to skilled work but gave no indication as to what it might  be
    and the evidence of Miss Hathiram was  expressly  considered  at  [19].
    She confirmed she was the director of Star Construction and had written
    a letter dated 11th March 2013  offering  the  Appellant  three  months
    work.  Her oral evidence was set out at [19] suggesting that he  was  a
    "particularly skilled wood worker."  However the panel found that there
    was no documentary evidence to support such employment and whilst  they
    accepted that he may have  been  helping  out  Miss  Hathiram  in  some
    capacity on building site, there was no  indication  that  he  had  any
    particular qualification or experience in such work that  would  ensure
    he would be able to obtain regular work.  Thus it was open to the panel
    to find, having taken into account all that evidence that based on  the
    lack of evidence of work or employment  in  the  fourteen  year  period
    since he had reached his majority, and on his own evidence  before  the
    panel at best it consisted of some casual work as  an  offer  of  three
    months' work by his cousin's wife.  This could not be seen as  evidence
    of steady employment in the United Kingdom  throughout  his  period  of
    residence or showing the payment of tax or national insurance and  thus
    it was open to the panel to  find  in  those  terms  that  he  was  not
    economically integrated by reason of his work  history.   Whilst  there
    was little to indicate "social integration,"  that  is  different  from
    saying that there was "no social integration" and it is plain from  the
    determination that they did have regard, notwithstanding  that  finding
    to his relationship with Miss Zavareh at [18] and his relationship with
    his immediate family at [17].

30.   In my judgment the findings at [19] need to be seen in the context of
    the evidence as a whole and could  not  be  properly  characterised  as
    irrational but a finding properly open to the panel to make.

31. Dealing with Ground 3, it is asserted that the panel  failed  to  apply
    the ratio in Beoku-Betts and failed to take into account the Article  8
    rights of other family members.  It is submitted in  the  grounds  that
    this argument was based on the "close nature of the  relationship  with
    the family unit."  This ground has no merit.  The  panel  gave  express
    consideration to the issues of family life in the context of the family
    members and their relationship to the Appellant.   In  respect  of  his
    parents, the panel found at [14] that whilst the Appellant  lived  with
    his parents, they were in court but did not give any  evidence  to  the
    panel.  They found that there was nothing to show that  "they  had  any
    real knowledge of the Appellant's day-to-day lifestyle or any influence
    on him."  At [17] they took into  account  his  relationship  with  his
    immediate family in the  UK  but  found  that  there  was  no  specific
    evidence of any family member (none of them had given  evidence  before
    the panel as to the nature, depth and strength of family  life)  except
    for  Miss  Hathiram  (who   was   the   Appellant's   cousin's   wife).
    Consequently whilst they accepted that on the sparse evidence they  had
    there would be "emotional bonds," but took into account that these were
    adult relationships but on  the  evidence  before  them  there  was  no
    element of particular dependency.  Thus it was plain that they did take
    into account the family relationships with others and it  was  open  to
    them to reach that conclusion at [17].

32.  The panel also considered his relationship with Miss Zavareh  at  [18]
    as noted by the panel there had been no reference to  the  relationship
    in his response to the Respondent in September 2012 and no  mention  of
    the relationship in his Grounds of Appeal.  It was plain that they  had
    known each other as friends and helped each  other  through  respective
    break-ups however both parties had accepted their relationship had only
    developed  after  he  was  released  from  prison  in  2013   and   the
    relationship was of a limited  duration.   The  parties  did  not  live
    together and the panel found that they had  never  co-habited.   Whilst
    they accepted it was a genuine relationship, they found  it  to  be  of
    limited duration and one that had begun against the background  of  his
    precarious immigration status in  the  context  of  their  relationship
    having begun at a time when both were aware  that  he  was  subject  to
    deportation proceedings.  Having considered the  relationship  and  the
    evidence as a whole, it was open to the  panel  to  find  that  on  the
    particular facts, they could not give the relationship any  significant
    weight.  It was open to the panel to reach those findings and no  error
    of law has been disclosed in that respect.

33. As to Ground 4 it is submitted that the panel failed to deal  with  the
    argument that the Respondent had to show compelling  justification  for
    requiring a British citizen to leave the UK  in  order  to  continue  a
    relationship with a non-British  national  (applying  the  decision  of
    Blake J in MM and Others).  The decision in MM was  not  a  deportation
    appeal and the correct law identified by the panel was that set out  in
    MF (Nigeria) that where the Appellant could not  succeed  substantively
    under paragraph 399 or 399A  then  the  focus  was  on  the  concluding
    sentence of paragraph 398:

         "The Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 339 or 339A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

34. As made clear in MF (Nigeria) (as cited) those circumstances have to be
    "sufficiently compelling" (and therefore exceptional) to  outweigh  the
    public interest in deportation however whilst the new  Rules  speak  of
    "exceptional circumstances" it has been made  clear  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) exceptionality is a likely characteristic  of  a
    claim that properly succeeds rather than a legal test to  be  met.   In
    this context, "exceptional" means circumstances  in  which  deportation
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  or
    the family such that deportation would not be proportionate (see  Kabia
    [MF: Paragraph 398- "Exceptional Circumstances"] [2013] UKUT 569).  The
    decision of SS Nigeria at paragraphs 46 and 55 which has to be read  in
    light of what has been said in MF (Nigeria)

         "While the  authorities  demonstrate  that  there  is  no  Rule  of
         exceptionality for Article 8, they also clearly show that the  more
         pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or  deportation,  the
         stronger must be the Claimant at Article 8 if  it  is  to  prevail.
         The pressing nature of the public interest here is vividly informed
         by the fact that Parliament's expressed declaration of  the  public
         interest is injured if the criminal's deportation is  not  effected
         such a result could in my judgment only  be  justified  by  a  very
         strong claim indeed."

    In those circumstances, it is plain that the decision of the Respondent
    and the law applied by  the  panel  did  consider  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances but on the  particular  facts  of  this  case,
    after carefully weighing all the factors at [21]  reached  the  overall
    conclusion that notwithstanding the positive aspects of his  case,  and
    taking into account the seriousness of the  offences,  the  Appellant's
    length of stay in the UK, his ties to the UK and those in Kosovo,  that
    deportation was proportionate and was justified.

35. Consequently it was open to the panel that it had not been  established
    on the particular facts that it would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the Appellant or his family that deportation  was  not
    proportionate.  The panel accepted that there  may  be  some  resultant
    hardship but it was  not  established  that  they  were  sufficient  to
    justify the appeal being allowed. The decision reached by the panel and
    the findings made cannot be properly  characterised  as  irrational  or
    perverse  and they  reached conclusions that were adequately   reasoned
    and open to them on the  evidence  that  was  before  them.  The  Upper
    Tribunal can only interfere with a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    if an error of law is established. As noted in the decision  of  of  MA
    (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49 at paragraph 45 Sir John Dyson stated:-

         "The court should not be astute to characterise as an error of  law
         what, in truth, is no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  AIT's
         assessment of the facts.  Moreover, where a relevant point  is  not
         expressly mentioned by the Tribunal, the court  would  be  slow  to
         infer that it had not been taken into account."


36. The grounds therefore do not  demonstrate  any  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the panel.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel did not   involve  the  making
of    an    error     of     law.      Their     decision     is     upheld.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
