
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01248/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 March 2016                         |On 19 May 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               OYEWOLE OSIMLAU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel, instructed by MKM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    respondent on 9 May 20123 to make him  the  subject  of  a  deportation
    order.

 2. The appellant has been in the United Kingdom since he was a few  months
    old.  He arrived in 1998 and was given indefinite leave  to  remain  in
    1999.

 3. He has not behaved himself.

 4. In May 2007 he was sentenced to two years six months  imprisonment  for
    robbery.  On 28 April 2009 at the Crown Court  at  Blackfriars  he  was
    sentenced to an indeterminate sentence of  imprisonment  of  "at  least
    three years" before being considered for parole.

 5. There is in decision letter a paragraph entitled "sentence length"  and
    that set out the terms of paragraph 398 of HC 395.  The  material  part
    is paragraph 398(a) which states:

    "The deportation of a person from the UK is  conducive  to  the  public
    good because they have been convicted of an offence for which they have
    been sentenced to a period of at least four years."

 6. Paragraph 398(b) applies to the deportation of a person  who  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at
    least twelve months.

 7. There is a paragraph in the refusal letter  entitled  "Sentence  of  at
    Least Four Years Imprisonment".   It  begins  "You  were  convicted  of
    robbery and sentenced to a period  of  indeterminate  imprisonment,  to
    serve a minimum total of three years' imprisonment".

 8. It is not clear to me how the Secretary of State interpreted the Rules.

 9. There is an obvious difficulty because on  the  plain  reading  of  the
    Rules the appellant has neither been sentenced to "a period of at least
    four years" nor to "a period of imprisonment of less  than  four  years
    but at least twelve months".

10. The refusal letter also makes plain that there are limited  grounds  of
    appeal but at the  material  time  they  included  a  ground  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the Rules.

11. However the Rules echo the amended provisions of  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Section  117D  includes
    definitions and Section 117D(4)(d) informs  us  that  references  to  a
    person who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a  certain
    length of time

    "include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment to or detention,  or
    ordered or directed  to  be  detained,  for  an  indeterminate  period,
    provided that it may last for at least that length of time ...".

12. With respect to the First-tier Tribunal Judge who reached  a  different
    conclusion, I can see no room at all for argument about the meaning  of
    the phrase in the Act.  An indeterminate sentence almost by  definition
    is capable of lasting for at least four years and so excludes a  person
    from some of the provisions in the Act that would or might prevent  his
    deportation.

13. I find nothing surprising about such an interpretation.   Indeterminate
    sentences  were  intended  as  a  protective  measure  and  were   only
    applicable in cases were people had behaved particularly  badly.   This
    was not argued before me and it is some time since I have practised  in
    criminal law but I  believe  that  an  indeterminate  sentence  had  to
    include a requirement that the person  sentenced  serve  at  least  two
    years in custody. This is the same length of time that a  person  would
    have to serve  as  a  minimum  if  he  was  sentenced  to  four  years'
    imprisonment.  It is clear to me  clear  both  as  a  matter  of  plain
    reading and a matter of principle that any indeterminate sentence  will
    be at least the equivalent of a sentence of four years' imprisonment.

14. Thus although I am satisfied that the statutory  definition  makes  the
    operation of Section 117  clear  I  am  not  aware  of  any  comparable
    definition in the Immigration Rules.

15. Given that the Immigration Rules do not make sense, unless it is to  be
    assumed that a person who is subject to an  indeterminate  sentence  is
    completely outside the Rules, and given that the Rules can be  expected
    to be drawn less rigorously than a statue, I am satisfied that for  the
    purposes of paragraph 398(a) of the Immigration Rules a person who  has
    been sentenced to an indeterminate sentence is a person  who  has  been
    sentenced to "a period of imprisonment of at least four  years".   This
    is not within the plain meaning of the Rule but as such a  person  does
    not come within paragraph 398(b),  that  is  a  person  who  has  "been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  four  years"  some
    construction beyond the plain meaning is necessary.

16. In this case the First-tier Tribunal noted that  the  sentencing  judge
    decided that a sentence of six years was  appropriate  but  as  he  was
    imposing an indeterminate sentence he addressed his mind to the minimum
    term a person would have to serve and decided that the appellant should
    be detained for at least three years.  This is less than four years and
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided that the sentence was not  to  be
    regarded as a sentence of "at least four years".

17. For reasons which I have set out above,  which  I  hope  are  clear,  a
    sentence of at least three years imprisonment is to be regarded for the
    purposes of the rules as a sentence of at least four years.

18. This finding is very important because it means that much of  the  work
    of the First-tier Tribunal was  unnecessary.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge spent considerable time in ascertaining if  the  appellant  could
    benefit from any of the exceptions under the Immigration Rules because,
    I find wrongly, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was a person who had  not
    been sentenced to four years' imprisonment.  The First-tier Tribunal, I
    am satisfied, made its decision for unsustainable reasons because of  a
    fundamental misunderstand of the Rules and I set aside its decision.

19. I have the benefit of an extensive Rule 24 reply and  a  reply  to  the
    reply.  I do not agree with Mr Slatter's contention that the  Secretary
    of State is raising points that she is not allowed to raise in  a  Rule
    24 notice. The appellant correctly refers me to the decision of EG  and
    NG (UT Rule 17: withdrawal; Rule 24; Scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT  00143
    (IAC).  However, the Secretary of State succeeded before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  She was under no obligation to raise anything in any kind of
    appeal.  As I hoped we made clear in NG, a party to an appeal does  not
    need permission to raise points in reply unless that  party  "seeks  to
    persuade the Upper Tribunal to replace a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with a decision that would make a material difference  to  one
    of the parties".  Here the appeal was dismissed and  the  Secretary  of
    State wants precisely that decision upheld.

20. In the event because of the construction I have given above the grounds
    have not actually helped me very much.

21. The appellant and his partner gave evidence before me.  The  effect  of
    their evidence is that they are not at present living together  because
    that  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  terms  of   the   appellant's
    immigration bail but they regard themselves very much as a  couple  and
    the appellant's partner was eight weeks into her pregnancy with a child
    conceived from her relationship with the appellant.

22. Clearly this is a case of a person who has lived for a  large  part  of
    his life in the United Kingdom.  It is not easy to see why the contrary
    view was reached.

23. However, the difficulty the appellant faces  is  that  the  Rules  were
    applied properly by the Respondent, and section 117 of  the  Act  which
    binds me when making an Article 8  analysis  requires  the  Appellant's
    deportation unless there are "very compelling circumstances,  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2" of section 117C.

24. In simple terms, close relationships formed in the United  Kingdom  and
    long residence there are not "over and above" the  features  identified
    in the Rules or the Act.

25. As far as I can see there are no "over  and  above"  features  in  this
    case. There is nothing that can mount exceptional circumstances.  It is
    an appeal that has to be dismissed.

26. I sat back a little and reflected on my decision.   There  is  evidence
    that the appellant, who has had a very unpromising start  in  life,  to
    which his own bad behaviour is a major contributing factor, has  gained
    maturity.  However this is not an EEA case.  A change in  his  attitude
    is of limited if any assistance  to  him.   Deportation  is  a  way  of
    showing societal disgust.  Clearly his removal will be a wrench for his
    partner but none of these points are important given my findings  under
    the Rules.

27. The plain fact is that the appellant's case cannot  succeed  under  the
    Rules or on human rights grounds.

28. It follows  therefore  that  having  set  aside  the  decision  I  must
    substitute a decision dismissing this appeal.

29. I realise that my route to this conclusion may come as  a  surprise  to
    the appellant but the need for "reasons over and above" ought  to  have
    been apparent and I suspect  were,  at  least  to  his  advisors.   The
    fundamental difficulty in his case is that his criminality puts him  in
    a category where he can only succeed if circumstances exist of  a  kind
    that do not exist here.

30. In the circumstances the grounds  identify  no  material  error  and  I
    dismiss the appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated  13 May 2016                   |

