
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01448/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 March 2014                            |On 24 March 2014           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      THE HON MR JUSTICE KENNETH PARKER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MARIAN-IONUT CREANGA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
                            For the Appellant: Mr L Tarlow a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
                            For the Respondent: Mr C Nwadi a
           Solicitor from Nicolas Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Romania  who  was
      born on 6 January 1995 ("the claimant"). The Secretary  of  State  has
      been  given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  a   panel
      consisting of First Tier Tribunal Judge Ruth and non-legal member Ms S
      E Singer ("the panel") who allowed the claimant's appeal  against  the
      Secretary of State's decision of 3 July 2013  to  make  a  deportation
      order against him under the provisions of  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") as the family
      member of an EEA national and that his removal was  justified  on  the
      grounds of public policy or public security following  his  conviction
      on 13 July 2012 at Isleworth Crown  Court  of  attempted  robbery  for
      which he was sentenced to two years and six months imprisonment  in  a
      Young Offenders Institute. The Secretary of State considered  this  to
      be a particularly serious offence.


   2. The claimant claimed to have arrived in the UK on  3  September  2007.
      The Secretary of State did not  believe  this  because  there  was  no
      evidence of his presence in the UK until his mother referred to him in
      her self-employment application dated 20 May 2008. As an EEA  national
      he would not have been subject to immigration control  on  entry.  The
      claimant has committed a number of offences. He was first  reprimanded
      for being drunk and disorderly in December 2010. He received a warning
      for battery in March 2011;  was  fined  for  disorderly  behaviour  or
      threatening abusive or insulting  words  likely  to  cause  harassment
      alarm or distress in November 2011 and fined for shoplifting in  April
      2012. The index offence is his conviction for attempted robbery on  13
      July 2012 following a plea of guilty at Isleworth Crown Court.  On  21
      September 2012 he was sentenced to 30 months imprisonment.  There  was
      no appeal  against  conviction  or  sentence.  He  has  completed  his
      sentence and is now on bail granted  by  a  judge  in  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal.


   3. The Secretary of State concluded that the claimant had not acquired  a
      right of permanent residence in the  UK  and  considered  whether  his
      deportation was warranted on the grounds of public  policy  or  public
      security. Consideration  was  given  to  the  principles  set  out  in
      regulation 21 (5) of the 2006 Regulations. The respondent set out  the
      circumstances of the offence and quoted from  the  judge's  sentencing
      remarks. The claimant had been assessed as posing  a  medium  risk  of
      harm to the public. When he committed the offence  he  was  under  the
      influence of cannabis and his previous offending behaviour was  linked
      to alcohol consumption. The Secretary of State  took  into  account  a
      psychiatric report. The prospects  of  rehabilitation  were  addressed
      and, in relation to the  2006  Regulations,  the  Secretary  of  State
      concluded that there was a real risk of reoffending and that it  would
      be proportionate  to  deport  the  claimant  in  accordance  with  the
      principles in regulation 21 (5).


   4. The Secretary of State went on to consider the  claimant's  Article  8
      human rights, concluding that whilst he had established  a  degree  of
      private life in the UK and had some family ties here  these  were  not
      sufficient  to  establish  a  family  life.  It   would   not   be   a
      disproportionate interference  with  his  right  to  respect  for  his
      private and family life to deport him.


   5. The claimant appealed and the panel heard  his  appeal  on  2  January
      2014. Both parties were represented. The  panel  heard  oral  evidence
      from the claimant and his mother.


   6. The panel found the claimant and his mother to be credible  witnesses.
      The evidence was detailed, internally coherent,  spontaneous  and  not
      undermined in cross examination. The evidence of his mother was  found
      to be particularly powerful. Most of the facts were  not  in  dispute.
      The panel concluded that the claimant had  arrived  in  the  UK  on  3
      September 2007. His mother was an EU citizen who had been continuously
      working in the UK firstly  as  a  self-employed  cleaner,  then  as  a
      healthcare assistant and now as a nurse  who  has  obtained  a  mental
      health nursing qualification.


   7. The claimant's left him in the care of his grandparents in Romania and
      came to the UK when he was eight. He came here  when  he  was  12  and
      struggled to adjust to the UK education system and to  learn  English.
      He left school at 16 and started a business studies  course  which  he
      failed complete. He was on a motor industry training  course  when  he
      committed the index offence and was imprisoned. He  suffered  violence
      at the hands of his stepfather which led to  the  involvement  of  the
      police and social services. Following a beating from his stepfather he
      ran away from home and it  was  during  this  period  that  the  index
      offence was committed. He produced evidence of  a  number  of  courses
      completed whilst in prison.


   8. Since his release on licence the claimant has returned  to  live  with
      his mother, half-brother and aunts and cousins in the same  household.
      His stepfather who mistreated him  is  no  longer  living  there.  The
      claimant helps with the care of his three-year-old half-brother.  Most
      of his family are living in the UK although the grandparents  continue
      to live in Romania and make regular visits to the UK.


   9. The claimant has enrolled  on  a  college  course  to  study  English,
      mathematics, IT and business administration.  He  has  stopped  taking
      drugs and misusing alcohol and has cut his links with his previous bad
      company. The claimant's mother believes that he had  been  shocked  by
      his period in prison and  has  made  a  positive  decision  to  reform
      himself. The panel accepted this.


  10. The panel concluded that whilst the claimant was liable to deportation
      under section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 he had been  living  in
      the UK as the dependent  family  member  of  his  mother,  who  was  a
      qualified person, for a period of five years from 3 September 2007 and
      as a result had acquired a right of permanent residence under the  EEA
      regulations, contrary to the view taken by the Secretary of State.


  11. The panel addressed the risk of reoffending which had been assessed in
      the probation report at 69%. However the assessment set out a list  of
      factors likely to either increase or reduce the  risk.  It  was  found
      that there were factors which substantially reduced the risk. This had
      diminished although not disappeared. The claimant was most unlikely to
      be a serious risk to public policy or public security.

  12. The panel concluded that deportation of the claimant would  not  be  a
      proportionate response to the risk which he now posed. The appeal  was
      allowed under the 2006 Regulations.


  13. The panel went on to consider the claimant's Article  8  human  rights
      grounds, finding that, although he was now an adult, he was  not  only
      living with his mother but was financially and  emotionally  dependent
      on her. There were emotional and other ties which  went  beyond  those
      normally existing between an adult child and a parent.  It  was  found
      that the claimant did have a family life in this country as well as  a
      private life built up over the time  he  had  been  here.  Deportation
      would be a disproportionate interference with his  human  rights.  The
      appeal was allowed on Article 8 human rights grounds.


  14. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal. The grounds argue that the panel erred  in  law  by  making  a
      material misdirection of law. It was not open to the panel to conclude
      that the claimant had established permanent residency in the UK. There
      were no adequate reasons for the conclusion that he  arrived  here  in
      September 2007. No consideration had  been  given  to  the  fact  that
      imprisonment broke the  period  of  continuous  residence.  This  also
      impacted on  the  Article  8  reasoning.  Those  who  had  not  become
      qualified persons because of five years continuous residents could  be
      removed for non-exercise of free movement rights irrespective  of  the
      public good grounds. The claimant had not demonstrated ties which went
      beyond normal emotional ties and had not  established  a  family  life
      with his mother and siblings (sic). The  panel  had  improperly  taken
      into account the future increase in his private life ties rather  than
      concentrating on  the  circumstances  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
      Finally, the panel had failed to give adequate  consideration  to  the
      Secretary of State's public interest policies.


  15. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal. He submitted that the panel
      should not have accepted the date on which the claimant said  that  he
      arrived in the UK without corroborative documentary evidence.  Of  the
      possible dates for the start of the claimant's imprisonment Mr  Tarlow
      favoured a date in April 2012 when he was first remanded  in  custody.
      The test which the Secretary of State had to apply before deciding  to
      deport the claimant had a lower threshold if he  had  not  acquired  a
      right of permanent  residence.  It  involved  conducting  a  balancing
      exercise with, on the one hand, his private and any family life and on
      the other the public interest. We were asked to find  that  the  panel
      had erred in law.


  16. Mr Nwadi submitted that it was open to the panel to conclude that  the
      claimant arrived in the UK in September 2007.  He  accepted  that  the
      panel should have considered the effect of the claimant's imprisonment
      in relation to the question of permanent residence. He submitted  that
      the start date for imprisonment was the date on which the claimant was
      sentenced which was 21 September  2012.  By  that  date  he  had  just
      achieved five years in this country.  The  panel  reached  conclusions
      open to it on all the evidence and there was no error of law. However,
      if we concluded  otherwise  he  accepted  that  we  could  remake  the
      decision  without  the   need   for   any   further   evidence.   Both
      representatives agreed that if we were to  remake  the  decision  they
      would not wish to make any further submissions.


  17. We reserved our determination.


  18. In paragraph 9 of the refusal letter the Secretary of  State  said  in
      connection with the claimant's period of residence in the UK  and  the
      question of whether he had acquired a right  of  permanent  residence;
      "In this  context,  "residence"  means  lawful  residence  within  the
      community. It is not considered that time spent in prison  constitutes
      residence for the purpose of the EEA regulations  (LG  and  CC  [2009]
      UKAIT 0024 and Carvalho [2010] EWCA Civ 1406)."


  19. The panel did not consider whether the claimant's period of  residence
      in the UK had been affected by the  time  he  spent  in  prison.  This
      should have been done and we find that the failure  to  do  so  is  an
      error  of  law.  SO  (imprisonment  breaks  continuity  of  residence)
      Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00164 (IAC) (Silber J and Warr UTJ), which reviews
      the earlier authorities referred to in the refusal letter  states,  in
      paragraph 16; "The position therefore is that it is quite  clear  from
      the cases that a person who is sentenced to imprisonment is not to  be
      regarded as living continuously in this country during the period when
      he is in custody and that  period  has  to  be  disregarded  with  the
      consequence that the five year continuous period starts afresh...."


  20. We have not been referred to any authority which covers the particular
      circumstances of this case and defines the precise date on  which  the
      period of custody commences. For reasons which appear  later  we  find
      that it was open to the panel to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
      claimant entered this country on 3 September 2007 at which  point  the
      clock started to run. The index offence was committed on 2 April 2012.
      He pleaded guilty and was convicted at Isleworth  Crown  Court  on  13
      July 2012. He was sentenced at the same court on  21  September  2001.
      The sentence was one of 30 months imprisonment. By 21  September  2012
      he had spent 167 days remanded  in  custody  in  connection  with  the
      relevant offence. By section 240(3) of the Criminal Justice  Act  2003
      the 167 days of remand in custody counted as "time served  by  him  as
      part of the sentence", and the sentencing judge duly accorded him full
      credit for the 167 days in pronouncing sentence. In other words, for a
      person who subsequently pleads guilty or is convicted of  an  offence,
      Parliament treats the sentence of imprisonment as beginning  when  the
      offender is remanded in custody in connection with  the  offence.  167
      days already served by the claimant were directed to be deducted  from
      his sentence. If the defining date  is  21  September  2007  then  the
      claimant had by then achieved five  years  residence  on  3  September
      2007. If the defining date is prior to 3 September 2007  then  he  had
      not. We find that the  period  of  custody  commenced  and  the  clock
      stopped running on the claimant's period  of  residence  when  he  was
      first imprisoned, 167 days before 21 September 2007. Clearly that  was
      the date on which  the  period  of  custody  commenced.  There  is  no
      indication that the claimant was at liberty at any stage  between  the
      commencement of the 167 day period and sentencing. We  note  that  the
      claimant also pleaded guilty before the five-year period  elapsed.  We
      accept that the position and the consequence would have been different
      if, for example,  the  claimant  had  been  remanded  in  custody  but
      subsequently acquitted.


  21. We conclude that the claimant had not been living continuously in this
      country for five years prior to the period when he was in custody  and
      that he has not achieved five years since his release from custody.


  22. It was open to the panel to come to the conclusion that  the  claimant
      entered this country on 3 September 2007. The Secretary of  State  had
      not suggested any alternative date only  that  the  claimant  had  not
      established that it was any earlier than May  2008.  The  panel  found
      that the claimant and his mother were both  credible  witnesses.  This
      has not been challenged in the grounds of appeal. It was open  to  the
      panel to come to this conclusion and that the claimant had arrived  in
      this country on 3 September 2007. Corroborative  documentary  evidence
      is not essential.


  23. The grounds of appeal suggest that the claimant has had two periods of
      imprisonment. This is incorrect, as Mr Tarlow accepted.


  24. We find that it was open to the panel to come to the  conclusion  that
      even though the claimant was a young adult he had established that  he
      had a family life with his mother and half-brother which  went  beyond
      the normal emotional ties between a parent and adult child. The  panel
      gave clear and sufficient reasons in paragraphs 44, 45  and  53  which
      were properly based on the evidence. The panel did not, as the grounds
      suggest, assess the claimant's private life on the basis of  what  the
      future might hold as opposed to the position  that  the  date  of  the
      hearing. This appears to come from a misreading of paragraph  54.  The
      panel did not fail to give adequate consideration to the Secretary  of
      State public interest policies.


  25.  SO,  quoting  from  paragraph  10  of  (LG  (Italy)  v  Secretary  of
      State [2008] EWCA Civ 190) records that;


          "The 2006 Regulations have introduced a new hierarchy of levels of
         protection, based on criteria of increasing stringency.


         (1) A general criteria  that  removal  may  be  justified  'on  the
         grounds of public policy, public security or public health';


         (2) A more specific criterion, applicable to those  with  permanent
         rights of residence, that  they  may  not  be  removed  'except  on
         serious grounds of public policy, or public security';


         (3) The most stringent condition applicable to a  person  'who  has
         resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  at  least
         ten years prior to the relevant decision' who may  not  be  removed
         except on 'imperative grounds of public policy'."


  26. Thus the panel should have applied the  test  of  "grounds  of  public
      policy, public security or  public health"  as  opposed  to  "serious
      grounds of public policy, or public security". In this appeal the only
      difference is the presence or absence of the word "serious" because no
      issues of public health arise.


  27. Whilst we do not apply any "near miss" test the  length  of  time  the
      claimant has lived in this country is relevant. It was nearly 5 years.
      His age was relevant to question of family life  because  he  had  not
      long since passed his 18th birthday.


  28. Whilst the panel erred in law in concluding  that  the  appellant  had
      acquired a permanent right of residence we find that the panel reached
      the alternative conclusion that the claimant would also have succeeded
      had he not done so. In paragraph 42 the panel said; "In our  view  the
      appellant is most unlikely to be a serious risk to  public  policy  or
      public security at this point. Indeed, even if we  had  concluded  the
      appellant had not acquired a permanent right  of  residence  we  would
      still have concluded he did not  pose  a  sufficient  risk  to  public
      policy or public security even with the lower level of  protection  to
      which he would have been entitled." We find that on all  the  evidence
      before the panel it was entitled to reach this conclusion and that  as
      a  consequence  the  claimant's  appeal  succeeded  under   the   2006
      Regulations. There would have been no knock-on  effect  to  invalidate
      the reasoning or conclusion in relation to the Article 8 grounds.


  29. We have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and can  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  30. In these circumstances we find that whilst the panel erred in law  the
      error has made no difference to the outcome of the appeal and there is
      no need to set aside the decision. Had it been  necessary  for  us  to
      remake the decision we would have reached the same final decisions  as
      the panel.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date   18
      March 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

