

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/01510/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 February 2016                      |On 16 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ERNEST ALI KARGBO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ward, Counsel instructed by Hanson Young & Co,
solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background
    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.  The Secretary of State  appeals  against  a
       decision of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  promulgated  on  27
       October 2015  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal.
       Permission to appeal the Decision was granted on 18 November 2015 by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on all grounds, albeit  recognising
       that ground one was the stronger of the grounds.  The  matter  comes
       before me to determine  whether  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Decision
       involved the making of an error of law.


    2. The background facts so far as it is necessary to  recite  them  are
       that the Appellant who is a national of Sierra Leone was born on  31
       August 1989 in the UK to a mother from Sierra Leone.  His mother was
       granted indefinite leave to remain  on  5  September  1990  and  the
       Appellant was granted leave as her dependent  on  2  November  2005.
       It is common ground and the Judge so found that  the  Appellant  has
       lived all his life in the  UK  (twenty-six  years  at  the  date  of
       hearing).  He has never left the UK.  He has  never  visited  Sierra
       Leone.  His mother and two brothers live in  the  UK.   Contact  has
       been lost with his father and it is not clear where his  father  now
       resides. The Appellant's mother says that she lost contact with  him
       in 2008. The Appellant's last living relative in  Sierra  Leone  was
       his grandmother who died in April 2013.   The  Appellant's  evidence
       was that he did not speak the language in Sierra Leone.   Mr  Norton
       accepted at the hearing before  me  that  although  English  is  the
       official language of Sierra Leone, the "lingua franca" is Creole and
       he was prepared to accept the Appellant's evidence that he does  not
       speak that language.   The Appellant accepted at the hearing  before
       the First-tier Tribunal that he is a member of  the  Roman  Catholic
       Church which has a network in Sierra Leone.  His case  is,  however,
       that as a person who has been born, raised and educated  in  the  UK
       with no family left in Sierra Leone that he has  lost  all  ties  to
       that country - if indeed he ever had any.


    3. The Appellant was convicted and sentenced for two offences prior  to
       the index offence  which  led  to  the  deportation  order,  one  of
       blackmail and one of possession of cannabis.  The Appellant has been
       arrested for other offences but those arrests have not  led  to  any
       convictions.  On 17 January 2011, the  Appellant  was  convicted  of
       wounding contrary to section 20 of the Offences against  the  Person
       Act 1861 and sentenced  to  twelve  months  imprisonment.   His  co-
       defendant was convicted of the more serious offence under section 18
       of the 1861 Act and sentenced to five years.  That is noted  at  [5]
       of the Decision.  The  Judge  there  also  set  out  the  sentencing
       Judge's remarks.  I will need to return to this in  connection  with
       the Respondent's ground two.  The  Judge  noted  at  [22]  that  the
       Appellant has not re-offended since the index offence.  That may  be
       a slightly generous interpretation of the evidence before the  Judge
       but it is correct to note that he has  not  been  charged  with  any
       further offences  and  the  offences  which  are  disclosed  in  the
       evidence after the index offence are recorded at [20]  and  [21]  of
       the Decision so the Judge was clearly aware  of  them.    The  Judge
       also sets out at [7] and [8] of the Decision, the evidence  produced
       by the Respondent of the Appellant's offending history.

      Submissions

    4. Mr Norton relied in his oral submissions on the three grounds as set
       out in the application for permission  to  appeal.   Those  are,  in
       short summary, that the Judge applied the wrong test in relation  to
       paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") (ground  one),
       that the Judge sought to diminish the severity  of  the  Appellant's
       offending (ground two) and that the  Judge  appeared  to  allow  the
       appeal also outside the Rules,  contrary  to  MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
       [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192.   Mr  Norton  appeared  to  accept  by  his
       submissions that ground one was the strongest and  that  ground  two
       would not stand alone. He pointed however to [52]  of  the  Decision
       and the Judge's comment that the public interest  was  satisfied  by
       the sentence in this case which he suggested did show a  fundamental
       misunderstanding of the public interest.


    5. In relation to ground three, he submitted that the approach  of  the
       Judge at [52] and [53] of the Decision is contrary to MF  (Nigeria).
       He accepted that taken alone, this might not be  material  but  when
       read with the other grounds it was a material error of law as it had
       infected the Judge's thinking.

    6. In relation to ground one, Mr  Norton  submitted  that  the  Judge's
       reasoning at [44] to [48] was based entirely on the Appellant's ties
       to the UK and lack of ties to Sierra Leone.  This did  not  properly
       address  the  question  of  whether  there  were  very   significant
       obstacles to integration in Sierra Leone.  In response to a question
       from me about what more the Judge needed to do on the facts of  this
       case, he submitted that the Judge  needed  to  consider  what  would
       prevent the Appellant from integrating given  that  he  is  a  young
       educated  male  with  the  resources  to  adapt  to  an   unfamiliar
       environment. The Appellant as a national of Sierra Leone is entitled
       to the same assistance  as  any  other  national  of  Sierra  Leone.
       Notwithstanding,  as  I  have  noted  at  [2]  above,  Mr   Norton's
       acceptance that Creole is the "lingua franca" of  Sierra  Leone  and
       that the Appellant may not speak this, he submitted that English  is
       the official language and that the Appellant  would  be  in  a  high
       percentile of the population who might be expected to communicate in
       that language given his education.  He also submitted that the Judge
       had failed to note that the Appellant  had  been  brought  up  in  a
       household by a mother who spent her formative years in Sierra  Leone
       and it was inconceivable in those circumstances that  the  Appellant
       would have no knowledge whatsoever of his cultural background.


    7. In relation to ground one, Mr Ward  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
       plainly adopted the right test.  He referred in particular  to  [43]
       of the Decision.  The reasoning which follows that paragraph has  to
       be read in context of that self-direction.  The real  challenge,  he
       submitted, is to the approach which the Judge has taken to the issue
       of whether there are very significant  obstacles.   He  pointed  out
       that there is no  statutory  definition  of  what  constitutes  very
       significant obstacles.  The assessment of  whether  those  exist  is
       fact sensitive.  He also pointed out that although Article 8 now has
       to be viewed "through the lens of the Rules", that  did  not  change
       the position that what the  Judge  is  required  to  assess  is  the
       proportionality of deportation albeit guided by what the Rules  have
       to say about the public interest.   In  this  case,  the  particular
       circumstances of this Appellant are his birth, upbringing and family
       life with his mother and brothers which  the  Judge  found  at  [45]
       rendered him "indistinguishable from a UK national in all respects".
        The issue therefore of his ties in the  UK  and  lack  of  ties  to
       Sierra Leone    is clearly relevant.  He pointed out  that,  if  the
       Appellant had retained ties in Sierra Leone, the Respondent would be
       relying on those as showing that  there  were  no  very  significant
       obstacles to integration in Sierra Leone.  In  those  circumstances,
       the lack of ties is clearly relevant in the opposite direction.   Mr
       Ward  pointed  out  that  the  other  factors  relied  upon  by  the
       Respondent were that the Appellant is educated, resourceful and that
       English is the official language of Sierra Leone.  The  Judge  dealt
       with those at [46] of the Decision.


    8. In relation to ground two, the Judge put the offending in context at
       [40] and [44] of the Decision.   There  is  a  difference,  Mr  Ward
       submitted, between a section 18 offence and a  section  20  offence,
       which goes to  the  intent  to  commit  the  offence  and  which  is
       reflected in the difference between the two sentences meted  out  to
       the Appellant and his co-defendant.  In response to a question  from
       me whether the Judge had properly considered other  aspects  of  the
       public  interest  in  deportation,  particularly   the   impact   of
       deterrence  and  the  public  revulsion  at  such  crimes,  Mr  Ward
       submitted that it was implicit at [42] that the Judge was  aware  of
       the general public interest in deportation.  I noted that the  Judge
       had not referred expressly to section 117  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002, particularly section 117C.   Mr  Ward  accepted
       this to be the case but said that the Judge had considered  that  in
       substance if not in form by his reference to the public interest  at
       [42] and consideration of the level of offending.

    9. In relation to ground three, Mr Ward submitted that any  such  error
       is immaterial.  Simply because the Judge said that  he  allowed  the
       appeal under Article 8 ECHR did not mean that he had considered this
       outside the Rules.  He pointed out that the  Judge  could,  at  [53]
       have gone on to say that the appeal was allowed under Article 8 ECHR
       "when considered through the lens of the  Rules"  and  no  complaint
       could then be made.  Further, the finding at [51]  that  the  appeal
       should be allowed under the Rules would remain undisturbed  by  what
       is said at [52] and [53] of the Decision, unless I found a  material
       error in relation to ground one.


    Discussion and conclusions


   10. I begin with ground one since it  appears  to  be  accepted  by  the
       Respondent to be the strongest of her grounds.  The  issue  for  the
       Judge in this case was whether the Appellant could satisfy paragraph
       399A of the Rules.  At the date of the hearing, which post-dated  28
       July 2014, that rule was in the following terms:-
           "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if-


                  a) the person has been lawfully resident in  the  UK  for
                     most of his life; and
                  b) he is socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK;
                     and
                  c) there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                     integration into the country to which it  is  proposed
                     he is deported"


   11. The Judge did not set out the rule and accordingly did  not  address
       (a) or (b).  However, there is no dispute on the facts of this  case
       that the Appellant has lived lawfully in the  UK  for  most  of  his
       life.  He is now aged twenty-six years.  He was  granted  indefinite
       leave to remain when he was aged six years.  The  deportation  order
       was not made against him until he was aged  twenty-two  years.   The
       Respondent does not challenge the evidence that he was born, brought
       up and educated in the UK.  There is no challenge to the finding  at
       [45] that the Appellant is indistinguishable  from  a  UK  national.
       Accordingly,  it  cannot  be  said  that  he  is  not  socially  and
       culturally integrated in  the  UK.   The  only  issue  therefore  is
       whether there would be very significant obstacles to integration  in
       Sierra Leone.


   12. The Judge's findings in this regard at [43] to [51] bear repetition:-



      "[43]      It is the view of this Tribunal that there are  indeed  in
           this case very significant obstacles preventing the  deportation
           of this Appellant.
      [44] The Tribunal has noted, with some disquiet, that he maintains  a
           stance of seeking to minimise his own role  both  in  the  Index
           Offence and his other offending.  There is also evidence of  him
           becoming  involved  in  potential   offending   and   being   in
           conflict/aggressive situations that have not involved in  actual
           convictions.  However, there is now also evidence of insight and
           significant reflection about his  offending.   The  Tribunal  is
           quite content to conclude that this is genuine  and  considered.
           He has clearly rehabilitated during and since  his  sentence  of
           imprisonment and the risk of reoffending is clearly low.
      [45] The Tribunal is, in fact, quite impressed  with  this  Appellant
           and has  had  the  opportunity  to  assess  him  throughout  his
           evidence and  during  the  hearing.   He  is  quite  clearly  an
           intelligent and resourceful young man who has done his  best  to
           squander   his   obvious   abilities.    He   has   intellectual
           sophistication and addressed the Tribunal with  measure  and  in
           perfect English.  He is indistinguishable from a UK national  in
           all respects.
      [46] The latter point is  of  relevance  since  to  all  intents  and
           purposes, he is a UK citizen.  He was born and educated in  this
           country up to University level.  There is no evidence at all  to
           show that he has any cultural or any other ties to Sierra Leone.
            The fact that it is said that English is the official  language
           of  Sierra  Leone  cannot,  of  itself,   compensate   for   the
           significant cultural difference between that country and the UK.
      [47] There is simply no  evidence  to  suggest  that  this  Appellant
           retains or has any cultural, social or family links with  Sierra
           Leone - a country in which he has never lived.
      [48] It would appear that his last surviving relative in Sierra Leone
           died in 2013 and there is no evidence of  any  other  visits  to
           that country from the Appellant or any of his family members.
      [49] The Tribunal concludes that the Appellant's family  and  private
           life is based and centred in the UK.  He has  no  links  of  any
           sort with Sierra Leone.  It is reasonable to conclude that there
           are therefore very significant obstacles preventing his  removal
           from this country where he was born and grew up, to a country to
           which he has simply no ties at all.
      [50] The Tribunal therefore finds that while the decision to seek  to
           deport this Appellant is statutorily made out, he  falls  within
           the category of exceptions that render that  deportation  to  be
           unwarranted in all the circumstances of this case.
      [51] The appeal is therefore allowed under the Immigration Rules."


   13. Mr Ward pointed out that the Respondent's letter in this  case  pre-
       dated the change in paragraph 399A of the Rules  and  therefore  did
       focus on whether the Appellant had any ties  to  Sierra  Leone.   He
       submitted that this may be one reason  why  the  Judge  focussed  on
       ties.  It is therefore convenient to consider the way in  which  the
       Respondent reasoned her rejection  of  the  Appellant's  case  under
       paragraph 399A as it then stood and Article 8 ECHR as follows:-
      "[34]      It is not accepted that you have no ties to Sierra  Leone,
           the Country of Origin  reports  for  Sierra  Leone  state  "that
           English is the official language".  It is  therefore  considered
           that language would not be an issue for you, upon your return to
           Sierra Leone.
      [35] As you were born in the UK, it is expected that you  would  have
           studied and possibly gained qualifications and skills in the UK.
            It is therefore considered hat any skills you have obtained can
           be utilised upon your return to Sierra Leone and help you to re-
           establish a private life upon your return.
      [36] It is argued that you have strong family ties with your  parents
           and siblings being resident here.
      [37] For the purposes of Article 8, relationships  between  an  adult
           and their parents and siblings do  not  constitute  family  life
           without further evidence  of  elements  above  normal  emotional
           ties.  No evidence has been provided to confirm that you have  a
           level of dependency upon your parents  or  siblings  that  would
           constitute being beyond normal emotional ties.  It is considered
           that your  parents  and  siblings  could  visit  or  communicate
           through modern means of  communication.   It  is  therefore  not
           accepted that you have family life in the UK with  these  family
           members for the purposes of Article 8 of the ECHR.
      [38] As you have been resident in the UK for over  20  years,  it  is
           accepted that you may well have established a private life  with
           friends  and  acquaintances  for  the  purpose  of  Article   8.
           However,  it  is  considered  that  you  could   maintain   your
           relationship with friends and acquaintances in  the  UK  through
           modern methods of communication such as e mail, telephone, skype
           and letters.  It is also believed that they could visit  you  in
           Sierra Leone or another country if they wish.
      [39] Therefore, having considered the factors in your case, it is not
           accepted that the right to private  life  outweighs  the  public
           interest in seeing you deported and therefore  your  deportation
           would not breach Article 8 of the ECHR."
       The Judge had regard to that decision letter at [10] to [12] of  the
       Decision.


   14. As to the test which the Judge applied which is the  basis  for  the
       Respondent's ground one, I am quite unable to accept that  there  is
       any error in the Decision.  The section dealing with paragraph  399A
       which I have cited at [12] above, quite clearly starts and ends with
       a  statement  that  what  the  Appellant  had  to  show  were  "very
       significant obstacles".  The challenge  then  becomes,  as  Mr  Ward
       submitted, one about the way in which  the  Judge  interpreted  that
       test and whether there  was  undue  focus  on  the  ties  which  the
       Appellant has to the UK and lack of ties to Sierra  Leone.   I  have
       cited at [13] above, the way in  which  the  Respondent  dealt  with
       paragraph 399A in the reasons  for  refusal  letter.   I  accept  of
       course that the Respondent was herself dealing with  the  "no  ties"
       test since that is  what  paragraph  399A  mandated  at  that  time.
       However, the basis of the Respondent's case  was  in  short  summary
       that the Appellant could return to Sierra Leone, a country where she
       accepted he had never lived and never visited, because his education
       and skills acquired in the UK as well as his age would enable him to
       adapt to that country.  Those factors are  considered  at  [45]  and
       [46] of the Decision.  The Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is
       "intelligent and resourceful".  However the way in which  the  Judge
       took account of those factors was by noting how high  his  level  of
       integration in the UK was as a result of those  factors.   That  was
       not legally impermissible.  Having found that he was to all  intents
       and purposes in the same position as a UK national, the  Judge  went
       on at [46] to note his complete lack of any cultural or  other  ties
       and that the fact that English  may  be  the  official  language  of
       Sierra Leone  did  not  "compensate  for  the  significant  cultural
       difference  between  that  country  and  the  UK".   There   is   no
       misdirection by the Judge and no misunderstanding of  the  evidence.
       He was clearly aware that the test was a high one but the assessment
       that it was met in this case is one which was open to him.


   15. I can deal with ground two more shortly  in  light  of  Mr  Norton's
       acceptance that this was not a stand  alone  ground  unless  account
       were taken also of [52] of the Decision and  the  finding  that  the
       sentence in this case served the public interest.   That  is  not  a
       point taken in the  grounds.   I  have  however  considered  it.   I
       confess to some initial concern about this Decision by  the  Judge's
       failure to expressly have regard to section  117C,  particularly  in
       light  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the  Respondent  as  to  the
       background to the Appellant's offending.  However, the Judge has had
       regard to that evidence at [7] to [9] of the Decision.  Although the
       Judge has noted the difference in treatment of the Appellant and his
       co-defendant twice at [5] and [40] of the  offending  which  is  the
       point taken in the Respondent's written grounds, I am satisfied that
       this was a relevant consideration  for  the  Judge  and  that  undue
       weight has not been placed upon it.  In spite of the Judge's failure
       to note the wider public interest in deportation, in  light  of  the
       Judge's self-direction to the public interest in deportation at [42]
       and the Judge's finding based on seeing the Appellant give  evidence
       that he was genuinely and clearly rehabilitated [44], I am satisfied
       that any error in failing to make express reference  to  that  wider
       public interest is not material.  In  relation  to  the  finding  at
       [52], that finding may be otiose in any event since it  follows  the
       finding in relation to paragraph 399A.  In any event, I am satisfied
       that this is a finding which was open to the Judge in light  of  his
       findings on the evidence as to the Appellant's risk of  re-offending
       and rehabilitation and also when viewed in context.   At  [52],  the
       Judge  is  considering  the  proportionality  in  deportation  which
       required the weighing of the public interest in deportation  against
       the findings which the Judge had by that stage made about the impact
       of deportation  on  the  Appellant.   Read  in  that  context  I  am
       satisfied that this was a finding which was open to  the  Judge  and
       does not show any minimising of the public interest.


   16. Finally, in relation to ground three, I can  dispose  of  this  very
       succinctly on the basis that any error, if there were one, would not
       be material.  It  may  well  be  that  the  Judge  was  misled  into
       approaching the case under Article 8 in this way by the Respondent's
       decision letter which adopts precisely that approach  (see  citation
       at [13] above).  Whilst that  decision letter does deal with Article
       8 ECHR  under  the  heading  and  therefore  through  the  prism  of
       paragraph 399A, the Judge's approach chimes with the  way  in  which
       the decision deals with the proportionality assessment  at  [36]  to
       [39] of the Decision.  Be that as it may,  as  I  observe  above  at
       [15], the Judge's finding that the Appellant met  the  exception  in
       paragraph 399A was sufficient to dispose of the appeal and, for  the
       reasons I have given at [14] above, I am satisfied that this  was  a
       decision he was entitled to reach.

   17. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no  material
       error of law in the Decision and I uphold it.   The  conclusion  may
       not have been one I would have reached but I am satisfied  that  the
       Judge cannot be said to have reached a conclusion which was not open
       to him for the reasons he gave. The Decision  contains  no  material
       misdirection as to the law or misunderstanding of the evidence.






DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 27 October 2015 with the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's
appeal is allowed under the Rules.



Signed           [pic] Date   18 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
