
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01205/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 6 December 2016                 |On : 13 December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               tahoor Mahboob
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa, instructed by ULaw Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  born  on  16  September  1978.
Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal allowing his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
deport him from the United Kingdom,  it  was  found,  at  an  error  of  law
hearing on 21 July 2016, that the Tribunal had made errors  of  law  in  its
decision and the decision was set  aside,  to  the  extent  set  out  below.
Directions were made for the decision to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.



Background

The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 23 July  1990  with  his  mother
and brother, at the age of 11 years, and was a  dependant  in  his  mother's
asylum claim. On 11 August 2000 he was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain
under the "backlog clearance" exercise.


On 20  January  2001  the  appellant  married  Andrea  Barath,  a  Hungarian
national. They had two children together, a son Amin born on 2 October  2004
and a daughter Laila born on 14 February 2006. The appellant  and  his  wife
separated on 16 November 2012, when the appellant left the  family  home  at
the request of his wife. They were divorced on 30 August 2013.


Between 23 July 1996  and  12  October  1998  the  appellant  received  four
convictions for eight offences,  including  vehicle  taking,  theft  from  a
vehicle, driving whilst disqualified and possession of  Class  B  (cannabis)
drugs. Between 15 December 2009 and 10 May 2013 he received a  further  nine
convictions for 14 offences, including driving with excess  alcohol,  making
off without paying, possession  of  Class  A  (cocaine  and  crack  cocaine)
drugs, failing to surrender to custody, possession  of  Class  B  (cannabis)
drugs, failure to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  a  community  order,
failure to attend drugs tests and threatening to damage property.


On 28 June 2013 the appellant was convicted  of  burglary  and  theft  of  a
dwelling and possession of Class B (cannabis) drugs, the index offence,  and
was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment. He  served  eight  months  of  his
sentence in prison and was then detained under immigration powers  until  26
February 2014.


On 31 October 2013 the appellant was notified of his liability to  automatic
deportation, but following representations as to  his  marriage  to  an  EEA
national he was issued with a fresh liability to deportation in relation  to
the EEA Regulations. Following notification of the appellant's  divorce  his
case  fell  again  to  be  considered  under  the  provisions  of  automatic
deportation under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. On 11 June  2014
a deportation order was signed against the appellant  and  a  decision  made
the following day, on 12 June 2014, that section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders
Act 2007 applied.

The respondent, in considering the appellant's Article 8  claim,  considered
that paragraph 398(b) of the Immigration Rules applied  to  him,  given  the
length of his sentence of imprisonment. With  regard  to  paragraph  399(a),
the respondent noted that the appellant's  ex-wife  had  confirmed  that  he
maintained contact with their children  but  considered  that  the  criteria
therein did not apply as  their  mother  could  continue  to  care  for  the
children. Paragraph 399(b) did not apply as the appellant was no  longer  in
a subsisting relationship with his ex-wife. With regard  to  paragraph  399A
the respondent noted that the appellant had been lawfully  residing  in  the
UK for approximately 23 years since the age of 11, but  considered  that  he
maintained ties to Pakistan and concluded that he did not,  therefore,  meet
the relevant criteria.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  were
exceptional circumstances such that the appellant's right to  family  and/or
private life outweighed the public  interest  in  his  deportation.  It  was
accordingly concluded that his deportation would not breach Article 8.

The appellant's appeal against that decision  was  initially  heard  in  the
First-tier Tribunal  on  20  November  2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Martins and was dismissed in a decision promulgated  on  13  February  2015.
That decision, however, was set aside in the Upper Tribunal on 24  September
2015, on the basis that the  judge  had  considered  the  wrong  version  of
paragraphs 399 and 399A, which  had  changed  by  the  time  of  the  appeal
hearing, and had failed to take into account  section  117B  and  C  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  appeal  was  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

The appeal was then heard on 15 January 2016 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
O'Garro.  Judge  O'Garro  heard  from  the  appellant,  his  ex-wife  Andrea
Mahboob, his sister and his mother. She accepted the  evidence  of  all  the
witnesses. She accepted that the risk  of  the  appellant  re-offending  was
low. The judge found that paragraph 399(b) (which  she  mistakenly  confused
with paragraph 399(a)) did not apply, since the appellant  was  not  married
and did not have a partner. With regard to  paragraph  399(a)  she  accepted
that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  two
children and that they would be very upset if  he  were  deported.  Applying
the guidance  in  MAB  (para  399;  "unduly  harsh")  [2015]  UKUT  435  she
concluded that it was not reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK
if the appellant was deported, but  she  concluded  that  it  would  not  be
unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK without him. Turning to  paragraph
399A the judge found that the appellant had spent most of his  life  in  the
UK, that he would have lost  all  ties  to  Pakistan  and  that  there  were
significant obstacles to his integration  in  that  country.  She  concluded
that his deportation  would  breach  his  Article  8  rights  and  that  the
exception to automatic deportation  applied.  She  accordingly  allowed  the
appeal.


Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by,  and  granted  to,
both parties. The appellant sought to  challenge  the  judge's  findings  on
paragraph 399(a) and (b), whilst the  respondent  sought  to  challenge  the
findings on paragraph 399A.

Following an error of law hearing on 21 July 2016, I upheld  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision in relation to paragraphs 399(a)  and  (b)  but  allowed
the Secretary of state's appeal  and  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  on
paragraph 399A, as follows:


         " Consideration and findings


            Mr Mahboob's Appeal


         17. I turn first of all to Mr Mahboob's cross-appeal.


         18. Mr Amunwa submitted, in summary, that the judge had  failed  to
             make any express findings on what was in the best interests  of
             the children, that she had rolled  the  children  up  into  one
             consideration  and  that  she  had  failed  to   consider   the
             relationships between the appellant and each individual  child.
             He submitted further that she had wrongly speculated about  the
             cause of the children's trauma being the lack  of  any  contact
             whilst the appellant was in prison and  that  she  should  have
             concluded that the "unduly harsh" test had been  met.  He  also
             submitted that the judge had failed to  consider  the  evidence
             that the appellant and his ex-wife were back together and  that
             the very compelling circumstances test had been met.


         19. It seems to me  that,  albeit  in  parts  arguably  brief,  the
             judge's findings nevertheless addressed all relevant matters in
             relation to both the children and the appellant's  relationship
             with his ex-wife. It is clear from her  findings  at  [73]  and
             [74] that the  judge  gave  full  consideration  to  the  ISW's
             report, considering the observations made  by  Mr  Horrocks  in
             regard to each child separately. I do not agree with Mr Amunwa,
             that the judge's  finding  at  [77]  about  the  cause  of  the
             children's trauma was unduly speculative  and  contradicted  by
             the ISW's  report,  but  consider  that  she  was  entitled  to
             conclude as she did, in particular considering the observations
             made by Mr Horrock at paragraph 4.13 of his report.  The  judge
             clearly gave careful consideration to the best interests of the
             children and their close relationship with the  appellant  and,
             whilst not expressly stated, it is plain  from  [76]  that  her
             conclusion was that it was in the children's best interests for
             the appellant to remain with them in the UK.  Nevertheless  she
             recognised that, whilst that was a  primary  consideration,  it
             was not the only consideration, and  she  then  assessed  other
             relevant considerations including their support network in  the
             UK and the availability of methods of contact with their father
             after his deportation.


         20. As Mr  Amunwa  acknowledged,  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
             "unduly  harsh"  test  was  conducted  with  reference  to  the
             guidance in MAB, whilst that case has since been found  by  the
             Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450 to have been
             wrongly decided, in favour of the more stringent  test  in  KMO
             (section  117  -  unduly  harsh)  [2015]  UKUT  543.  The  test
             therefore required a wider assessment than the children's needs
             which  included  a  proportionality  assessment   including   a
             consideration of the appellant's criminal  offending,  relevant
             risks, and the  public  interest.  That  was  indeed  a  matter
             properly recognised by the judge at [75] when she  referred  to
             the public interest in deporting criminal offenders.


         21. Accordingly, for all the reasons cogently given by  the  judge,
             she was, in my  view,  fully  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
             evidence did not demonstrate that it would be unduly harsh  for
             the children to remain in the UK without the appellant. I  find
             no errors of law in her decision on paragraph 399(a).


         22. With regard to the assertion  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
             consider the evidence that the appellant and his  ex-wife  were
             back together, for the purposes of paragraph 399(b),  it  seems
             to me that the evidence did not demonstrate that that  was  the
             case. The evidence suggested no more than that the couple  were
             considering the possibility of a future reconciliation but were
             awaiting the outcome of the deportation appeal before make  any
             decisions  (ISW  report  at  3.11  and  3.23).  In   fact   the
             appellant's witness statement, at paragraph 49, stated that  it
             was unlikely that they would  reconcile.  There  was  certainly
             nothing in the oral evidence given at the  hearing  to  suggest
             that  they  were  back  together.  Accordingly  the  judge  was
             perfectly entitled to conclude that there was no evidence of  a
             genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  for  the  purposes   of
             paragraph 399(b).


         23. With regard  to  the  fourth  ground,  the  question  of  "very
             compelling circumstances", that was not a matter considered  by
             the judge as  she  had  already  found  that  the  criteria  in
             paragraph 399A had been met.


         24. Accordingly, for all of these reasons, I find no errors of  law
             in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on  the  appellant's
             grounds relating to paragraphs 399(a) and (b) and I uphold  the
             decision in those respects and dismiss the  appellant's  cross-
             appeal.


          Secretary of State's Appeal


         25. I do, however, find merit in some of the Secretary  of  State's
             grounds of appeal.


         26. Mr Melvin properly conceded that the first ground, in regard to
             paragraph 399A(a), was not the strongest, given the contents of
             [50] of the reasons for deportation  letter  in  which  it  was
             accepted that the appellant had been lawfully resident  in  the
             UK for approximately 23 years at that time.  In  light  of  the
             view expressed in that paragraph, it is plain  that  the  judge
             was perfectly entitled to conclude that the criteria in 399A(a)
             had been met.


         27. Neither do I find any merit in the second  ground  relating  to
             paragraph  399A(b),  the  question  of  social   and   cultural
             integration in the  UK.  The  judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for
             concluding as she did in that regard at [80] of her decision.


         28. However it seems to me that the judge erred in her findings  on
             paragraph 399A(c) when considering whether there were any  very
             significant obstacles to integration into Pakistan.  It  is  of
             some concern that the judge, at [86], referred to  "significant
             obstacles" rather than "very significant  obstacles",  although
             she set out the correct  test  at  [81]  and  [83]  and  it  is
             therefore questionable which  test  she  applied.  That  is  of
             particular  significance  when  considering  that  the  judge's
             conclusions at [86] were based on the appellant having lost all
             ties to Pakistan, whereas the evidence was of  extended  family
             members remaining in  Pakistan.  Although  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Martins' decision was set aside, the  evidence  that  was
             before her is not excluded and may be considered,  and  I  note
             that there was reference in that decision  to  extended  family
             members at [57], [98] and [118]. That does not appear to  be  a
             matter fully and  properly  considered  by  Judge  O'Garro  and
             neither did she give consideration, or proper consideration, to
             the appellant's language and cultural  ties  to  Pakistan.  Her
             decision appears to have been made with reliance  on  the  more
             restrictive test in Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria
             [2013] UKUT 60 applicable to the old version of paragraph  399A
             rather than the wider consideration envisaged  in  the  revised
             paragraph 399A(c).


         29. Furthermore, I  find  myself  in  agreement  with  Mr  Melvin's
             submission that the judge's  assessment  of  paragraph  399A(c)
             ought  to  have  included,   but   failed   to   include,   any
             consideration of the public interest and the  negative  aspects
             of the appellant's conduct. The recent cases of MM (Uganda) and
             MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 make it clear that a holistic
             consideration,  including  a  consideration   of   the   public
             interest, has to form part of the assessments in paragraph 399,
             and so too  it  ought  to  have  formed  part  of  the  judge's
             assessment of paragraph 399A. I do not  agree  with  Mr  Amunwa
             that  the  judge's  previous  references  to  the   appellant's
             criminal offences and to the public interest  demonstrate  that
             these were matters taken into  consideration  when  making  her
             findings on paragraph 399A(c) later on in her decision.


         30. For all of these reasons I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's
             decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds,  with
             reference to paragraph 399A, has to be set aside  and  re-made.
             The Secretary of State's appeal is  therefore  allowed.  I  set
             aside the decision allowing the appeal  under  paragraph  399A.
             The judge's findings on  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b),  and  her
             findings on paragraph 399A(a) and (b) are preserved.


         31. The appellant's appeal will therefore be listed for  a  resumed
             hearing in the Upper Tribunal in order for the decision  to  be
             re-made on paragraph 399A and, if  the  criteria  in  paragraph
             399A are found not to have been met, on paragraph 398  and  the
             question of "very compelling circumstances".

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me for a resumed hearing on 6 December 2016,  to
re-make the decision on paragraph 399A(c), as  to  whether  there  would  be
very significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  Pakistan,
and, if relevant, whether there were very compelling circumstances over  and
above those described in paragraphs  399  and  399A,  for  the  purposes  of
paragraph 398 of the immigration rules.


Further oral evidence was given  by  the  appellant,  his  ex-wife  and  his
sister to address the above questions.


The appellant, when asked how familiar he was with the culture in  Pakistan,
said that he was  more  familiar  now  than  previously  as  he  was  now  a
practising Muslim and was learning the basics of  the  culture  through  his
mother and cousins. Previously he had not understood why men and women  were
kept separate, since he had grown up mixing with his brothers  and  sisters,
and his male and female cousins. He now  understood  that  there  were  good
reasons for separating them. However he believed that he would feel like  an
outsider if he returned  to  Pakistan,  as  he  had  done  when  he  visited
previously, as the country was poor and corrupt and he would  not  know  who
to trust. His relatives in Pakistan were poor and would not be able to  help
him. He had maternal and paternal uncles in Pakistan, with  their  families,
but he only spoke to them if he was  at  his  mother's  house  and  she  was
speaking to them. It would be possible to strengthen  his  bonds  with  them
but they could not support him financially and  he  would  be  a  burden  on
them. One uncle had had to rely financially upon  his  daughter's  husband's
family as he could not support himself  and  so  he  (the  appellant)  could
hardly ask him for help. The appellant said, further, that  he  could  speak
conversational Urdu but could not read or write the language  and  so  would
have to get people to help  him  in  Pakistan  and  would  not  be  able  to
progress quickly. He agreed that he could use his skills as  a  mechanic  in
Pakistan even if he could not read or write in Urdu.

When cross-examined by Mr Melvin, the appellant said that he  lived  at  his
mother's house and was supported by his parents, although he  only  required
food and accommodation. He had stopped drinking and  smoking.  He  had  many
family members in the UK but  they  could  not  assist  him  financially  in
Pakistan as they had their own debts here. His parents had nothing  to  give
him financially but could only assist  by  guiding  him  by  contacting  his
uncles. He had been attending the mosque for about six to seven  months.  He
had been to Pakistan only twice, in 2006 and 2008 for family  weddings,  and
his mother had stopped going there since her mother  died  in  2013/14.  The
appellant confirmed that he now accepted that the culture  of  Pakistan,  in
segregating men and women until marriage, was the correct way.  In  response
to Mr Amunwa's further questions, the appellant said that it  was  best  for
his children if he remained in the UK. He was able to guide them  in  regard
to their school life and education and  keep  them  safe,  as  he  had  been
through the education system in the UK himself, whereas his ex-wife was  not
familiar with school life here.


The appellant's sister, Samia Rabbani, then gave  her  evidence,  confirming
that she had come to the UK with the appellant when they  were  young,  when
they had very little English and associated  with  the  Pakistani  community
here. She said that the  appellant  would  find  it  difficult  to  cope  in
Pakistan as he had limited knowledge of Urdu and did  not  know  his  uncles
very well. She would not have spare money to send him if he was in  Pakistan
as she had a family to support here. When cross-examined, she said that  the
appellant did not  know  the  system  in  Pakistan  and  so  would  find  it
difficult to work there.


Finally the appellant's former wife, Andrea Mahboob, gave her evidence.  She
said that the appellant had little to do with his  family  in  Pakistan  and
would only speak to them when he was at his mother's house. If they  visited
any family abroad it was her family in Hungary as it was closer and  in  any
event the appellant's brothers and sisters were  in  the  UK.  It  would  be
undescribably hard if he had to leave the UK and she did not  know  how  she
was going to be able to cope with  teenage  children  without  their  father
around. It was a huge benefit having him living close by  and  he  was  very
close to his children. She had never  been  to  Pakistan  and  knew  nothing
about the Pakistani culture.


Both parties then made submissions.


Mr Melvin submitted that there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  the
appellant integrating in Pakistan. He could speak  the  language  and  could
work as a mechanic. He was now a practising  Muslim.  It  was  not  accepted
that his large extended family in the UK would not be able to  provide  some
initial assistance  when  he  returned  to  Pakistan.  There  were  no  very
compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest  for  the  purposes
of paragraph 398 and outside the rules, with reference to  the  judgment  of
the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2016] UKSC 60. The situation had changed since  the  independent
social worker's report, with the appellant's  return  to  Islam,  and  great
weight should be placed on the appellant's offending and the  fact  that  he
was a medium level offender. The appeal should be dismissed.


Mr Amunwa relied on the judgement in Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  813  in
relation to the question of "very significant obstacles to integration".  He
submitted that the integration test was a  "broad  evaluative  judgment"  in
which it was relevant that the appellant would be an outsider  in  Pakistan.
He had spent the majority of his life in the  UK  and  had  no  one  readily
available  to  guide  him  in  Pakistan,  where  it  was  a  very  different
environment to what he was used to. He  was  illiterate  in  Urdu  and  that
would affect his ability to cope there in  terms  of  finding  accommodation
and employment. His extended family in Pakistan would not provide an  active
support network, having never made regular visits to the UK  or  experienced
any intensive contact. Mr Amunwa relied  on  the  "balance  sheet"  approach
advocated in Hesham Ali, and submitted that whilst  the  best  interests  of
the  children  fell  short  of  meeting  the  "unduly  harsh"  test,   their
separation from their father would nevertheless be harsh. He relied  on  the
independent social  worker's  report  in  that  respect.  In  addition,  the
appellant was significantly rehabilitated, he had a supportive  relationship
with his ex-partner and lengthy residence in the UK.  There  were  therefore
weighty factors in  favour  of  the  appellant  and  the  appeal  should  be
allowed.


Consideration and findings


The issues in re-making the decision in the appellant's  appeal  are  narrow
and concern  the  question  of  whether  there  would  be  very  significant
obstacles to his integration into Pakistan for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
399A(c), whether there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A, for the  purposes  of  paragraph
398 of the immigration rules,  or  whether  there  are  any  other  features
outweighing the public interest outside the immigration rules,  pursuant  to
the decision in Hesham Ali.

Turning first of all to paragraph 399A(c), which is reflected  in  Exception
1 in section 117C(4)(c) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002, I do not consider that the appellant has  succeeded  in  demonstrating
that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in
Pakistan. The strength of his case in this regard  lies  in  his  length  of
residence in the UK and the fact that he has lived  in  this  country  since
the young age of 11 years and would thus be  returning  to  a  country  with
which he has limited familiarity (having visited only twice) and  which  has
a different language, system and culture to that  to  which  he  has  become
accustomed in the  UK,  and  furthermore  that  his  close  family  members,
including his children, all live in the UK rather than Pakistan.  These  are
of course weighty matters and indeed led Judge O'Garro to allow the  appeal.



However,  "very   significant   obstacles"   means   something   more   than
difficulties, or even significant difficulties. In this case, the  appellant
spent the first 11 years of his life in Pakistan and attended  school  there
for 5 years (as indicated at [5]  of  his  first  witness  statement  of  18
November 2014). As he explained at [8]  of  that  witness  statement,  after
moving to the UK his family lived within  their  own  community  where  they
spoke their own language. It seems to me that the appellant  has  been  less
than truthful in respect to his account of his  language  ability,  claiming
in his most recent witness statement, at [12], that he  spoke  the  language
at a  "barely  conversational  level",  which  is  clearly  untrue  and  was
contradicted by the evidence given at the hearing and by the  indication  in
the evidence given in his previous statement at [8] and [9]. I also find  it
difficult to accept that, having spent 5 years at school in  Pakistan  until
the age of 11, he is currently illiterate and unable to read or write  Urdu,
as he claims, and I consider that that  is  also  untrue,  or  at  least  an
exaggeration. He clearly speaks the  language  and  would  have  no  problem
communicating in Pakistan. The appellant accepted that he would be  able  to
utilise the skills attained  in  the  UK  as  a  mechanic  and  I  consider,
therefore, that he should not have problems finding employment in  Pakistan,
whether or not he can read and write in Urdu.  He  has  extended  family  in
Pakistan, namely uncles and aunts and cousins, who could  guide  and  assist
him in that and other  respects.  Whilst  he  claims  to  have  had  limited
contact with  that  extended  family,  the  reliability  of  that  claim  is
somewhat undermined by his attempt to underplay his  language  ability,  but
in any event it is his case that  he  has  communicated  with  those  family
members when at his mother's house and he accepted himself that he would  be
able to strengthen the family bonds if he was to return to Pakistan.

The problem which the  appellant  identified  in  particular  was  that  his
extended family in Pakistan did not have the financial means to support  him
and he feared becoming a burden upon them. However, whilst the claim in  the
evidence was that his family members in the UK could not  provide  him  with
financial support, I see no reason why they could not  provide  the  limited
assistance required in the short-term before he was able  to  earn  his  own
living through working as a  mechanic  or  otherwise.  Whether  or  not  his
extended family in Pakistan have limited financial means, it is clear  that,
and I find that, there is a support network available to  him  in  terms  of
initial  accommodation  and  guidance.  As  regards  familiarity  with   the
culture, it is the case that the  appellant  has  already  returned  to  the
religion and religious culture which exists  in  Pakistan  and  he  accepted
himself that he now understood and accepted the cultural norms that  he  had
previously  not  espoused,  such  as  the  separation  of  male  and  female
relatives.


Mr Amunwa, in his submissions, accepted  that  the  concerns  in  regard  to
integration in the appellant's case were in effect now limited  to  language
and lack of support network. However, for the reasons given, I do not  agree
that  either  present  significant  obstacles,  and   certainly   not   very
significant  obstacles,  to  integration.   I   consider   the   appellant's
circumstances are entirely different to those of  the  appellant  in  Kamara
who had no knowledge  of  the  local  languages,  no  familiarity  with  the
cultural norms and no family ties in his country of origin.   On  the  basis
of the broader evaluative judgment suggested in that case, it  seems  to  me
that, in terms of the approach in [14], the appellant will be enough  of  an
insider to have a reasonable  opportunity  to  be  accepted  in  society  in
Pakistan,  having  an  ability  to   communicate   in   the   language,   an
identification with and understanding  of  the  religion  and  culture,  the
skills to enable him to  find  employment  and  the  support  (even  if  not
financial) of extended family members. I  do  not,  therefore,  accept  that
there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  in
Pakistan and do not accept that he meets the criteria in paragraph 399A(c).

Turning to "very compelling circumstances over and above those described  in
paragraphs 399 and 399A", I find again that there are none. It  has  already
been found, for reasons fully and properly  given,  that  it  would  not  be
unduly harsh for the appellant's children to be separated from their  father
and for them to remain in the UK with their  mother  upon  his  deportation.
The appellant's children's best interests and the report of the  independent
social worker have been considered in some detail by Judge  O'Garro  in  her
decision and I have provided reasons for upholding her decision. I  do  not,
therefore, consider it appropriate to  repeat  the  findings  made.  Indeed,
recent case law has particularly emphasised the weight to be  given  to  the
public interest in cases  concerning  foreign  criminals  despite  the  best
interests of the children.


Taking account of all relevant factors in this  case,  including  those  set
out in section 117B and C  of  the  2002  Act,  and  giving  weight  to  the
appellant's  length  of  residence,  close  family  and   other   ties   and
integration into this country,  his  lengthy  absence  from  Pakistan  since
childhood, his relationship with his children and their best interests,  the
reasons given for his criminal offending and his assurances  that  he  would
not re-offend,  the  low  risk  of  re-offending  and  his  efforts  towards
rehabilitation, but also considering the nature and extent of  his  criminal
convictions and his offending history, and the weight to be attached to  the
public  interest,  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is  nothing  sufficiently
compelling in the appellant's circumstances or  those  of  his  children  or
other family members to outweigh the  significant  public  interest  in  his
deportation for the purposes of paragraph 398 of the immigration rules.

In Hesham Ali the Supreme Court held that the immigration rules were  not  a
complete code and I have therefore considered whether  there  is  any  other
aspect of the appellant's case which would outweigh the public  interest  in
his deportation. For the reasons already given, I find that there are  none.
Accordingly I  consider  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  not  be
disproportionate and would not breach his human rights.  The  exceptions  to
deportation set out at section 33 of the UK Borders Act  2007  therefore  do
not apply.

DECISION


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law in relation to  its  findings  on  paragraph  399A,  and  the
decision has accordingly been set aside  in  that  respect.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal on all grounds.


                               Signed   Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
