
IAC-TH-CP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01142/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2015                  |On 25 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                               Joseph Miranda
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person - no representation
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal. He was  born  on  10  December
      1974 in Funchal, Madeira.  The respondent made a decision  to  make  a
      deportation order against him  which  is  dated  13  June  2014.   The
      relevant part of the decision reads as follows:-

          "On 11 December 2013 at Wood Green Crown Court, you were convicted
          of burglary with intent to steal - non dwelling.  The Secretary of
          State has considered the offence of which you have been  convicted
          and  your  conduct,  in  accordance  with  Regulation  21  of  the
          Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   She  is
          satisfied that you would pose a genuine, present and  sufficiently
          serious threat to the interests of public policy if you were to be
          allowed to remain in the United Kingdom and that your  deportation
          is justified under Regulation 21.  She has therefore decided under
          Regulation 19(3)(b) that you should be removed and an  order  made
          in accordance with Regulation 24(3) requiring  you  to  leave  the
          United Kingdom and prohibiting  you  from  re-entering  while  the
          order is in force.  For the purpose of the order  Section  3(5)(a)
          of the Immigration Act 1971 will apply.

          The Secretary of  State  proposes  to  give  directions  for  your
          removal to Portugal, the country of which you are a national."

   2. The appellant appealed against this decision and the appeal was  heard
      on 7 October 2014.  The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Troup who allowed the appeal.  The respondent sought  to  appeal  that
      decision.  Permission to appeal was granted and after an oral  hearing
      before Upper Tribunal Judge Latter the First-tier Tribunal  was  found
      to have erred in law such that its decision was  set  aside.   It  was
      directed that the appeal would remain in the Upper  Tribunal  for  the
      decision to be remade; hence the appeal came before me.

Documentation

   3. I have before me all those documents that were before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge.  In  addition  the  appellant  provided  some  further
      evidence in an unnumbered bundle and with at least one  document  that
      appears to be in Portuguese which document was not translated.

The Oral Evidence Before Me

   4. I heard evidence from the appellant; Ms Varsha Harilal  Patelm  -  the
      appellant's partner - and from Mrs Maria Fatima  Gon�alves  Miranda  -
      the appellant's mother.  The appellant's father was in  attendance  at
      the hearing but in the end did not give evidence as he indicated  that
      he was feeling unwell.  The appellant and Ms Patel gave their evidence
      in English and Mrs Miranda gave evidence  through  an  interpreter  in
      Portuguese.

The Law

   5. Under Regulation 19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 the Secretary of State may remove an EEA national  or
      the family member of such a national if the  Secretary  of  State  has
      decided that the person's removal is justified on  grounds  of  public
      policy, public security or public health in accordance with Regulation
      21.

   6. Regulation 21 states:-

          "21.    (1)  In this regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA
                   decision taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public
                   security or public health.

              (2) A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                   ends.

              (3) A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                   person  with  a  permanent  right  of   residence   under
                   regulation 15 except on serious grounds of public  policy
                   or public security.

              (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                   grounds of public security in respect of an EEA  national
                   who-

                   (a) has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                       period of at least ten years prior to  the  relevant
                       decision; or

                   (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                       is necessary in his best interests, as provided  for
                       in the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted
                       by the General Assembly of  the  United  Nations  on
                       20th November 1989.

              (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
                   policy or  public  security  it  shall,  in  addition  to
                   complying  with  the   preceding   paragraphs   of   this
                   regulation, be taken in  accordance  with  the  following
                   principles-

                   (a) the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                       proportionality;

                   (b)  the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                       personal conduct of the person concerned;

                   (c) the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                       represent  a  genuine,  present   and   sufficiently
                       serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
                       interests of society;

                   (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                       which relate to considerations of general prevention
                       do not justify the decision;

                   (e) a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                       themselves justify the decision.

              (6) Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                   public policy or public security in relation to a  person
                   who is resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker
                   must take account of  considerations  such  as  the  age,
                   state of health, family and  economic  situation  of  the
                   person, the person's length of residence  in  the  United
                   Kingdom, the person's  social  and  cultural  integration
                   into the United Kingdom and the extent  of  the  person's
                   links with his country of origin.

              (7) ..." (Not relevant to this appeal).

   7. According to the respondent  a  letter  was  sent  on  15  April  2014
      requesting evidence from the appellant of his continuous residence and
      of exercising treaty rights in  the  UK  but  he  failed  to  respond.
      Because he had provided no such evidence it was not accepted  that  he
      had acquired the right of permanent residence in the  United  Kingdom.
      According to a document at I3 of the respondent's bundle the appellant
      did not provide a  response  to  that  request  because  "Home  Office
      already have all the paperwork that they are requesting him to  send".



   8. The evidence that I have before me which  was  not  challenged  by  Mr
      Wilding at the hearing  indicates  that  the  appellant's  father  was
      purchasing National Insurance stamps at least from December 1973  when
      he was working at the Connaught Hotel.  He has produced his card  from
      that period to show this.  Photocopy entries from his passport at  the
      time show that he was granted  permission  to  work  as  a  waiter  at
      various establishments with entries from August 1973, January 1974 and
      October  1976.  Thereafter  he  was  granted  the  right   to   remain
      permanently in the United Kingdom by a letter dated 16 August 1979.

   9. Prior to the appellant's father being  granted  the  right  to  remain
      permanently  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  permission   granted   for
      employment as a waiter was "subject to review as necessary".  It is  a
      reasonable  assumption  that  the  appellant's  father  was   employed
      throughout the period  1973  to  1979,  otherwise  I  would  not  have
      expected him to have been granted permission to remain permanently.

  10. The appellant's evidence is that he entered the United Kingdom in 1977
      when he was aged 2.  I have little reason to doubt that he has resided
      here ever since. There is a letter from the Home Office dated 5  April
      1977 which refers to  permission  being  granted  to  the  appellant's
      mother to come to the United Kingdom to reside  with  the  appellant's
      father. Permission was given also for three children to  reside  here,
      the appellant being one of them.  There  is  good  reason  to  suppose
      therefore that the appellant arrived during 1977 as  he  states.   His
      father was exercising the equivalent of treaty rights at the time  and
      the appellant thereafter, I accept, attended school until he  was  the
      age of 16.

  11. In order for the appellant to acquire an initial five years  permanent
      residence while at school he would have  needed  to  be  either  self-
      sufficient with comprehensive sickness  insurance  or  have  been  the
      family member of  a  person  who  was  at  the  time  exercising  (the
      equivalent of) treaty rights in the UK.  I agree with  the  respondent
      that simply attending school for five years would not be  evidence  of
      continuous residence in accordance with the EEA Regulations.

  12. The problem for this appellant is the paucity of evidence  that  could
      lead me to the conclusion that he has acquired such a permanent  right
      of residence and therefore enhanced  protection  against  deportation.
      He came into the United Kingdom at a very young age and at a time when
      his father was working here with permission.  However, no evidence has
      been produced to me in what way and for what periods  his  father  was
      exercising treaty rights after he obtained indefinite leave to remain.
       One might assume that he carried on exercising such  rights  for  the
      entire period until he retired.  On the other  hand  it  is  perfectly
      possible - I do not know - that in fact he ceased any such  activities
      immediately after he obtained indefinite leave to remain.

  13. The appellant himself gave evidence of his  employment  after  leaving
      school.  There is a CV but this cannot by any  means  be  said  to  be
      comprehensive because it lacks detail and evidence to support what  is
      said in it.  It was apparently prepared by Ms  Patel  and  is  in  one
      respect at least incorrect in showing his employment record.  In  oral
      evidence before me the appellant said that he had not worked for  HRPC
      (Parts Centre) from 2004 to 2011 as the CV stated but from 2007 (after
      his release from custody) until 2011.  Even then it  appears  unlikely
      that that date is correct given that he was  imprisoned  for  eighteen
      months on 21 August 2007 and on 6 November 2007  imprisoned  for  four
      months "concurrent".  His next period of imprisonment then appears  to
      have been on 24 December 2013.  This is a period  of  more  than  five
      years since the last conviction but the  evidence  produced  does  not
      show to me on the balance of  probabilities  that  between  those  two
      times he was residing in the UK in accordance with the Regulations.

  14. I am perfectly satisfied  that  the  appellant  cannot  bring  himself
      within Regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations which requires that  a
      relevant decision can only be taken on imperative  grounds  of  public
      security. To establish such enhanced protection  the  appellant  would
      need to show that he is an EEA national who has resided in the UK  for
      a continuous period of at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
      decision.  In the judgment of the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
      Union in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  MG  (C-400/12)
      [2014] 1 WLR 2441 the CJEU stated at paragraph 24 as follows:

          "24.    It follows that, unlike the requisite period for acquiring
              a right of permanent residence, which begins when the  person
              concerned commences  lawful  residence  in  the  host  member
              state, the ten year period of  residence  necessary  for  the
              grant of the enhanced  protection  provided  for  in  Article
              28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be calculated by  counting
              back from the date of the  decision  ordering  that  person's
              expulsion."

  15. In MG the CJEU went on to  say  at  [33]  and  [36]  that  periods  of
      imprisonment cannot be taken into account for the purposes of granting
      the enhanced protection provided for in article 28(3)(a) of  Directive
      2004/38 and that in principle such  periods interrupt  the  continuity
      of a period of residence for that provision.

  16. In principle periods of imprisonment interrupt  the  continuity  of  a
      period of residence for the purposes of Article 28(3)(a). Such periods
      may - together with other factors going to make  up  the  entirety  of
      relevant considerations in  each  individual  case  -  be  taken  into
      account by the national authorities responsible for  applying  Article
      28(3) as part of  the  overall  assessment  required  for  determining
      whether the integrating links previously forged with the  host  member
      state have been broken, and thus for determining whether the  enhanced
      protection provided for in that provision will be granted.

  17. As UTJ Latter stated at paragraph 13 of the error of law decision this
      apparent tension in the court's judgment was considered by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in MG (Prison - Article 28(3)(a) of the  Citizens  Directive)
      [2014] UKUT 392 and it held that the judgment should be understood  as
      meaning that a period of imprisonment during the  relevant  ten  years
      did not necessarily prevent a  person  from  qualifying  for  enhanced
      protection if that person was sufficiently integrated but a period  of
      imprisonment must have a negative impact on the issue of  establishing
      integration.

The Evidence Before Me

  18. I do not find it necessary or appropriate to set  out  at  length  the
      appellant's evidence.  I had no witness statement from him,  Ms  Patel
      (apart from an unsigned document apparently produced to the First-tier
      tribunal) or the appellant's mother or father.  I took  the  appellant
      through his evidence as recorded by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in
      his determination from  paragraphs  17-25  inclusive.   The  appellant
      accepted that paragraphs 4 and 5 of the said determination which  gave
      details of his family and his criminal record are correct.

  19. As far as the appellant's criminal record is concerned  the  appellant
      accepts that he has 28 convictions  for  53  offences  which  occurred
      between 1990 and 2013.  He did not accept one conviction  against  him
      shown in the PNC record which was that against John Miranda which  was
      for a term of 35 months imprisonment for being knowingly concerned  in
      the  fraudulent  evasion  of  VAT.   The  appellant  said  that   this
      conviction related  to  his  brother.  That  assertion  has  not  been
      challenged by the respondent and as a result I find that it  does  not
      relate to the appellant.

  20. The most recent offences as shown in the First-tier  decision  are  as
      follows:-

|17       |27.10.2003 - robbery      |Three years imprisonment                |
|18-23    |Six offences between April|                                        |
|         |2005 and April 2007 for   |                                        |
|         |theft and deception when  |                                        |
|         |he was fined or imprisoned|                                        |
|         |for short periods         |                                        |
|24       |21.08.2007 - burglary and |Eighteen months imprisonment            |
|         |theft                     |                                        |
|25       |06.11.2007 - false        |Imprisonment four months concurrent     |
|         |representations           |                                        |
|26       |06.08.2013 - two offences |28 days imprisonment                    |
|         |of false representation   |                                        |
|27       |10.09.2013 - shoplifting  |28 days imprisonment                    |
|         |and other offences        |                                        |
|28       |18.11.2013 - failing to   |Seven days concurrent with the sentence |
|         |surrender to custody      |below                                   |
|29       |11.12.2013 - burglary with|Sixteen months                          |
|         |intent                    |                                        |


  21. Relevant matters upon which the appellant gave evidence are  that  his
      mother and father reside in London W12.  His brother normally lives in
      Buckinghamshire with his wife and three children but he is now serving
      a prison sentence.  The appellant's  sister  lives  in  Ireland.   The
      appellant left school at the age of 16.  His partner Ms Patel has been
      with him since 2007.  He was in immigration detention  (following  his
      release from prison) until late 2014 but was then  granted  bail.   Ms
      Patel is now pregnant by him and is due to give birth in August  2015.
      He was working for Pers Removals between 2011 and 2013 and he  started
      working for them again approximately two weeks before the hearing.  He
      is only  living  with  his  parents  currently  because  he  is  being
      electronically tagged at his parents' address.   He  had  no  sureties
      when he applied for bail.  His partner was willing to  be  his  surety
      but he went ahead without her anyway.

  22. In relation to his employment he left school at 16 and went onto a YTS
      scheme for about a year and a half, learning to  be  a  mechanic.   He
      left due to an accident at work.  After he recovered his health he was
      on unemployment benefit and then in and out of custody.  He fell  into
      bad company and only worked a couple of months "here and there".   His
      first proper job was at "Lucas" working as a catering assistant.  This
      was in 1995 and he worked for about eight to nine  months  there.   In
      1997 he worked for ANC Express Parcels.  A friend then offered  him  a
      job in a travel agent and he worked there for about four  months.   He
      was then unemployed.  He came out of  custody  and  then  went  to  an
      employment agency working "on and off".

  23. The appellant says that he is now free  of  drug  addiction.   He  has
      received no treatment for it but has been able to  free  himself  from
      the habit since his term of imprisonment.  His partner lives with  her
      son.  The appellant has a former partner and a daughter with  her  who
      comes to stay with him and Ms Patel  at  weekends  and  during  school
      holidays.  His daughter is not aware of the decision to deport him.

  24. The appellant says also that he is in good health and has not left the
      UK since his arrival in 1977 except when  he  went  to  France  before
      being convicted of evasion of import duty.  He  has  no  relatives  in
      Portugal.  His father has one brother and two sisters who all live  in
      London.  His mother has one sister  who  lives  in  London  also.   He
      speaks to his parents  in  Portuguese  but  he  fears  that  he  would
      struggle to speak the language in  Portugal.   Following  his  release
      from prison in 2006 he has lived continuously with Ms Patel until  his
      arrest in 2013 and he has worked throughout that period.  When he  was
      in immigration detention at Campsfield Ms Patel visited  him  on  five
      occasions in the previous three months.  Ms Patel's  son  has  resumed
      seeing his biological father and does so approximately once per  week.
      In  cross-examination  before  the  First-tier  Judge  the   appellant
      accepted that he had been given a chance by  the  respondent  in  2006
      when a decision was made  to  withdraw  the  deportation  notice.   He
      conceded that he had not "acknowledged"  that  opportunity.   However,
      whilst  serving  his  sentence  he  had  not  been  subject   to   any
      adjudication and had not failed any  drug  tests.   He  has  gained  a
      computer technician's qualification.

  25. In cross-examination the appellant asserted that it was correct in the
      NOMS report that he had not used drugs for six years  from  2007.   He
      just stopped using them.  Before then he had been a regular drugs user
      and it was only when he had a row with his brother that  he  spiralled
      back into drug use.  When asked what  confidence  the  Tribunal  could
      have that he would not react in the same way again he promised that he
      would not.  His partner has helped him to  stay  clean.   He  realises
      that because of his relapse he has affected  her  badly.  He  used  to
      smoke drugs constantly and his then partner smoked with him  but  when
      she had the child she stopped doing so.  All his friends prior to 2007
      were bad company but he is now staying away from them and  has  erased
      their contact numbers from his phone.  His brother received a ten year
      sentence for supplying thirteen kilos of cocaine.  The appellant  said
      that although he had a lapse in 2013 it  has  only  made  his  resolve
      stronger and that he will not relapse again.  It was put to  him  that
      his resolve has not yet been tested but  he  said  that  it  had  been
      because he is in a "trigger" area where his  former  associates  still
      live and that is a test for him.  He also accepted that all  the  jobs
      on his CV had been short-term jobs or jobs obtained through an agency.



Ms Patel's Evidence

  26. Ms Patel said that she met the appellant after he  was  released  from
      the prison sentence imposed in 2007.  He was sharing a cell  with  her
      son's father.  Ms Patel and the appellant moved in together after  six
      months or so and had been living together since then.  They  have  not
      lived together following his arrest for the most recent offence.   She
      is now expecting on 20 August and it is the  appellant's  child.   She
      had no evidence with her to confirm her pregnancy.  I  note,  however,
      that in the appellant's bundle there is part of a document from  North
      West London Hospitals NHS Trust referring to an investigation taken on
      23 January 2015 which refers to maternity care; an antenatal provider,
      and the place of delivery which suggests to me that Ms Patel is indeed
      pregnant.  Both she  and  the  appellant  are  named  respectively  as
      "woman" and "partner."

  27. Ms Patel went on to say that she was against drugs because of what her
      son's father did.  He was quite aggressive towards  her  property  and
      became a stalker.  She is trying to become a  driving  instructor  and
      works at a food outlet also.  The appellant's daughter comes  to  stay
      with them and the appellant is behaving himself.  He would go to  work
      and come back with a wage every week.  She thinks he got into  trouble
      again because he hit a midlife crisis.  She could not get  a  grip  on
      him and noticed a deterioration in him.  He stopped working so much in
      2013 and she no longer had control over the money and he was "not into
      doing family stuff".  When he went to jail he realised what  he  would
      lose by not taking his family seriously and he is  now  looking  after
      them again.  She wants him to return to her and to provide a life  for
      his family.

  28. In cross-examination Ms Patel said that she was  not  aware  until  he
      went to prison  that  the  appellant  had  been  shoplifting  and  had
      possessed a knife.  Ms Patel confirmed that she visited the  appellant
      in prison and immigration detention.  Although there is  reference  in
      the NOMS report that she "now"  has  a  conviction  for  carrying  out
      frauds with the appellant she knows nothing about that.  She does  not
      have any criminal convictions.

  29. Ms Patel was born in the United Kingdom and all her family  are  here.
      She gave other details of family members.   She  then  said  that  the
      appellant's brother has a cash and carry in Enfield but she  does  not
      see much of him because he is really busy.   She  could  not  remember
      when she last saw him and the reason given was because she and he have
      both been busy.  She last saw him in Christmas 2013 and she has spoken
      to him a few times.   It  was  then  put  to  her  that  in  fact  the
      appellant's brother is in prison and she accepted that she knew  that.
      She added that she did not know for what reason he is  in  prison  but
      when pressed about this she said that it was  for  drugs  and  he  had
      received a ten year prison sentence.  There was "no particular reason"
      she did not say that he was in prison.

  30. Ms Patel did not accept that the appellant's risk  of  reoffending  is
      high.  She knows he is capable of good and bad.  If the appellant  had
      to go to Portugal they would not break up over it.  They  have  spoken
      about it and would cross that bridge if it came to it.  She  was  then
      questioned as to why she had said that she thought the  appellant  had
      got into trouble because of a "midlife crisis".  She accepted that she
      thought he was scared of family life.  Ms Patel was then asked if  the
      appellant had given her the reason why he had  got  into  trouble  was
      because of an argument he had with his brother.  Did she know anything
      about a row with him?  Ms Patel responded that she did not tend to get
      involved.

The Appellant's Mother's Evidence

  31. The evidence that I heard from the appellant's mother was  given  very
      tearfully.  She displayed emotion throughout  and  added  very  little
      other than to plead that she  did  not  want  her  son  to  return  to
      Portugal because he has only ever known this country.

Findings

  32. The appellant was straightforward in giving his evidence.  Apart  from
      the one conviction he accepted all the others.  He accepted also  that
      the jobs that he had had were generally of short duration or temporary
      jobs when he was working through an agency.  Those periods of work had
      been interrupted by a number of periods of imprisonment.

  33. The sentencing remarks  which  are  set  out  at  Appendix  F  of  the
      respondent's bundle state as follows:-

          "On 16 October this year, you broke into a hospital; you took your
          toolkit with you.  You broke your way in via a staff toilet; it is
          clear that  some  damage  was  caused  and  you  were  then  found
          wandering around in the hospital waving a  screwdriver  trying  to
          leave.  Your presence in the hospital caused real  problems.   You
          admit that you were there looking for  drugs  but  the  staff  who
          encountered  you  were  very  concerned  about  the  wellbeing  of
          patients but also their own wellbeing because you were brandishing
          the screwdriver in a very menacing way.

          You have 27 previous convictions for 53 offences, a whole range of
          offences, including dishonesty.  I take into account that  you  do
          not accept one of those convictions; it makes no  difference,  but
          your record, Mr Miranda shows you to be a persistent and  prolific
          offender.  I do not ignore the fact that on the  papers  it  would
          very much appear that there was a lengthy gap  in  your  offending
          and I accept what your Counsel says that, during that gap, you led
          a perfectly respectable life but this break into the hospital  was
          the culmination of offending that had  been  going  on  since  the
          summer and  it  is  of  real  concern  to  me  that  you  have  an
          outstanding sentence for shoplifting when you had on you a weapon,
          namely a knife.

          Your  Counsel  quite  rightly  concedes  that,  in  terms  of  the
          guidelines, this is a category 1 offence.  You targeted a hospital
          for the drugs, you brandished a screwdriver.  This took  place  at
          night and staff were  threatened  by  you.   Set  against  that  I
          accept, of course, in mitigation that very little damage,  if  any
          was caused and nothing was, in fact, taken.

          I have read the  pre-sentence  report.   The  pre-sentence  report
          suggests that you have zero motivation for a  drug  rehabilitation
          requirement order, that  you  have  very  low  insight  into  your
          problems.  I accept that opinion can be contrasted by the  opinion
          of Jenny Davis who says that you are ready, able and motivated  to
          complete a drug programme.  ..."

  34. The appellant was given full credit for his plea of  guilty  and  then
      sentenced to a term of imprisonment of sixteen months.

  35. I have not seen  the  opinion  of  Jenny  Davis  referred  to  in  the
      sentencing remarks.  Whether or not the appellant  said  that  he  was
      ready, able and motivated to complete a drug rehabilitation  programme
      it seems that he did not do so.  The NOMS report however does state at
      J7 that the appellant has attended drugs courses in prison  previously
      including the 12-step rapt course, has been drug free in  prison,  and
      has accepted help in prison also.   The  same  NOMS  report,  however,
      concludes by stating that the appellant has a strikingly  low  ability
      to recognise problems, demonstrated by his unrealistic  view  that  he
      can resolve his drug habit  without  professional  intervention.   The
      assessment of the likelihood of his reconviction is high with a medium
      level of risk of serious harm.  It is said furthermore that as a  drug
      abuser the appellant can be seen  to  be  effectively  self-medicating
      when  emotional  or  relationship  difficulties  arise,  as  with  the
      argument with his brother.

  36. My assessment of the appellant therefore is that  despite  his  stated
      wish and belief that he  will  remain  hereafter  free  from  criminal
      activity the reality is that, as referred to in the  NOMS  report,  he
      will offend again.  Past behaviour is very often an indicator of  what
      behaviour will be displayed in the future and in this type of scenario
      I find that this is likely to be particularly so where  the  appellant
      has only sought and received limited help in addressing his  problems.



  37. I have considered what Ms Patel has said  in  her  evidence  and  have
      taken it into account when arriving at my findings in relation to  the
      appellant.  She clearly did not tell the  truth  in  relation  to  her
      knowledge of the appellant's brother's activities and because of  this
      I cannot trust that I have  been  told  the  truth  on  other  matters
      either.  I am prepared to accept that she did visit him in prison  and
      when in immigration detention and for the reason already given she  is
      likely to be pregnant with the appellant's child.  I assess  that  she
      has limited ability to influence him positively to keep  away  from  a
      life of crime.

  38. As for the appellant's mother's evidence although she  did  her  level
      best, I am sure, she could really add nothing to the appellant's case.



My Deliberations

  39. I turn now to Regulation 21.  For the reasons set out earlier in  this
      decision  the  appellant  cannot  receive  the  benefit  of   enhanced
      protection against removal because the ten year  period  of  residence
      necessary is calculated by counting back from  the  date  of  decision
      ordering  the  appellant's  expulsion.   The  appellant's  period   of
      imprisonment interrupts the period of residence  for  the  purpose  of
      calculating the continuous period of at least ten years' residence  in
      the UK.  Had the appellant been able  to  take  the  benefit  of  that
      enhanced protection the decision could not have been taken  except  on
      "imperative grounds of public security".

  40. Also for the reasons that I have given I am  not  able  to  find  that
      there is  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  has  a
      permanent right of residence under Regulation 15.  If  he  had  proved
      that he had such a permanent right of residence then the  decision  to
      deport him could only be taken (in this appeal) on "serious grounds of
      public policy".  Although it seems on the face of it somewhat unlikely
      that a person who came to the UK in 1977 who has remained  here  since
      has not obtained such a right, on the particular  facts,  and  on  the
      evidence that has been produced, I do not find that he is so entitled.

  41. That of course is not the end of the matter because the other  matters
      set out in Regulation 21 have to be  taken  into  account  before  the
      removal of an EEA national who has entered the United Kingdom  may  be
      justified on the grounds of "public policy, public security or  public
      health".

  42. I am satisfied that the decision has not been taken to serve  economic
      ends and that it is based exclusively on the personal conduct  of  the
      appellant himself.  I bear in mind and apply the requirement that  the
      decision must comply with the principle of  proportionality  and  that
      his conduct must represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society - in this
      case the threat to  the  interests  of  public  policy;  that  matters
      isolated  from  the  particulars  of  the  case  or  which  relate  to
      considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision;  and
      that  the  appellant's  previous  criminal  convictions  do   not   in
      themselves justify the decision.

  43. In making my decision I take account of other matters referred  to  in
      Regulation 21(6).  The appellant is now 40 years of  age.   He  is  in
      good health.  His parents and siblings live in the United Kingdom.  He
      has and has had a relationship with Ms Patel for a  number  of  years.
      However, I treat her evidence with some caution. In  essence  this  is
      because she patently did not tell the truth about her knowledge of the
      appellant's brother's criminality and also when she  referred  to  the
      appellant himself having a mid-life  crisis  as  the  reason  for  his
      offending when it was his drug problem that  directly  contributed  to
      such offending. It cannot be a truthful description when the appellant
      himself said that he had had a row with his  brother  which  triggered
      his drug taking and criminal behaviour  thereafter.   She  would  have
      known about this.

  44. I accept that the appellant has some contact with his own daughter but
      he is not the primary carer for her and I have  very  little  evidence
      about her and none from her mother or indeed her as to how  she  feels
      about the appellant.  Likewise I have little  reliable  evidence  that
      the appellant has a good relationship  with  Ms  Patel's  son  and  in
      particular that the son has bonded with the appellant  "from  day  one
      and sees him as the father figure in his life and misses him  dearly".
      It appears, in any event, that the child has contact now with his  own
      father.

  45. The appellant's parents came to the hearing and I assess that they are
      dismayed, bewildered and shocked  at  the  appellant's  behaviour  and
      indeed the behaviour of the appellant's brother.  I have little  doubt
      that they would  be  badly  affected  if  the  appellant  were  to  be
      deported.

  46. Further matters to be taken into account are that I  assess  that  the
      appellant has obtained some employment since his release on  bail  but
      in view of his previous history  he  is  unlikely  to  be  permanently
      employed either because it will be his choice not to be  or  of  those
      employing him or because  future  offending  would  prevent  him  from
      having permanent employment as it has done in the past.

  47. The appellant has resided in the UK for about  38  years.   His  links
      with his country of origin are, I accept, limited.  He  will  remember
      nothing about the country.  He speaks Portuguese with his parents  and
      despite his protestations to the contrary I find that there is no good
      reason to suppose that he would be unable to communicate in Portuguese
      if he returned to Portugal or Madeira.   Such  skills  as  he  has  in
      particular  in  relation  to  driving  should  enable  him  to  obtain
      employment there.

  48. I have already found that the appellant stated and  believes  that  he
      will hereafter remain free from criminal activity.  I reject that  for
      the reasons already  given.   Looking  at  the  past  he  has  been  a
      "persistent and prolific  offender"(as  per  the  sentencing  remarks)
      albeit that for the period following release after conviction in  2007
      he seems to have remained out of trouble until 2013. However, he  then
      offended again and received a further term of  imprisonment.   He  was
      well aware that following his release from prison a deportation notice
      was served on him in 2006 but that after representations were made the
      deportation notice was withdrawn. Nevertheless a warning was given  to
      him that may have  had  some  positive  effect  upon  him  because  he
      remained out of trouble for a few years.  However,  he  then  offended
      again. Such beneficial influence as Ms Patel may have had over him has
      proved to be only temporary.

  49. I also consider whether the decision to  deport  could  prejudice  the
      prospects of rehabilitation from offending in Portugal.  I  understand
      that the appellant has not completed programmes that might reduce  the
      risk of him reoffending in the future.  He has  decided  to  go  "cold
      turkey" but on the facts as I find them to be he is not interested  in
      rehabilitative work and there is no support network in the UK to  help
      him rehabilitate. There seems  to  be  no  reason  why  he  could  not
      rehabilitate in Portugal if he decided that that was what he wanted to
      do.  Therefore deportation would not prejudice the  prospects  of  his
      rehabilitation.

  50. Directive 2004/38/EC at recitals 23 and 24 state:

          "(23)   Expulsion of union citizens and their  family  members  on
              grounds of public policy or public security is a measure that
              can seriously harm persons who, having availed themselves  of
              the rights and freedoms conferred on them by the  EC  treaty,
              have become genuinely integrated into the host member  state.
              The scope for such measures should therefore  be  limited  in
              accordance with the  principle  of  proportionality  to  take
              account of the degree of integration of the person concerned,
              the length of their residence in the host member state, their
              age, state of health, family and economic situation  and  the
              links with their country of origin.

          (24)    Accordingly, the greater  the  degree  of  integration  of
              union citizens and their family members in  the  host  member
              state, the greater the degree of protection against expulsion
              should be.  Only in exceptional  circumstances,  where  there
              are  imperative  grounds  of  public  security,   should   an
              expulsion measure be taken against union  citizens  who  have
              resided for many years in the territory of  the  host  member
              state, in particular when they were  born  and  have  resided
              there throughout their life.  In addition,  such  exceptional
              circumstances should also apply to an expulsion measure taken
              against minors, in order to protect their  links  with  their
              family, in accordance with the United Nations  Convention  on
              the Rights of the Child, of 20 November 1989."

  51. It is clear enough that  there  are  not  in  this  appeal  imperative
      grounds of public security to be considered, however unpleasant it may
      be for members of British society to have to endure  and  suffer  from
      the criminal activities of the  appellant.   One  of  the  fundamental
      interests of society is to be able to live in peace, free of fear  and
      the risk of suffering violence or from the criminal  acts  of  others.
      Although the appellant was not born here he arrived when he  was  very
      young; he was schooled, brought up with his whole family, has  worked,
      and has resided here throughout his life. He  speaks  English  as  his
      first language. To that extent therefore he  has  integrated  into  UK
      society. However, his crimes have been frequent.  He was convicted  of
      robbery and sentenced to three years in prison in 2003.  He  has  been
      imprisoned frequently since but not for as long as for  that  robbery.
      For the latest offending he was imprisoned for sixteen months. He is a
      "persistent and prolific offender".  I take into account that he is at
      high risk of offending again and that there is a medium risk  of  harm
      to other members of the public should he do so.

  52. Applying the principle of proportionality and taking into account  all
      the considerations in Regulation 21(6) and with  such  guidance  as  I
      find I am given in the recitals 23 and 24 above I  conclude  that  the
      appellant succeeds in this appeal. He has been here a very long time --
       almost all of his 40 year life. Although he is not  fully  integrated
      into the UK -- his offending is evidence of this and there is  a  very
      real concern about future offending -- he has integrated to an  extent
      because he was schooled and brought up with his family  here,  he  has
      worked and has resided here throughout his life and speaks English  as
      his first language. He has a long standing relationship with Ms Patel.
      He has a daughter here  with  whom  he  has  a  relationship  and  the
      possibility of another child being born in August 2015. These  matters
      outweigh the negative considerations to which I have  referred.  As  a
      result I find that it would be disproportionate to remove him from the
      United Kingdom. However, if the  appellant  continues  to  offend  and
      carry out criminal acts for which he receives punishment  through  the
      courts a future decision to remove him may well be upheld.  As  it  is
      currently the appellant succeeds in his appeal.



Notice of Decision

I allow the appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction has been made thus far and none has been  sought.  In
the circumstances of this appeal I see no need for one.



Signed        Date 25 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
