
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01118/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 February 2014                            |On 17 February 2014          |
|Extempore                                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and



                               kashief laidley
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr Adekoya, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, the panel  comprising  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Glossop and Mrs S I Hewitt, JP  promulgated  on  16
    October 2011 allowing Mr Kashief Laidley's appeal against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State made on 23 April 2013 that he is a person  to
    whom Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act applies.  For clarity, I refer
    to the Secretary of State as the respondent and to Mr  Laidley  as  the
    claimant.

 2. The respondent was granted permission to appeal against  that  decision
    and the matter  then  came  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  after
    permission had been granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin.   That
    hearing before me was on 6 December 2013 and for the reasons set out in
    my decision promulgated on 13 December 2013 I found that the First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.  A copy of my decision is  annexed  to  this
    determination.

 3. I gave directions as to how the appeal was to  be  re-made,  making  it
    clear that in this case the central issue is whether the  claimant  has
    no ties to Jamaica, it being accepted that he is under the  age  of  25
    and has spent more than half of his life in  the  United  Kingdom.   To
    that end I heard evidence from the claimant, the claimant's mother, the
    claimant's grandmother and the claimant's cousin, Ms Peterkin,  all  of
    whom appeared in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  this  case  they  all
    adopted the witness statements that they  had  given  and  were  cross-
    examined by Mr Duffy.

 4. The common theme of the evidence is that the claimant has no family  in
    Jamaica.  He was  brought  up  there  it  appears  by  his  mother  and
    grandmother until his mother came to the United Kingdom.  His uncle was
    also involved with that, that is his uncle, Everton, who,  it  appears,
    died a few years ago in a car crash.

 5. The evidence of the witnesses is  broadly  consistent  and  is  to  the
    effect that since he has come to the United Kingdom  the  claimant  has
    lost his ability to  speak  patois,  has  difficulty  communicating  in
    patois both with his grandmother and mother and that on occasions  they
    have to ask him to speak more slowly and he has to ask  them  to  speak
    more slowly.  That is also the evidence of Ms Peterkin, his cousin.

 6. The claimant has been educated in this country,  and  it  is  also  the
    consistent evidence of the  witnesses  that  he  was  not  educated  in
    Jamaica; he did not attend school as it was too  far  from  the  house.
    All the witnesses were of the opinion  that  the  claimant  would  have
    difficulties in re-adjusting to life in Jamaica due to  his  difficulty
    to communicate, that is in his difficulty in speaking and understanding
    patois which would be expected were he to return there.  It is also the
    consistent evidence that he does not like Jamaican food, no longer eats
    it and has in fact been eating "English food"  for  want  of  a  better
    description since more or less the time he arrived  here.   His  mother
    relates this to the food that  he  was  given  when  he  first  started
    attending school in this country around the age of 8.

 7. I also bear in mind that it was the evidence of the  claimant's  mother
    that he has some learning difficulties and that is a matter  which  was
    also dealt with by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  claimant  does  it
    appears have a large number of more distant  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The claimant's grandmother explained that  her  brothers  and
    sisters with one exception live in the United Kingdom.  The  claimant's
    mother has one sister in the United States with whom  she  has  limited
    contact and has not seen for fourteen years.

 8. Mr Duffy submitted that I should have close regard to  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions, chapter  13,  specifically  section  4  which
    deals with the definition of no  ties  including  social,  cultural  or
    family.  He also addressed  me  on  Ogundimu  (Article  8:  new  Rules)
    Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) which also deals with that issue at  [122]
    to [126].

 9. Mr Duffy submits that the question which should be asked is whether the
    claimant would be able to have an adequate private life if returned  to
    Jamaica.  He submitted that as the claimant had been  living  with  two
    Jamaican women it was unlikely that he would have lost all his cultural
    ties to Jamaica.  He  submitted  also  there  was  a  danger  that  the
    witnesses were seeking to  exaggerate  the  difficulties  the  claimant
    would have on return, that the claimant would have acquired  a  pattern
    of speech up until the time he left and that would have not  diminished
    to any great extent given that he was still living with his family.

10. Mr Duffy also submitted that in the alternative were I not to find that
    the claimant had no ties to Jamaica that this is not a  case  in  which
    there  would  within  paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration   Rules   be
    exceptional circumstances, addressing me in particular on the decisions
    of the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550  and  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 as well as  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC.

11. Mr Adekoya submitted that on the basis of what is said in Ogundimu  and
    also the Home Office instructions it is clear in this  case  that  this
    claimant no longer has any ties to Jamaica given the length of time  be
    has spent in the United Kingdom and that whilst he may well  have  been
    exposed in some degree to the cultural norms through  living  with  two
    Jamaican women, the situation is that  his  mother  in  particular  had
    moved on and had adapted to life in the United  Kingdom.   He  drew  my
    attention to the fact that she  said  they  keep  different  groups  of
    friends and family.

12. I note also that the claimant went  to  school  in  this  country.   Mr
    Adekoya submitted also that the claimant had limited use of patois  and
    limited understanding of it; that he  had  no  family  and  friends  in
    Jamaica; and, in the  reality  there  were  no  ties  to  Jamaica.   He
    submitted that in the alternative there are  exceptional  circumstances
    in this case, given that the claimant  has  learning  difficulties,  is
    solely dependent on his family, and would find it  very  difficult  for
    him to return and would in fact be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.



13. In reaching my conclusions, the starting point must in reality be  what
    is said in Ogundimu at [123]:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin.  If this were not the case then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless."

    It is also stated [124]:

         "We recognise that the text under the rules  is  an  exacting  one.
         Consideration of whether a person has no  'ties'  to  such  country
         must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances
         and  is  not  to  be  limited  to  social,  cultural   and   family
         circumstances."

14. I deal first with the evidence of the witnesses.

15. There is some merit in Mr Duffy's submission that the family  may  well
    have exaggerated to some degree  the  difficulties  that  the  claimant
    would have due to not speaking Patois, but I do not consider that  that
    exaggeration is material.  I accept that the claimant  will  understand
    some patois, he was certainly brought up  in  a  house  where  that  is
    spoken but that does not mean that he would be able to  communicate  as
    clearly with those in Jamaica whose patois is spoken all the  time.   I
    bear in mind that both the grandmother and the  mother,  although  they
    both speak patois, also speak English because they have  to  do  so  in
    their everyday life in the  United  Kingdom.   In  reality  patois  and
    English are not two distinct languages; there is a  spectrum.  Speakers
    will use more or less patois in  their  speech  depending  on  context,
    education and situation; it is likely that in Jamaica, particularly  in
    a rural area, an individual will use far more  patois  and  in  a  more
    accented way than somebody for example who is educated  and  lives  and
    works in a professional job in Kingston  but  they  will  equally  both
    speak patois.

16. There is considerable merit in Mr Adekoya's submission that  the  other
    members of the family have adapted to life in the  United  Kingdom  and
    thus it is difficult to characterise the claimant as being  brought  up
    in a Jamaican environment; both the  mother  and  grandmother  have,  I
    accept, changed through  being  here  and  neither  has  been  back  to
    Jamaica; their ties to that country have also diminished.   I  bear  in
    mind also that the claimant has been at school here.  He will have been
    educated  in  an  environment  which  almost  inevitably  will  not  be
    exclusively Jamaican; it will have been in a multicultural environment,
    in  south  London,  with  a  large  number  of  people  from  different
    countries.   It  likely  that  a  child  becoming  an  adolescent   and
    eventually an adult,  as  the  claimant  has  done,  will  become  more
    influenced by his peer group at school rather than by family  and  that
    his cultural norms will flow from them.  It is instructive to  note  in
    this context that the claimant appears from a relatively young  age  to
    have been influenced to eating food provided to him  at  school  rather
    than the food offered at home to the extent that both  his  grandmother
    and mother have cooked separately for him.  Whilst they are quite happy
    to eat Jamaican food, he is not.

17. It is not in doubt that this claimant has no friends left  in  Jamaica.
    He left at the age of 8.  There is no evidence of him having  continued
    contact with anybody there. He did not go to school there and so it  is
    in effect inevitable that he would have  had  few  friendships  of  the
    type, certainly as he left at 8, which would have continued.  I  accept
    the evidence of the witnesses that they have few if any ties to Jamaica
    and I note that even when the mother's brother died it was through  her
    sister in the United States that that information was passed on to her.
     Further, given that the claimant left Jamaica at the age of 8 and  had
    until then lived in a small rural community, he would have little or no
    knowledge of the country as a whole.

18. Pulling  all  of  these  factors  together  and  bearing  in  mind  the
    definition that is set out in Section  4.1  of  the  UKBA  Guidance,  I
    consider that the reality is  that  this  claimant  has  little  or  no
    knowledge if any of how life is conducted in Jamaica. It could at  best
    be second hand from his mother and grandmother who have, through losing
    ties with the country  over  the  years,  less  and  less  up  to  date
    knowledge of it. His experience is to say the least limited given  that
    he did not go to school there and left at the age of 8.  He  has  lived
    in the United Kingdom now for over twelve years, more than half of  his
    life.  He is as Mr Adekoya submitted entirely dependent on  his  family
    here.  He has no family or connections to Jamaica and whilst his family
    have ties to Jamaica, he does not.

19. Whilst the factual matrix here is different from Ogundimu, I note  that
    given that the family have in effect little or no ties to Jamaica other
    than historical, and on the particular facts of this case,  I  consider
    that the exacting test set out in the Rules is in met as I am satisfied
    that the claimant has shown that he does not have ties to Jamaica.

20. Accordingly it follows from that that I am satisfied this is a case  to
    which paragraph 399A(b) applies and accordingly this appeal falls to be
    allowed under the Immigration Rules.  In the  circumstances,  as  I  am
    satisfied that the claimant does meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    399A there is no need for me to consider whether there are, as  is  set
    out  in  paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules  any   exceptional
    circumstances which apply.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law and is set aside.  I re-make the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


Signed                                  Date   13 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01118/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 December 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                             MR Kashief Laidley
                                                                    Claimant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Adekoya, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal  (a  panel  comprising  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Glossop and Mrs S I Hewitt JP) promulgated on 16 October 2013 in which
    they allowed the claimant's appeal against the respondent  made  on  23
    April 2013 that he is a person to whom Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007 applies and should  therefore  be  deported  pursuant  to  his
    conviction for attempted robbery in breach of previous orders to  which
    he was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica born on  12  September  1993.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in  2001  and  has  lived  here  since.   He
    remained here and was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2009.

 3. The claimant has been convicted of a number of  criminal  offences  the
    most recent being a conviction on 7 November 2011  for  common  assault
    for which he received a community order and a  conviction  on  12  July
    2012 at Isleworth Crown Court for the offence of attempted robbery  and
    a breach of the previous community order for which he was sentenced  to
    eighteen months' imprisonment.

 4. After taking  into  account  representations  from  the  claimant,  the
    respondent considered that he was a  foreign  criminal  who  should  be
    deported and did not fall within the exceptions set out  in  paragraphs
    399(a), 339(b) or 399A on the basis that he had  no  children  and  was
    single and, that although he  had  lived  continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least half of his life immediately preceding the date of
    the immigration decision (discounting  his  imprisonment)  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect him to be able to readjust to  life  in  Jamaica
    should he be deported and  that  he  has  ties  to  the  country.   The
    respondent considered also that there were no exceptional circumstances
    in this case.

 5. The claimant's case is that he in fact  has  no  ties  to  Jamaica,  no
    relatives there and no longer has any memories  of  living  there.   He
    lives  with  his  mother  and  grandmother.   The  claimant   has   had
    significant  educational  difficulties,  attending  a  special   school
    between 2008 and 2010 and is fact dependent on his mother  although  he
    is now aged 19.  His case is that he has now reformed, is no longer  at
    risk of committing further offences and  that  it  would,  despite  the
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals, be disproportionate  on
    the particular facts of this case to deport him to Jamaica.

 6.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the  claimant,   the
    claimant's mother and grandmother and his cousin, Miss Angela Peterkin.
     The Tribunal found:-

      a) that he had been convicted of a number of criminal  offences  prior
         to the index offence resulting in the deportation order [17];

      b) that a probation officer had assessed  his  remorse  following  his
         conviction as genuine [18];

      c) that the claimant had had an unsettled  life  in  the  past  moving
         around on a number of occasions, had been excluded from school as a
         result of his behaviour and although he  had  been  statemented  as
         having special educational needs, this had not been proceeded  with
         [19] noting also that the probation officer  who  reported  on  the
         claimant in October 2012 considered that the  claimant  was  making
         more constructive use of his time, had seen a marked improvement in
         his general belief system and motivation to  change,  had  improved
         his thinking skills and was becoming more aware of the  choices  he
         had to make [20] and having had  regards  to  his  mother's  caring
         attitude [21] that although the fact that he had shown  bad  public
         behaviour his criminality was of the very low risk level within its
         category [22] and having taken account of the  probation  officer's
         report and the  evidence  of  Angela  Peterkin  [24]  and  although
         presented a medium level risk of harm and a  medium  level  of  re-
         offending [23] he did not pose a significant or an imminent risk of
         serious harm; that on all the facts of  the  case  his  deportation
         would be "heavily disproportionate" [27].

 7. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the following grounds:-

      a) that the First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself in law  in  failing
         to have regard to the Immigration Rules in the Article 8 assessment
         and in effect failing to have regard to the  public  interest  when
         assessing the proportionality of deporting the claimant [1, 2];

      b) in failing to give reasons or adequate reasons for finding why  the
         claimant would not re-offend [1] and in particular failing to  take
         into account the finding by the probation  officer  who  found  him
         still to pose a medium risk of harm  and  re-offending;  failed  to
         give adequate reasons for the finding that the claimant has no ties
         to Jamaica, considering only family ties  or  support;  failing  to
         provide adequate reasons for finding that he is  dependent  on  his
         family.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  on  6
    November 2013, stating

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal has erred  in  failing
         to consider  at  all  the  Immigration  Rules  as  they  relate  to
         deportation and thus when conducting the balance exercise to attach
         the required weight to the Secretary of State's view.   The  First-
         tier Tribunal has not carried out the two-stage approach within the
         Rules referred to in MF [2013] EWCA Civ 1192."

 9. I heard submissions from both representatives.  Mr Duffy submitted that
    there was no indication anywhere in the determination that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had considered the public interest let alone  the  weight
    to be attached thereto.   He  submitted  that  there  was  insufficient
    reasoning to uphold the findings reached by the Tribunal, if they could
    be called these, the Tribunal providing no reason  for  preferring  the
    pre-sentence report from Miss Keeling over the more recent NOMS report.



10. Mr Adekoya submitted, in respect of Ground 1, there are  a  substantial
    number of references in the determination to the public  interest.   He
    submitted further that the Tribunal  had  given  adequate  reasons  for
    their findings  of  fact  submitting  further  that  the  Tribunal  had
    considered all the evidence before concluding that the claimant had  no
    ties to Jamaica.

11. Whilst the panel does record [6]  that  the  respondent  relied  on  SS
    (India) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  388  and  records  the  submissions  of  the
    Presenting Officer  [15]  it  is  not  possible  to  discern  from  the
    determination what weight if any the Tribunal attached  to  the  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals.  Whilst they state  [26]  that
    attempted robbery is always serious and that the  respondent  has  good
    reason to order foreign nationals to be deported in many cases, that is
    not a sufficient or sustainable basis for the conclusion that deporting
    the claimant would be  disproportionate.   I  consider  that  in  these
    circumstances, the respondent  could  not  know  why  it  is  that  the
    Tribunal  had  found  against  her.   Accordingly,   and   given   that
    consideration offers significant weight  to  the  public  interest  was
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal, I  consider  that  this
    error is material and so on that basis alone the  determination   needs
    to be set aside.

12. Turning to the  claimed  errors  of  law  as  regards  fact-finding,  I
    consider  that  the  Tribunal   has   given   adequate   and   detailed
    consideration set out in paragraphs 18 to 25 that the claimant did  not
    present a risk of re-offending.  Whilst I accept that, as  the  grounds
    aver, the claimant had stated previously that he would not reoffend but
    had later  done  so,  the  Tribunal  has  given  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding why it is this situation has now changed and noted  that  he
    had not re-offended since being released.  They  took  into  account  a
    substantial amount of evidence indicating that he had in  fact  changed
    and was now getting the active support  of  family  and  the  probation
    service.  The conclusion was therefore open  to  the  Tribunal  on  the
    evidence before them.

13. The panel considered the claimant still to be dependent on his  mother.
    They found, and there is no challenge to this, that he lived  with  his
    mother and grandmother;  that  he  has  no  partner;  that  he  has  no
    children; and he is an only child.  He has never had any  contact  with
    his father and whilst he was in prison as an adult, it is evident  from
    the evidence of his mother, grandmother and Miss Peterkin  that  he  is
    close to his family.  They also concluded, as  they  were  entitled  to
    [25] that he has seriously interested relatives who are able to  assist
    him.

14. Assuming that what is set out at paragraph 26 is  a  finding  that  the
    claimant has no ties to Jamaica, I consider that this  is  inadequately
    reasoned given the failure to address the  fact  that  the  Immigration
    Rules at 399A refer to more than family.  On that basis, I am satisfied
    that it will be necessary to remake the  determination  addressing  the
    issue of whether the claimant has no ties to Jamaica, it being accepted
    by both representatives that if  it  is  under  after  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I therefore adjourned the matter in order  to  hear  fresh  and
    additional oral evidence.



