
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01261/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 June 2015                      |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           Egal Saeed Mohamed Egal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, instructed by Fusco Browne, Sheffield
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Egal Saeed Mohamed Egal, was born on 30 April  1991  and
    is a male citizen of Somalia.  The  appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2004 when he was aged 12 years.  He claimed asylum  but  his
    application was refused by the respondent.  However, in August 2010, he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   On  3
    October 2011, the appellant was convicted of three counts of  supplying
    a class A (heroin) controlled drug and one count of offering to  supply
    a class A (cocaine) controlled drug and was sentenced  to  four  years'
    detention  in  a  Young  Offenders'  Institute.    The   sentence   was
    subsequently reduced to two years and eight months.  He was informed of
    his liability for  deportation  on  26  November  2012  and  a  further
    application for asylum made by the  appellant  on  29  April  2013  was
    refused on 20 February 2014.  The deportation order was made in respect
    of the appellant on 16 June 2014.  The appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal against the decision to make a deportation order  against
    him but his appeal was dismissed (Judge  Grimshaw)  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision promulgated 1 October 2014.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The basis upon which the appellant appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    somewhat problematic.  His grounds of appeal deal, in  the  main  part,
    with the appellant's circumstances in the  United  Kingdom  insofar  as
    they may engage Article 8, ECHR.  The grant of  appeal  (Judge  P  J  G
    White) was concerned primarily with the possibility that the First-tier
    Tribunal had determined the appeal by reference to an incorrect version
    of the Immigration Rules.  That point was not argued before me by  Miss
    Khan of Counsel who, instead, submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had failed to engage with the likely circumstances which the  appellant
    would face upon return to Somalia insofar as those circumstances  might
    render his removal by  deportation  disproportionate  under  Article  8
    ECHR.  I agree with Mrs Pettersen that the  grounds  advanced  by  Miss
    Khan at the initial hearing  do  differ  from  those  detailed  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  However, I have considered the submissions made  by
    Miss Khan.  I am grateful also to Mrs Pettersen for responding to  them
    at the initial hearing.

 3. Miss Khan accepted that the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  His appeal is exclusively, therefore, under Article
    8, ECHR.  Judge Grimshaw dealt with Article 8  at  [28]  et  seq.   She
    properly had regard to Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, in particular, Section 117C [29-30].  She  noted  that
    the appellant could not succeed under paragraph 399A of the Immigration
    Rules because he  had  not  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    sufficient period of time.  At [32], she wrote:

         "The appellant asserts that he no longer has any ties  to  Somalia.
         However against that I note that the appellant is able to speak the
         language of his country in addition to English.  He has  spent  his
         formative years in his country of origin.  I cannot  find  that  he
         has  proved  that  he  has  lost  his  awareness  of  the  culture,
         traditions and societal norms of Somalia.  The burden of  proof  is
         on the appellant to show the obstacles to return.  Other  than  his
         understandable reluctance to return to a country he has not visited
         or lived in for a decade I have not been directed to  any  evidence
         to justify a finding that it  would  be  unreasonable  for  him  to
         return to life in Somalia.  I bear in mind that the appellant is  a
         single young man in good health.   Arguably  as  a  result  of  his
         knowledge, skills and experience he has acquired during his time in
         the  United  Kingdom  he  is  in  a  favourable  position  to  seek
         employment and find his place in society."

 4. Miss Khan submitted that the judge's analysis at [32]  was  inadequate.
    While she acknowledged that the judge's findings were not  inconsistent
    with the country guidance of  MOJ  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
    [2014] UKUT 00442 (which  was  promulgated  several  days  after  Judge
    Grimshaw promulgated her own decision) Miss  Khan  submitted  that  the
    judge had not dealt adequately with circumstances which  the  appellant
    would  face  upon  return  to  Somalia.   However,  Miss  Khan  in  her
    submissions on the grounds of appeal  did  not  challenge  the  judge's
    findings at [27]:

         "Having considered  the  country  background  information  and  the
         submissions of the respondent set out in the refusal  letter  I  am
         satisfied that a return to Mogadishu is not incompatible  with  the
         appellant's  rights  under  Article  2  and  3   [of   the   ECHR].
         Furthermore, I am satisfied that the improvement  in  the  security
         situation in Mogadishu is sufficiently durable for me  to  conclude
         that there no longer remains a general risk of Article  15(c)  harm
         to the appellant if he were returned to the  capital.   Indeed,  Ms
         Campbell [Counsel for the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal]
         has not sought  either  in  a  skeleton  argument  or  her  closing
         submissions to persuade me otherwise."

 5. The judge's unchallenged finding as regards Article 15(c)  and  Article
    3, ECHR should be  read  in  the  light  of  country  guidance  of  AMM
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    00445 (IAC) which has been relevant country guidance for Somalia  since
    2011.  Whilst it is true that the judge did not refer in terms  to  AMM
    or, indeed, to Maslov v Austria (2008) 1638/03 I am satisfied that what
    the judge says regarding Article 8, ECHR at  [32]  is  consistent  with
    both domestic and European jurisprudence.  Although  the  appellant  is
    young and has spent much of his life in the United Kingdom he had  only
    been in this country for seven years  lawfully  before  committing  the
    index offence.  There was nothing in the judge's  assessment  which  is
    inconsistent with Maslov.  The judge's findings as regards the  ability
    of this particular appellant to reintegrate into Somali society are, in
    my opinion, entirely adequate.  In addition, the judge  has  considered
    the strength of family ties which the appellant has within  the  United
    Kingdom, especially with his father [33].   She  reached  a  conclusion
    which was plainly available to her on the evidence and  in  support  of
    that conclusion with cogent and clear reasoning.  I see  no  reason  to
    disturb her analysis either for the reasons given  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal or by Miss Khan in her oral submissions.  As I have noted above,
    Miss Khan did not rely upon  the  reasons  given  by  Judge  White  for
    granting permission.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

