
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01792/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2015                      |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     JL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Birnberg
                    Pierce & Partners, Solicitors (on 28.4.2014)
     Mr N Leskin, Solicitor, Birnberg Pierce & Partners (on 4.3.2015)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (on 28.4.2014)
     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (on 4.3.2015)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because my reasons for  allowing  this  appeal  concern  the
    welfare of a child, CJ, who was born in 2002 and so  is  now  13  years
    old. There is no legitimate public  interest  in  identifying  him.  In
    order to preserve anonymity I have redacted the full  names  of  people
    who gave evidence before me or whose names were given in evidence. This
    order does not restrict publishing details of  the  appeal  other  than
    those prohibited above.

 2. This is an appeal against a decision to refuse to revoke a  deportation
    order.  It has been determined unsatisfactorily on an earlier  occasion
    by the First-tier Tribunal and I found that the First-tier Tribunal had
    erred in law.  Subject  to  minor  corrections  I  set  out  below  and
    incorporate into this determination my "Reasons For  Finding  Error  Of
    Law And Setting Aside The First-Tier  Tribunal's  Determination"  which
    were sent to the parties on 4 November 2014. The reasons  also  explain
    the appeal that is before me including the preliminary view I had taken
    on certain strands of evidence.  However it is a matter of record  that
    the law has changed and I have to decide this appeal not in  the  light
    of the Rules in existence when the decision complained of was made  but
    in the light of the Rules and Act applicable now.

 3. Although I  had  received  written  submissions  about  the  effect  of
    paragraph 399A(a) as it was when I first heard the appeal  I  have  not
    had any argument about the effect of the  rule  399A  in  its  present,
    amended, form. Mr Leskin said that the appellant  "does  qualify  under
    the rules as they are now". This is a reference to the appellant having
    been lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom  for  most  of  his  life
    (just). He is clearly  socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom but I do not accept that  there  are  "very  significant
    obstacles to his integration" into Angola. The finding  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at paragraph 41 that the appellant attended a church that
    had strong links to Angola is factually  sound  even  though  I  do  no
    accept that it can be described properly as a "tie". It is part of  the
    appellant's case that he attends  church  frequently.  The  church  has
    links with Angola and these could be used to facilitate his integration
    into Angola. Paragraph 399A does not apply to this case and so,  unless
    paragraph 399(b)  applies,  the  appellant  would  have  to  show  very
    compelling factors before his appeal could be allowed and the  evidence
    before me would not support such a finding.

 4. I allow the appeal with reference to paragraph 399(b).

 5. I explain my decision for setting aside the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal below:

         "1.  The appellant is a national of Angola who was  born  in  1965.
         He is therefore now 49 years old.

         2.   He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  a  decision  of  the
         Respondent on 19 August 2013 not to revoke a deportation order made
         against him on  28  July  2010.   An  earlier  appeal  against  the
         deportation order was dismissed on 12 October 2010. The  First-tier
         Tribunal  dismissed  the  present   appeal   in   a   determination
         promulgated on 4 March 2014 and the appellant was given  permission
         to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 25 March 2014.  Essentially  the
         appellant complained that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  given
         proper consideration to the appellant's ties with Angola  (if  any)
         and  had  not  made  the  interests  of  his  children  a   primary
         consideration.

         3.   The appellant has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  over  20
         years. If the appellant had established that he has "no ties"  with
         Angola then there would be no need for  him  to  show  "exceptional
         circumstances" before the appeal could be allowed on  human  rights
         grounds.

         4.   The Tribunal did not accept that the  appellant  had  no  ties
         with Angola and dismissed the appeal.

         5.   The Tribunal was  unimpressed  with  oral  evidence  that  the
         appellant had no ties with Angola. The evidence  included  evidence
         from the appellant's children that they had never heard him talk of
         family members in Angola. The  Tribunal  discounted  that  evidence
         because "they have not lived with the  Appellant  for  over  eleven
         years"  (paragraph  28).  That  reason  is  perverse.   There   was
         unchallenged affidavit evidence that the children  lived  with  the
         appellant until he went to prison in 2009. Not  only  is  the  time
         period wrong by about 5 years  but  the  value  of  the  children's
         evidence might reasonably be expected to be greater  as  they  were
         older than the Tribunal appreciated when they stopped  living  with
         their father.

         6.   I have reminded myself that the Tribunal  gave  other  reasons
         for its decision but I cannot say that the decision would have been
         the same if the  evidence  of  the  children  had  been  considered
         properly.

         7.   It follows that the appeal has  to  be  heard  again.  I  have
         decided to keep the appeal in the Upper Tribunal. One of my reasons
         for this decision is that it is likely to lead to the appeal  being
         decided more quickly than would be possible if the case went to the
         First-tier.

          8.  I will  hear  argument  at  the  resumed  hearing  about  what
         findings, if any, can be preserved. My preliminary  views  are  set
         out below.

         9.   The findings at paragraph 26 and 27 about Mr D  appear  to  be
         sound and should be followed.

         10.  Paragraphs 29-39 are  not  tainted  by  error  and  should  be
         followed. I do not  agree  that  the  appellant's  possible  future
         Church connections with Angola amount to  a  "tie"  but  they  are,
         potentially, relevant to the balancing exercise.

         11.  The finding that the appellant has not given up drink  depends
         in part on discounting his children's evidence and so needs  to  be
         looked at again.

         12.  Pastor S's evidence is uncontroversial.

         13.  If either party wishes to rely  on  further  evidence  at  the
         resumed hearing it should be served in accordance with the rules.

         14.  For the avoidance of doubt, I  am  quite  satisfied  that  the
         Tribunal at paragraph 43 of its determination simply missed out the
         word 'not'."

 6. There were two findings of the First-tier Tribunal which may well  have
    been perfectly sensible on the evidence before it  but  which  are  now
    agreed to be wrong.  The first is that Mr  D  was  not  in  the  United
    Kingdom in October 2010 and so was unable to attend  the  hearing.   He
    has produced his Angolan passport with  appropriate  stamps  which  has
    satisfied Mr Avery that he was out of the country as claimed.  There is
    also further evidence which establishes that the witness, C D N is  not
    a blood relative of the appellant.

 7. These are not points that will necessarily assist me very much but they
    were wrong findings and the parties are entitled to know that they have
    not been relied upon.

 8. As I am remaking the decision I must apply Part 5A  (also  called  Part
    VA) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  which  was
    inserted by section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014  and  is  effective
    from 28 July 2014 and Part 13 of the Immigration Rules but particularly
    paragraph 399 which puts into the Rules the amended requirements of the
    Act.

 9. The relevant part of the Act is in the following terms:

         s117C. Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals.

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where- (irrelevant)

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a ... genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect
             of C's deportation on the ... child would be unduly harsh.

10. The relevant part of the rules is in the following terms:

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) ... applies if-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

         (i)  the child is a British Citizen; ... and ...

             (a) it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person is to be deported; or

             (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
             without the person who is be deported.

11. The Act also makes clear that although these provisions  apply  to  the
    instant appeal they do not apply to a  case  where  the  person  to  be
    deported has been sentenced to at least 4 years imprisonment.  In  that
    event the public interest requires deportation unless  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions
    1 and 2.

12. It  is  for  the  appellant  to  prove  his  case  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

13. The appellant gave evidence before me.

14. He adopted an earlier and unsigned statement in my bundle  setting  out
    his personal circumstances.  It is not necessary to go into them in any
    great detail.  The essential points are that  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 1990 during the civil war in Angola and was  joined  by  his
    wife and elder son in 1991.  He was given indefinite leave to remain in
    2001 although he  had  not  been  given  asylum.   His  three  youngest
    children were born in the United Kingdom and are British citizens.

15. He had no family remaining in Angola.

16. He worked in the United Kingdom as a cleaner and later did factory jobs
    and started working in a printing office.  He  became  unemployed  when
    the business was closed and he drifted into bad company and started  to
    drink excessively.  He explained frankly how he had  started  to  drink
    socially and then too much and then became an alcoholic.  He very  much
    regretted the irresponsibility he had shown in that time  of  his  life
    including his criminal offences.

17. I understand from other evidence that the appellant's  oldest  son,  S,
    has been to prison and the appellant was anxious that CJ did not follow
    his example.

18. The appellant has separated from his  wife  but  described  himself  as
    close to all of his children who he tried to see as often as possible.

19. He lived with his "sister", M and her family.

20. He explained how he kept in regular contact with all of  his  children.
    At the time he made his statement he saw his oldest daughter L  "almost
    every day".  Typically he met her on her way from university  and  they
    had coffee and a snack together.  He met his daughter C  two  or  three
    times a week and spoke to her most days.

21. Typically his son CJ spent the weekend at the appellant's home with  M.
    Usually he would collect CJ from his mother's home on a  Friday.   They
    would spend the weekend together and then attend  the  same  church  as
    CJ's mother on Sunday. CJ would return home with her from church.

22. The appellant said that his relationship with his wife had deteriorated
    and he saw no hope of reconciliation, but they had come to  terms  with
    the breakdown of their marriage and were able to be polite and friendly
    towards each other for the sake of the children.

23. He expressed the view that his drinking was behind him.  He now  had  a
    different circle of friends and after making serious attempts to reduce
    his alcohol consumption he had "stopped altogether since July 2013".

24. In answer to questions from me he said he had last consumed alcohol  in
    September 2014.  This was an occasion after he made the statement where
    he said he had not consumed alcohol at all.  He said  he  had  had  one
    glass of wine at a party to celebrate the graduation of  his  daughter,
    L.

25. He reiterated that he had not  resumed  excessive  alcohol  consumption
    since being detained.

26. He believed that if he had permission to work he could get a job  in  a
    restaurant or as a print finisher.

27. He explained in his evidence-in-chief that he now saw his son every day
    because he collected him from school.

28. He was cross-examined.

29. Mr Avery asked him, predictably but perfectly  fairly,  why  we  should
    believe his protestations to have stopped drinking when there had  been
    other occasions in his life when drink had got him into trouble and his
    alleged concern for his family did not stop him  attracting  a  fifteen
    month prison sentence for the incident in 2009.  The appellant  had  no
    compelling answer to  this  question.   He  said  he  had  changed  his
    friends.

30. He was prompted to collect his son from school every day because a  boy
    had been murdered  in  the  area  around  the  school  and  the  school
    encouraged parents to accompany their children home.

31. It was pointed out to him that in her statement M had said that he  did
    not have the money to buy alcoholic drink.   Mr  Avery  suggested  this
    might have been a contributory factor in  his  apparent  sobriety.  The
    appellant understood but did not accept that suggestion. He pointed out
    that his daughter did give him some money and he had  not  returned  to
    drink.

32. The appellant's wife gave evidence before me adopting her statement she
    had  signed  on  6  December  2014.   Essentially  she  supported   the
    appellant's evidence in all material respects, particularly  about  the
    circumstances and occasions in which he saw their  son  CJ.   She  said
    that the school would sometimes ask directly to speak to the  appellant
    rather than her and she would certainly involve the appellant if CJ was
    misbehaving.

33. She was pressed and said that as far as she was aware the appellant  no
    longer drank alcoholic drinks.  She made it plain  that  she  knew  him
    well enough to know how he behaved when he was drinking and she had not
    seen him behave in that way.  Rather he was a changed person.

34. She was cross-examined and dealt satisfactorily with the points put  to
    her.

35. The appellant's daughters L and C also gave evidence in accordance with
    statements which they adopted.  They were not cross-examined.

36. It is particularly significant  that  they  supported  the  appellant's
    claim not to have consumed alcohol. L said that although she understood
    her father had drunk alcohol at her graduation party she had  not  seen
    him drink on that occasion. He was certainly not drunk.

37. I have  considered  the  documents  that  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I have read the sentencing remarks of  Her  Honour  Judge  W
    Joseph when she sentenced the appellant to a total of  fifteen  months'
    imprisonment for offences involving trying deceitfully to obtain  money
    from a bank.  I note Mr Avery's observation that this was not a  drink-
    related offence in the way that  his  other  criminal  behaviour  might
    reasonably be seen to be.

38. I particularly note the supporting statement of M  which  supports  the
    appellant's claim about where he lives and how CJ spends  the  weekends
    with him.

39. There is a statement from CJ.  My copy is not signed but it is  similar
    to an affidavit that is in the papers.

40. Of much more assistance to me although it  is  appropriate  to  have  a
    short statement from the child in his circumstances, is the  report  of
    Alison Cantle dated 3 February 2015.

41. I note as well there is a report from  Judith  Jones  described  as  an
    independent social worker dated 24  June  2013.   That  is  not  hugely
    different in substance but it predated Ms Cantle's evidence.  The  more
    recent report has given me the greatest assistance.

42.  Ms  Cantle  holds  a  degree  of  Bachelor  or  Arts  and  Master   of
    Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy. She described  herself  as  a  Child  and
    Adolescent Psychotherapist with more than twelve years experience.  She
    works in the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service  at  the  Royal
    Free Hospital NHS Foundation Trust.

43. She had interviewed the child CJ with his mother and sisters  L  and  C
    and then interviewed the CJ again as well as interviewing the appellant
    and seeing the appellant and the child together  on  another  occasion.
    She also had a telephone  interview  with  the  head  teacher  of  CJ's
    school. She had read the papers in the case.

44. Her conclusion from the  background  papers  is  that  the  appellant's
    marriage was "functioning reasonably well" until the appellant began to
    drink heavily.  The appellant's wife and  children  were  all  affected
    adversely by the appellant's behaviour.

45. In December 2011 the appellant's wife told CJ that he could  no  longer
    see his father and this prompted  him  to  leave  the  family  home  by
    climbing from a window and go to stay at his paternal aunt's home where
    his father then lived.  The conditions there were very cramped but  not
    unwholesome and he was allowed to remain.  He was at his father's  home
    for about three months during which time his personal hygiene,  conduct
    and school work declined.  CJ returned to live with his mother.

46. Ms Cantle described CJ  as  having  "a  rather  sweet  smile  and  good
    manners".   She  said  that  she  "had  the  impression  of  a   small,
    emotionally fragile boy".  She said that he was  "clearly  affected  by
    the conversations about the possible loss of his father".

47. She spoke of how the rest of the family commented  on  the  very  close
    relationship between CJ and his father and CJ's mother and sisters were
    sure that his bad behaviour  at  school  was  due  to  distraction  and
    anxiety about his father being removed.

48. Ms Cantle's enquiries suggested that L had become a  major  role  model
    for CJ but she was concerned how she could cope in  the  event  of  the
    appellant being deported.

49. The school confirmed that the  appellant  was  listed  as  the  "second
    contact" after CJ's mother.  The schoolteacher, Mr  G  attributed  CJ's
    improving behaviour to the school's discipline system but  agreed  that
    CJ was better when his father intervenes.  CJ's academic  progress  was
    described as "on target" in certain subjects but below  that  level  in
    maths and others.

50. She found that all members  of  the  family  believe  that  CJ  had  an
    "especially strong attachment  to  his  father".   Ms  Cantle's  report
    suggested to me that she thought the family could do more to support CJ
    and adjust to the possibility of his father being removed.

51. Ms Cantle made some obvious but wholly  valid  observations  about  the
    young adolescent boy needing to distance himself from  his  mother  and
    follow a wholesome male role model.   His  brother,  S,  is  not  in  a
    suitable position to  be  a  candidate  because  of  his  own  criminal
    behaviour.  Ms Cantle said: "If [the appellant]  is  deported  CJ  will
    lose his only male role model and will be left, as the baby boy of  the
    family, in an otherwise all female household."

52.  She  then  referred  to  academic  reports   supporting   the   wholly
    unremarkable conclusion that boys who live without  their  fathers  are
    more likely to exhibit antisocial behaviour or criminal activity, to be
    depressed and to behave badly.  She thought it would be extremely harsh
    for the appellant to be deported.

53. Certain things are reasonably clear  from  this  evidence.   Firstly  I
    accept that the appellant has faced up to the highly adverse impact  on
    his life made by his excessive consumption of alcoholic  drink  and  he
    has responded to that firstly by cutting back his consumption and  then
    by almost completely abstaining from drinking alcohol.

54. I make this finding not just on the appellant's say so but because  the
    claim is supported by those who know him and see him  frequently.   The
    sister with whom he lives, his wife and grown-up children all commented
    on how his behaviour has improved because he is not drinking.

55. Whilst I do not criticise Mr  Avery  for  making  the  point  that  the
    appellant is short of money and so it must be harder for him to finance
    drinking spells, I also remind  myself  that  an  addiction  makes  big
    demands on a person.  Indeed one of the reasons that alcoholism is such
    a dreadful condition is that addicts will find money for  drink  before
    they will find money for their basic needs.

56. I was concerned that the appellant still regarded  the  consumption  of
    intoxicants as an acceptable way of celebrating and therefore  that  he
    thought it somehow appropriate to drink alcohol on the occasion of  his
    daughter's graduation.  In  some  ways  his  evidence  about  that  was
    impressive.  His daughter's graduation represented  the  only  academic
    success of any significance in living memory in the appellant's  family
    and he was, appropriately, proud of her.  I accept that although he did
    take alcohol on that occasion he limited himself to  one  drink.   Very
    often a person who has a craving for  alcohol  cannot  content  himself
    with one drink and it may have been that giving into the temptation  to
    drink on that occasion would  have  led  to  a  drunken  episode.   The
    evidence is clear that it did not.  Fighting addiction is not easy  and
    many people who are able to give up  for  a  while  then  relapse  with
    adverse consequences.

57. Further, his wife gave no indication whatsoever of cherishing hopes  of
    rekindling their relationship and I was very much of the view that  she
    has established a polite relationship with the appellant for  the  sake
    of CJ. It is desirable that parents who are unable to live together  as
    husband and wife preserve a good relationship.  Generally  this  is  in
    the best interests of the child or children.  However I saw nothing  in
    his wife's  evidence  to  make  me  think  she  would  do  anything  to
    exaggerate or describe falsely the appellant's abstinence.

58. I recognise that addicts can sometimes produce favourable reports  from
    support  organisations  to  confirm  their  claims  to  have  given  up
    something that was bad for them. However anyone who breaks an addiction
    ultimately does so because he or she has decided so do to. I  must  not
    disbelieve the appellant's claim to have given up drink because  it  is
    not confirmed by an alcoholics' support organisation when his claim  is
    supported rather than undermined by other evidence.

59. I can only act on the evidence before me.  The  evidence  is  that  the
    appellant has determined to abstain from alcoholic drink and those  who
    know him and live with him confirmed that  is  precisely  what  he  has
    done.  Whilst they might be predisposed to look favourably upon  him  I
    have no basis for assuming they would lie for him.

60. I am satisfied that the appellant has given up taking  alcohol  and  is
    unlikely to resume taking alcohol in the reasonably foreseeable future,
    at least as long as he remains in the United Kingdom.

61. I have looked again at the report of Alison Cantle.   I  remind  myself
    that this was disclosed to the Secretary of State  before  the  hearing
    and the respondent did not wish the witness  to  attend  to  be  cross-
    examined. Having thus accepted Ms Cantle's evidence it was not open  to
    the respondent to challenge it and there is no reason to think that  it
    should be challenged. It appears to be an honest expression of reasoned
    and informed expert opinion.

62. It is absolutely clear that CJ  suffers  from  a  degree  of  emotional
    disturbance.  The school have identified  him  as  a  boy  in  need  of
    additional  support  and  he  has  been  referred  to  an   educational
    psychologist.  He has friends at school but has had episodes of bad and
    disruptive behaviour which resulted in frequent  detentions  and  other
    bother at school but he seemed to have improved. I note that  according
    to Ms Cantle's report the school does not give enthusiastic support  to
    the appellant's relationship with CJ.  The appropriate teacher  thought
    the improvement in CJ's  behaviour  was  the  result  of  the  school's
    disciplinary regime but the  school  noticed  "some  change"  when  the
    appellant is involved.  The school confirmed that the appellant is  the
    second contact and that CJ's mother approved that arrangement.  I would
    have preferred it if the report had assured me that the  change  was  a
    change for the better but that is the inference I draw from it.

63. It is not possible  to  know  with  certainty  just  what  events  have
    influenced CJ's behaviour.  Commonsense would suggest that the break-up
    of his parents' marriage and his father leaving the family  home  would
    be disturbing for him as would his father's frequent episodes of excess
    alcohol consumption and involvement with the criminal  justice  system.
    It is however  quite  clear  that  CJ  has  responded  badly  to  these
    influences and that he is very fond of his father.  For example  it  is
    quite clear that he did on his own initiative leave his  mother's  care
    and go to live with his father even though conditions in  the  father's
    home were sufficiently unsatisfactory to warrant the attention, but not
    the intervention, of social services.

64. It is also plain that estrangement from his father was associated  with
    a period of bad behaviour at school and that the  re-emergence  of  his
    father in his  life  has  been  coincidental  with  an  improvement  in
    behaviour at school.

65.  The  appellant's  daughters  and  wife  commented  favourably  on  the
    relationship between the appellant  and  CJ  and  their  comments  were
    echoed by the expert  report.   Ms  Cantle  encouraged  discussion  and
    unearthed memories of happy times between CJ and his father which  gave
    independent evidence for the  conclusion  that  their  relationship  is
    particularly important.

66. I also note the evidence that boys without fathers are more  likely  to
    have antisocial behaviour, to steal, to abuse substances and so on than
    those who enjoy a good relationship.  I am aware too that many children
    from deeply unpromising backgrounds go on to live exemplary  lives  and
    that some children from apparently ideal backgrounds can grow up to  do
    bad things.  The fact remains that generally a good relationship with a
    father is an improving influence.   I  remind  myself  of  Ms  Cantle's
    conclusion.  She said:

         "CJ  has  an  extremely  strong  attachment  to  his  father   [the
         appellant] who has a more effective and positive influence  on  his
         behaviour than anyone else in CJ's life.  It would  be  distressing
         and unhealthy for any  child  to  "lose"  their  actively  involved
         father.   In  CJ's  case,  given  his  stage  of  development,  his
         temperament and his family dynamics I  think  it  would  be  highly
         detrimental."

67. Although I have examined the evidence critically and reflected  on  the
    points made by Mr Avery I have no basis whatsoever for disagreeing with
    that conclusion. I do not think that Ms Cantle was engaged in  advocacy
    or hyperbole. CJ's attachment to the appellant  is  "extremely  strong"
    and  the  appellant's  removal  would,  in  her  opinion,  be   "highly
    detrimental".

68. I remind myself that the appellant is subject to  a  deportation  order
    because of his own criminal  misbehaviour  and  it  is  in  the  public
    interest to remove him.   I  see  no  need  to  labour  this  point.  I
    understand it and fully appreciate that the public interest lies in the
    appellant being removed.  Parliament says so and,  in  any  event,  the
    proposition is unremarkable. The United Kingdom does not  need  foreign
    criminals. The question for me is whether, when all the  other  factors
    are considered, the public interest in his  removal  is  overridden  by
    other circumstances.

69. Although the appellant has been out of trouble for some time, has given
    up drink and has other children in  the  United  Kingdom  I  would  not
    expect these things to tip  the  balance  in  favour  of  allowing  the
    appeal. Although his other children are clearly fond of  him  they  are
    now adult and their relationship with him does not  require  particular
    consideration.

70. I do find that the best interests of CJ lie in the appellant  remaining
    in the United Kingdom to preserve a relationship with his  son.   I  do
    not see that there can  be  any  sensible  argument  about  that.   The
    evidence was quite plain that the appellant is  an  important  part  of
    CJ's life.

71. I am also  satisfied  for  the  purposes  of  Section  117C(5)  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 that the appellant has a "genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child", CJ.  He  sees  CJ  most
    days, usually every day, and he talks to him  if  he  cannot  see  him.
    Virtually every weekend is spent at his father's home.  His  father  is
    involved with the school.   Indeed,  and  I  do  not  mean  this  as  a
    facetious comment, many busy fathers still living in a  nuclear  family
    would have less to do with a 13 year old boy than  this  appellant  has
    with CJ.

72. For the purposes of paragraph 399(a)(i)(ii)(a) of HC 395 I am satisfied
    that it would be unduly harsh for CJ to live in Angola. He is a British
    citizen engaged in the education  system  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    supported by his mother and adult sisters there. They are not going  to
    remove to Angola even if that is permissible.  It  would  be  silly  to
    suggest that CJ should  remove  with  his  father  to  Angola  and  the
    suggestion was not made.

73. I find that Section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2012 operates in favour of allowing this appeal.  This states:

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

74. We know from Section 117C(3) that where Exception 2 applies the  public
    interest does not require the appellant's deportation.

75. I must ask myself what is meant by the phrase "unduly harsh".

76. Mr Avery, appropriately, reminded me of the observation of Sedley LJ in
    AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 at paragraph 27:

         "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it  has
         been, will be broken up for ever because  of  the  appellant's  bad
         behaviour. That is what deportation does."

77. Mr Avery's point was that the implementation of a deportation order may
    well  have  serious  consequences   but   Parliament   says   that   in
    circumstances such as exist here the public interest is in deportation.
     The words "unduly harsh" imply that some harshness is due.   The  harm
    caused to CJ by the appellant being deported is the natural consequence
    of a deportation order made in the case of a man with a  13  years  old
    son. It must be assumed that it is the kind of harshness that is deemed
    to be "due".

78. In short Mr Avery submitted the test of "unduly harsh" is a  very  high
    one and is not satisfied by the evidence in this case.

79.  Mr  Leskin  submitted,  contrarily,  that  "unduly  harsh"  should  be
    understood without reference to the appellant's criminality but  solely
    to the effect that deportation would have on the child  concerned.   CJ
    manifestly does not deserve the  disruption  to  his  life  that  would
    follow with the consequence of his father's deportation  and  it  would
    therefore be unduly harsh to remove him.

80. Mr Leskin submitted that  Home  Office  guidance  suggesting  that  the
    degree of criminality is relevant to determining the meaning of "unduly
    harsh" was wrong.

81. I cannot agree with Mr Leskin that the  degree  of  criminality  is  an
    irrelevant consideration but if I did agree with him then I would  find
    that his contention supported Mr Avery's position,  namely  that,  what
    ever the offence,  the  public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
    something quite out of the ordinary existed to support a  finding  that
    the predictable harsh consequences were in some way  "undue".  This  is
    clearly not what Mr Leskin suggested.

82. I agree with Mr Leskin that no harshness is due to CJ. It  is  not  his
    fault that his father is a criminal.

83. It is clear from the rules that "undue harshness" only becomes relevant
    if the person to be deported has proved  that  he  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship. Removing a parent in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship is likely to have a disruptive effect.
    If Mr Leskin is right and the Act permits  consideration  only  of  the
    effect of deportation on a child it is hard to see why there is a  need
    to show undue harshness too. In the huge majority of cases where  there
    is genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  removing  the  parent
    will have harsh consequences.

84. I remind myself that section 117C(2) of the 2002 Act  says,  in  terms,
    that "the more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
    greater the public interest in deportation of the criminal".

85. The Act also makes it plain that something more than undue harshness is
    needed to avoid deportation in the case of a  person  sentenced  to  at
    least four year in prison.

86. The scheme of the Act shows that although the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is always in the public interest the public interest does not
    require (in the sense of need,  or  insist  upon)  deportation  if  the
    effect of deportation on certain people, in this case a child with whom
    the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship, would
    be "unduly harsh".

87. Neither the Act nor the rules give much  guidance  on  the  meaning  of
    "unduly harsh". In the absence of such  guidance  I  find  that  it  is
    something to be determined by the decision maker in the  light  of  all
    the evidence but illuminated by the public interest, which is  variable
    having regard to the seriousness of the crime, by the best interests of
    the child,  which  statute  requires  to  be  considered,  and  by  the
    criminal's propensity to reoffend.

88. I reject Mr Avery's contention that, because the ordinary  consequences
    of deportation to a family are harsh they must be assumed to  be  "due"
    and something more is needed for them to be unduly harsh. Although this
    submission was cogent, I find  it  inconsistent  with  section  117C(6)
    which provides that, in the case of a foreign  criminal  who  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  four  years,   the
    public interest requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  I
    must not interpret "unduly harsh" as equating with  "very  compelling".
    To do so would nullify section 117C(6) and wrongly blur the distinction
    between criminals who have been  sentenced  to  less  than  four  years
    imprisonment and those who have not.

89. I have indicated above my findings on the effect of removal on CJ. They
    are not  unusual.  The  appellant  had  the  advantage  of  experienced
    representatives who had prepared the case properly but nothing  emerged
    that could not have been predicted. Generally children benefit  from  a
    supportive relationship with both parents and a  boy  on  the  cusp  of
    adolescence generally will benefit particularly from the support of his
    father. It may be that deportation orders are often not appropriate  in
    cases where children will be affected by removal.  Where  the  criminal
    has been sentenced to less than 4 years imprisonment I find that all of
    the evidence must be considered to determine if the effects of  removal
    in a particular case are unduly harsh.

90. Although the appellant's criminal conduct merits deportation I think it
    unlikely that the appellant will get into trouble again. The respondent
    is uniquely well placed to know if the appellant has committed  further
    offence and I have not been told of any. He has  already  kept  out  of
    trouble for more than 5 years and he  appears  to  have  addressed  the
    issues that led to his offending.

91. Neither the Act nor the rules indicate the  relevance,  if  any,  of  a
    criminal's propensity to re-offend. Without in any way going behind the
    statutory declaration that deportation of foreign criminals is  in  the
    public interest it seems to me  quite  clear  that  although  there  is
    always a public interest in deporting foreign criminals the  extent  of
    the public interest must depend on any propensity to reoffend  as  well
    as on the crime. Whilst recognising that  there  may  well  be  intense
    public revulsion towards an offender  who  has  committed  one  serious
    offence even if there is little chance of it being repeated very  often
    the need to deport a person is heightened if there is a  likelihood  of
    reoffending.

92. The sentencing bracket of twelve months to four  years  represents  the
    disposal of quite a wide range of criminality.  It is entirely possible
    that some serious sexual offences and drugs offences could be  punished
    with less than four years' imprisonment and it seems  to  me  perfectly
    sensible, and consistent with the  statute,  to  say  that  the  public
    interest in deporting such a person weighs more  heavily  than  in  the
    case of a less serious criminal who nevertheless should be deported  in
    the public interest.

93. Further the appellant's offending behaviour did not  include  violence,
    organised  crime,  sexual   misconduct   or   other   activities   that
    particularly outrage the public.

94. I am satisfied on the  totality  of  the  evidence  that  preserving  a
    relationship with his father is extremely desirable for CJ.   I  accept
    that he has come to  terms  with  his  parents  living  apart  and  has
    regained equilibrium so he behaves acceptably and works reasonably well
    with the constant support of his father.  I think  it  likely  that  if
    that were removed CJ would be  seriously  unbalanced  again  and  would
    misbehave.  He may well get into criminal trouble.   His  older  sister
    would have some positive  influence  on  him.   His  other  sister  and
    mother, although well intended, I think  would  not.   The  appellant's
    absence would have a serious detrimental affect on CJ just  as  it  has
    done before.

95. I  remind  myself  that  if  the  appellant  is  removed  then,  absent
    extraordinary circumstances, he cannot return to the United Kingdom for
    at least ten years and there is no reason to assume he would be allowed
    back after that.  Any chance of being a meaningful father for CJ during
    his adolescence would be completely destroyed.

96. His behaviour has put him in a bracket where, although  it  is  in  the
    public interest to deport  him,  according  to  Parliament  the  public
    interest does not require his removal if he has satisfied me  that  the
    consequence would be unduly harsh for his son.

97. It is likely that deporting the appellant would  seriously  disturb  CJ
    who has already been badly affected by the break  up  of  his  parents'
    marriage. His behaviour is  now  acceptable.  It  can  be  expected  to
    deteriorate again if the appellant leaves. That would be bad in  itself
    but would reflect significant disturbance in CJ's life that would be  a
    harsh consequence of his father's removal.

98. When I remind myself that I do not expect the  appellant  to  get  into
    trouble again, that the offence that led to the decision to deport  was
    committed more than five years ago and was not an  offence  of  a  kind
    that caused public outrage I am persuaded that the likely harsh effects
    on CJ are more than the facts require. In short they are  undue  and  I
    allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

99. I have set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  allow
    the appeal.  The appellant did not ask for costs and I make no order.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 April 2015                  |


