
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01443/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 August 2017                     |On 28 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PDC
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Tobin, Counsel, instructed by Pride Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    appellant (the present respondent).  This direction  applies  to  among
    others all parties, any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  We make this order because
    the case turns on the welfare of the respondent's  minor  children  who
    are entitled to privacy.

2.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (whom we will refer  to  as
    the  appellant)  against  a  decision  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    promulgated on 26 January 2015 allowing the appeal  of  the  respondent
    (whom we will refer to as the "claimant") against the decision  of  the
    appellant on 10 July 2014.

3.   The claimant is a citizen of Grenada born in March 1971 and  has  lived
    in the United Kingdom since July 2007.  He and his wife were married on
    3 May 2007.  He entered the United Kingdom with entry  clearance  as  a
    husband and his leave was extended by stages.  His discretionary  leave
    to remain was due to expire in November 2014.

4.   He has three children with his wife all of whom are  British  citizens.
    The eldest was born on 16 August 2008, the second child was born  on  6
    May 2010 and the third child was born on 3 April 2013.  It is  accepted
    that after the marriage the claimant and his wife lived together  until
    the claimant was convicted at the Crown Court of an offence of  violent
    disorder.  He  was  sentenced  on  17  July  2013  to  eighteen  months
    imprisonment.

5.   That offence involved the claimant joining a group  of  men  who  burst
    into the house of a neighbour who had protested against noise  made  at
    an informal party.  One of these men wielded a machete  and  was  found
    guilty of wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily  harm  and  was
    sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.  We have  seen  the  sentencing
    remarks of the judge who passed sentence.  It appears that the claimant
    had armed himself with a chair and formed part of a group of up to  six
    people who threatened the neighbouring family and who were part of  the
    group that were "standing four square behind the man  with  a  machete.
    The claimant was not sentenced as being  a  party  to  the  offence  of
    wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm.  However, the judge
    pointed out that he could not ignore the fact  that  the  claimant  had
    been cautioned for violence in the past, namely an assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm and common assault.

6.   On 16 April 2014 the claimant was  detained  under  immigration  powers
    having presumably been released from his sentence by that date.  He was
    released on bail on 12 June 2014.  The appellant's decision is dated 10
    July 2014 in which she  set  out  her  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    claimant should be deported.

7.   The appellant considered the claimant's right to family life  with  his
    three children under paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules.   Regard
    was had to the serious nature of  the  offence,  the  strength  of  the
    claimant's relationship with his children and his wife and  the  nature
    of the contact he had with them.  It was considered that the claimant's
    removal would have an impact on the children's  emotional  welfare  but
    the view was taken that this would be "minimal".  Reference was made to
    an absence of evidence to indicate that there were  any  concerns  over
    the  children's  behaviour  or  psychological   wellbeing   since   his
    imprisonment.   The  appellant  considered  each  child  in  turn   but
    concluded that contact could be maintained by the claimant with all  of
    them through modern means of communication and family visits.   It  was
    not suggested that  the  children  should  accompany  the  claimant  to
    Grenada.

8.   In relation to the family life with his wife, it was accepted that  the
    claimant had lived together with his wife and his children  before  his
    imprisonment.  However, at the date of the decision the  appellant  was
    not living with them.  There had been no contact between  the  claimant
    and his  family  while  the  claimant  was  imprisoned.   The  claimant
    returned to live in family on 3 December 2014, following an  assessment
    by a probation officer that it was suitable for him to do so.

9.   The appellant  noted  that  the  Probation  Service  had  assessed  the
    claimant as a "MAPPA level 1 offender who poses a medium risk  of  harm
    to  the  public  with   risk   factors   being   'physical   harm   and
    intimidation'".  However, in the probation officer's opinion, his  risk
    of reoffending was low.  It was not considered that  the  claimant  had
    advanced any exceptional circumstances which could outweigh the  public
    interest in deportation.

10.   Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  claimant  and  his  wife  gave
    evidence.  They  were  found  to  be  honest  witnesses.  The  claimant
    expressed his remorse for his offending behaviour.   He  had  completed
    courses in prison and he had become a "red  band"  owing  to  his  good
    behaviour there.   He  had  attended  all  his  appointments  with  the
    probation officer upon release.  He had not reoffended and  there  were
    no concerns about his conduct or attitude.

11.  At the time of the hearing the claimant was  again  living  in  family.
    It was accepted that, while his wife had not visited  the  claimant  in
    prison, she had spoken to him on an almost daily basis, sometimes three
    or four times in one day.  The Tribunal found that he was in a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with his children.   The  Tribunal
    also found that, after his release and prior to him resuming his  place
    in the family home, he saw his wife and children frequently.

12.  The claimant's wife worked as a nurse.   During  his  imprisonment  she
    continued to work but had to rearrange her shifts  so  that  she  could
    manage childcare.  She had started to work three twelve hour shifts per
    week but her income reduced  as  a  result.   She  ran  into  financial
    difficulties during this period and was now paying off debts.

13.  The Tribunal found  that  the  claimant  was  the  main  carer  of  the
    children at the time of the hearing (on 13  January  2015)  and  looked
    after them while his wife was at work.  There was  some  evidence  that
    the youngest child was sleeping better  than  she  had  done  when  the
    claimant was not  living  in  family.   The  Tribunal  found  that  the
    children would be deprived  of  this  care  were  the  claimant  to  be
    deported.  Although that would place his wife in the same  position  as
    when he was imprisoned, the  situation  would  become  permanent.   She
    would have to reduce her working hours causing financial problems which
    in turn would  impact  negatively  upon  the  children.   She  did  not
    currently rely on public funds but the Tribunal found that it would  be
    likely that she would be forced to rely on public  funds  as  a  single
    mother of three children.  Understandably, the Tribunal found that  the
    imprisonment of the claimant had had a negative effect on the wife  and
    the children, both financially and psychologically.

14.  The Tribunal found that the  claimant's  wife  would  not  be  able  to
    afford regular visits to Grenada with the children if the claimant  was
    deported.  Although he was a plasterer there was no  evidence  to  show
    that he would be able to obtain employment immediately on return so  as
    to be able to afford flights for his children to visit him.

15.  At paragraph 29 of the determination, the Tribunal  gives  a  summation
    of the basis for its conclusion  that  the  effect  of  the  claimant's
    deportation on his wife and children would be "unduly harsh"  and  that
    the exception in paragraph 399(a) applied to the claimant.

16.  It is stated that contact with the  claimant  would  be  restricted  to
    telephone contact and it would not be  possible  for  the  children  to
    visit him in Grenada owing to the cost.  The children would be deprived
    of physical contact with their father and would be deprived of the care
    that they currently receive from him.  They would be deprived of  their
    primary carer.  They would be affected psychologically by  the  absence
    of a father figure who had lived with them all their lives  apart  from
    the time he was incarcerated.  It was likely that the  claimant's  wife
    would be forced to rely on public funds and to split  the  family  unit
    and cause reliance on public funds in this way was not  in  the  public
    interest.

17.   The  Tribunal  then  went  on  to  consider  the  public  interest  in
    accordance with Section 117C of the 2007 Act and state:

         "We find ... taking into account  all  the  circumstances  of  [the
         claimant] including his  offence,  his  subsequent  behaviour,  the
         strength of the relationships with his children and  his  wife  and
         the effect on the children of his deportation, that [the  claimant]
         has shown on the balance of probabilities that the  decision  is  a
         disproportionate breach of his rights under Article 8."


18.  The appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The appeal was heard on 2 November 2015.  At that time the claimant was
    not legally represented.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  15  December
    2015, the appeal was allowed on the basis that the Tribunal  had  erred
    in law in finding it established that  the  effect  of  the  claimant's
    deportation on the  partner  or  children  would  be  unduly  harsh.  A
    decision dismissing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was substituted.  The claimant therefore  fell  to  be
    deported.  It is stated at paragraph 59 that "There  is  no  space  for
    independent  consideration  on  Article  8  grounds.    The  First-tier
    Tribunal should not have allowed the appeal on human rights grounds and
    to that extent it erred".

19.  That decision was itself  appealed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  by  the
    claimant on grounds that are set out in the grounds of appeal  dated  1
    January 2016.  Permission to appeal was granted by a decision  dated  7
    October 2016.  Reference was made to MM (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450 although it was noted  that
    the appeal might not gain anything from that decision.  However, it was
    accepted that the grounds of  appeal,  which  challenged  the  approach
    taken by the Upper Tribunal, were arguable.  Before  the  appeal  court
    itself, the appellant accepted that the Upper Tribunal Judge had failed
    to consider separately:


         "the issue of whether the [claimant's] deportation would breach the
         family's rights to family and private life under  Article  8  ECHR.
         Having regard to the subsequent judgment of the  Supreme  Court  in
         Hesham Ali, the Secretary of State accepted that  this  constitutes
         an error of law".


    Accordingly, the decision of the Upper Tribunal  was  quashed  and  the
    matter remitted back to this Tribunal.  We pause there to observe  that
    the terms of the subsequent decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  NE-A
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ
    239 has apparently endorsed the approach of the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    when he said at paragraph 59 that there was no  space  for  independent
    consideration on Article 8  grounds.   Nevertheless,  the  matter  came
    before us for a hearing on 15 August 2017.


20.  Mr Melvin for the  appellant  attempted  to  redefine  and  update  the
    grounds of appeal because  of  their  rather  "sprawling  nature".   He
    argued that the First-tier Tribunal had applied a test lower than  that
    expressed in Immigration Rule 399 and Section 117C(5) of the 2007  Act.
    It did not properly apply the test of undue harshness.  He argued  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in  treating  the  child's
    best interests as paramount and as being decisive of  the  question  of
    whether deportation would be unduly harsh upon them.   In  addition  it
    had reversed the burden of proof at paragraph  25  in  respect  of  the
    question as to whether there was evidence about the claimant being able
    to find work in a short timeframe on his return  to  Grenada.   It  had
    failed properly to assess the significance of his  offending  behaviour
    when they state at paragraph 17 that he expressed his  remorse  at  the
    hearing and apologised.  In fact  he  had  attempted  to  downplay  his
    actions in the attack.

21.  The second broad ground of appeal is that the  lack  of  focus  on  the
    nature and detail of the offending behaviour indicates that the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge misdirected himself in relation to the significance
    and relevance of that behaviour.  It failed to consider  or  apply  the
    manifold nature of the public interest (see AM v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1634).

22.  Ms Tobin for the claimant submitted that there had  been  no  error  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  Nothing turned in this
    appeal upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450 although that appeared to have been the basis  upon
    which this appeal  went  before  the  Court  of  Appeal.   As  to  NE-A
    (Nigeria,) that case could be distinguished since it dealt with a  case
    in which the claimant had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
    more than four years and very compelling circumstances over  and  above
    the two exceptions in Section 117C were required.  When  proper  regard
    was had to the terms of the decision and in particular paragraph 29, it
    could not be said that the Tribunal had applied the wrong test.

23.  Neither could it be said that the Tribunal had failed  to  have  proper
    regard  to  the  seriousness  of  the  offence.   There  were  multiple
    references  to  the  nature  of  the  offence  in  the  body   of   the
    determination (see paragraphs 16, 17  and  18  of  the  determination).
    Having regard to the fact that the claimant was assessed  as  being  at
    low risk of reoffending and to  the  countervailing  considerations  in
    relation to private and  family  life,  the  finding  that  the  public
    interest was outweighed in this case  was  a  conclusion  open  to  the
    Tribunal.  It had the benefit of hearing all the evidence in  the  case
    and had taken account of all the relevant considerations.  She  pointed
    out that the appellant's sentence was  materially  below  that  4  year
    threshold.

24.  We enquired of Mr Melvin as to what his position  was  in  relation  to
    the determination of the Upper Tribunal Judge of 15 December 2015.   He
    urged us to find the reasoning therein to be persuasive and  to  follow
    it.  Ms Tobin urged us to reach our conclusions independently  of  that
    determination but pointed out that at paragraph 63 the  Upper  Tribunal
    judge had recognised that the First-tier Tribunal was  concerned  about
    the impact of deportation on the family and that he had understood  and
    shared those concerns.  This was a narrow case.

25.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision was  based  on  whether  or  not  it
    could be said that it would be unduly harsh for the children, who  were
    British citizens, to remain in the United Kingdom without their  father
    and, to some extent, whether it would be unduly harsh for his  wife  to
    remain in the UK without him. The Tribunal was required to have  regard
    to the considerations set out in Section 117C of  the  2002  Act.   The
    public interest required the claimant's deportation unless  sub-section
    (5) of Section 117C could be said to be met.

26.  It was not disputed that the claimant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  with  his  wife  and  three  children.  Accordingly,  the
    Tribunal was faced with the  directive,  contained  in  the  Rules  and
    enshrined in statute, that the deportation of the claimant was  in  the
    public interest and, since  he  had  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    eighteen months, it was only if the test of  undue  harshness  was  met
    that the public interest in deportation would be outweighed.

27.  In the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, it appears to us  that
    the factors which, in its view, outweighed the public interest in  this
    particular case were these.  First that the appellant was the principal
    carer of his children at the time of the hearing.  The children benefit
    from that care.  They would be psychologically affected by his absence,
    particularly because he had been a father figure to them all  of  their
    lives apart from the time that he  was  incarcerated.  Limited  contact
    with him in Grenada would be possible. Deportation would mean that  his
    wife and children would be forced to rely on public funds and that  was
    not in the public  interest.   It  is  further  plain  from  the  final
    sentence of paragraph 26 that the Tribunal took the  view  that  to  be
    deprived of their father would not be in the childrens' best interests.
     However, we, like the Upper Tribunal Judge before us,  are  unable  to
    identify any factors in the analysis set out by the First-tier Tribunal
    that justifies the conclusion  that  the  consequences  of  deportation
    would be "unduly harsh" upon either  the  children  or  the  claimant's
    wife.  We do not for a moment suggest that the consequences will not be
    harsh.  Plainly, to sever  family  ties  between  father  and  children
    through  deportation   will   have   profound   consequences   from   a
    psychological,  emotional  and  economic  perspective.  But  there  was
    nothing in the evidence to demonstrate that the effect on the  children
    would be exceptionally severe or that any child had exceptional  needs.
    It is not clear to us why the considerations set out by the Tribunal at
    paragraph 29 took this case into the realm of undue  harshness  in  the
    sense of being inordinately or excessively harsh and the failure to  do
    so constitutes a material error in law.  The considerations  relied  on
    appear to us  to  be  the  inevitable,  if  bleak,  consequences  which
    inevitably will result from the division of a family.

28.  Further, we do not  accept  that  the  financial  consequences  to  the
    public purse of deportation  can  legitimately  be  considered  in  the
    assessment of whether deportation would be unduly harsh as  the  First-
    tier Tribunal describe in the last sentence of  paragraph  29.  Such  a
    factor cannot be said to impact on the consequences of deportation upon
    a family.   If correct, the public interest in the deportation  of  any
    partner of a foreign criminal or one himself  in  employment  would  be
    weakened and potentially outweighed if his family would thereby  become
    dependent on public funds.  We do not consider that to  have  been  the
    intention of Parliament standing the presumptions in the Rules and  the
    weight to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  in  deportation  in
    accordance with the Rules and sections 117A to 117C of  the  2002  Act.
    Furthermore, the focus must be on the effects  of  deportation  on  the
    children and partner, and whether  these  amount  to  undue  harshness,
    rather than on the public purse.  Nor do we consider  that  the  public
    interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal can  be  said  to  be
    diminished by the fact that his removal will cause an additional burden
    on the public purse. To that extent, we consider  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially misdirected itself and erred in law.

29.  For these reasons we allow this appeal.  We set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In the circumstances, we will remit the  case
    to a differently constituted panel for a re-hearing.

Notice of Decision

30.  The appeal is allowed.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

