
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01451/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 December 2014                            |On 2 January 2015            |
|Oral judgment                                 |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             CHRISTOPHER KARAMA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms H Short, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
                  Solicitors (Oxford)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Petherbridge promulgated on  7  October  2014
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 24 September 2014 in  which  the
    Judge allowed the appeal  of  the  applicant  before  him,  Christopher
    Karama, against the decision of the Secretary of State that  he  should
    be deported from the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  his  acts  of
    criminality.  The Judge set out the correct self-direction  in  law  in
    paragraphs 7 and 8 onwards, up to paragraph 18  of  the  determination,
    including  reference  to  the  provisions  introduced  by  Section   19
    Immigration Act 2014 which inserted Sections 117A to D  into  the  2002
    Act.

2.   Mr Karama finds himself in the position he is now as a  result  of  his
    acts of criminality.  The Judge records that on 2 November 2012 he  was
    convicted at the Basildon Crown Court of two counts  of  possession  or
    control of identity documents with intent for which he was sentenced to
    fourteen  months'  imprisonment.   Judge  Petherbridge  set   out   the
    Sentencing Judge's comments which I do not need to  refer  to  verbatim
    other than to the fact that Mr Karama  was  convicted,  notwithstanding
    his not guilty plea, by a jury and the Sentencing Judge's reference  to
    the fact that one of the convictions related to the use of  a  passport
    relating to a Mr Otuko who is deceased,  in  order  for  Mr  Karama  to
    obtain a driving licence.  The Sentencing Judge found  that  to  be  an
    aggravating feature as were other features within the case involving  a
    degree of planning.  The Sentencing Judge considered  that  he  had  to
    pass a deterrent sentence for offences of this nature as  a  result  of
    which there would be no discount as it was a  'not  guilty'  plea.   Mr
    Karama was sentenced to fourteen months' imprisonment and  subsequently
    made the subject of an automatic deportation  order  under  UK  Borders
    Act.  He appealed on the basis that his  deportation  from  the  United
    Kingdom will breach his rights under Article 8.

3.   As stated, the method by which courts and  tribunals  are  required  to
    assess the Article 8 issue has been set out  in  statutory  form.   The
    importance of that, as indeed Ms Short mentioned in her submissions, is
    that Parliament has set out and approved the way that such matters must
    be assessed which may also have a potential impact  upon  earlier  case
    law decided prior to the  introduction  of  the  statutory  provisions.
    Section 117A states that in considering the  public  interest  question
    the court or the tribunal must in particular have regard in  all  cases
    to section 117B and in cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals, to  the  considerations  listed  in  Section  117C.   It  is
    accepted that 117B does not in isolation allow Mr Karama to succeed and
    in relation to Section 117C, Section 117C(3) states that in the case of
    a  foreign  criminal  who  has  not  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of four years or more the  public  interest  requires  the
    foreign criminal's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or  Exception  2
    applies.  Section 1 does not  apply  to  this  case  and  the  relevant
    consideration was to Exception 2 to be  found  in  Section  117C,  (5).
    That provision applies where the criminal has a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualified  partner  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child and  the  effect  of  the
    criminal's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

4.   As stated, the First-tier Judge set out in  detail  the  correct  legal
    framework and the nature of the written and oral evidence that was made
    available to the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge's findings are set out
    from paragraph 123 onwards of the determination in the  first  part  of
    which the Judge records a  number  of  occasions  when  Mr  Karama  has
    committed  criminal  acts  within  the  United  Kingdom  referring   at
    paragraph 132 to the fact that as a result of the final conviction,  he
    is now the subject of an automatic  deportation  decision.   The  Judge
    analyses the family members involved thereafter before turning  to  the
    relationship Mr Karama has to his children and to his wife from whom he
    was separated.  The Judge notes a social worker's reports of  23  April
    2014 and the update of 8 August 2014. It is clear the Judge  considered
    the material before him with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny.
    The  Judge  notes  there  have  been  very  serious  problems  in   the
    relationship Mr Karama has with his wife who he married  in  June  2011
    although they have been in a relationship since  at  least  1996.   The
    Judge notes that in April 2014 his wife told a social worker she was no
    longer in an active relationship with Mr Karama  and  at  the  original
    hearing of the appeal his wife did not attend.  The social  worker  was
    able to interview Mr Karama on 9 April 2014 in which he admitted he had
    not seen his children for some time and that his wife  had  placed  his
    possessions in the garage in their former home.  At the  moment  he  is
    bailed from immigration detention and is living at his sister's home in
    Chingford along with a niece Rachael.  Those factors appear not  to  be
    disputed.

5.   The Judge  noted  the  content  of  the  social  worker's  report,  the
    findings of  which  were  not  challenged  by  the  Presenting  Officer
    according to paragraph 144 of the determination.  The Judge heard  oral
    evidence from Mr Karama's boys with whom  he  was  impressed,  although
    noting some discrepancies in the material before him.  In paragraph 149
    the Judge did not accept that Mr Karama had no relatives in Uganda  and
    in paragraph 150 that whilst noting the comments regarding Mr  Karama's
    wife's application for discretionary leave made by the  Respondent,  it
    was noted there was no reference made to Mr Karama; although things had
    now changed since the application was made and the Judge was  satisfied
    there was now a meaningful relationship between Mr Karama and his wife.
     The Judge, however, went on to consider the statutory  provisions  and
    found that Exception 1 could not apply and then addressed  Exception  2
    before concluding "I do consider that the Appellant's deportation would
    be unduly harsh insofar as the three children are concerned".

7.   The grounds on which permission  to  appeal  were  sought  and  granted
    challenge the balancing exercise undertaken by the Judge in relation to
    the criminality and the weight that should be given to that  factor  by
    reference to case law that preceded the introduction of the  2014  Act,
    and effectively submits that insufficient weight was  given  or  indeed
    little weight was given to the case relied upon  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  While the Secretary of State has now set out how she  considers
    when the need to deport a person arises, how the public interest should
    be assessed in statutory provisions, the question  is  whether  it  has
    been established that it was unduly harsh for Mr Karama to be  removed.
    If that was the case the Secretary of State's own statutory  provisions
    seem to indicate that his removal from the United Kingdom would not  be
    required.    Unduly   harsh   consequences   or   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences  for  the  children  will  mean  the  deportation  or  the
    requirement to deport Mr Karama would not be proportionate.

8.   The Upper Tribunal discussed with Ms Short at some  length  earlier  in
    the hearing what findings the Judge made regarding  circumstances  that
    were unduly harsh.  It is my primary finding that the first error  made
    by the Judge is that he  failed  to  define  within  the  body  of  the
    determination what the circumstances were that were harsh and why  they
    were unduly harsh, i.e.  that  having  considered  the  impact  of  the
    removal upon the children why that made the  decision  disproportionate
    when everything was properly taken into account.

9.   Ms  Short  accepted  that  no  specific  reference  was  made  to  such
    circumstances in the determination but submitted  that  I  could  infer
    from  a  reading  of  the  findings  that  the  Judge  had  found   the
    circumstances were unduly harsh based upon his acceptance and  lack  of
    challenge to the conclusions of the social worker.  In relation to  the
    social worker's report I  have  considered  the  response  set  out  at
    paragraph 31 and in particular at pages 77 and 78 of Mr Karama's appeal
    bundle.

10.  In paragraph 31 the social worker states:

          "What effect Chris's removal to Uganda would have on each  of  the
         children.  If he was returned to Uganda he would  not  be  able  to
         visit here so would not see the children at all.  If possible could
         you comment on  how  his  time  in  prison  affected  each  of  the
         children.  The statements refer to Emmanuel struggling  in  school,
         Peter becoming very withdrawn  and  Annabelle  really  missing  her
         father."


    That is in fact  the  question  of  the  scope  or  a  summary  of  the
    instructions to the expert that  she  was  asked  to  comment  upon  in
    response to which the expert says:


         "As I commented in my first report, when I had met with  the  boys,
         they had found it  almost  impossible  to  contemplate  that  their
         father might be returned to Uganda.  Without doubt Annabelle who is
         close to her father would miss him.  Whilst it is one prospect  for
         him to be living here at her Aunt  Barbara's  house,  it  would  be
         quite another for him to be in Africa.  At 7 years of age, I am not
         sure that she would necessarily understand the complexities of this
         situation, but the fact that she would not be able to  see  him  at
         all if he were in Africa would  be  detrimental  to  her  emotional
         health, in my professional opinion.  They have a close relationship
         and she clearly dotes on her father,  enjoying  special  attention,
         being the youngest child  and  the  only  daughter.   It  would  be
         unlikely that Annabelle would see him until she was much  older  if
         he returned to Uganda and she would thus in effect lose her father.
          Chris has played a significant part in her life  since  her  birth
         even when he has not been living at home."


    The expert continues:


         "I cannot comment on Emmanuel's situation"


    and then as follows in relation to Peter and Trevor:


         "Both Peter and Trevor are apparently doing well at school  and  on
         the football field, which is a shared passion  with  their  father.
         In spite of the family difficulties and no  doubt  because  of  the
         tenacity and determination of their mother over the last 18 months,
         they are making excellent  progress.   Like  their  sister,  whilst
         their father is more a visitor to the home these  days  because  of
         the  parent's  relationship,  they  clearly  are  seeing  him  more
         regularly than they did when I made my first visits, as attested by
         both Annabelle herself and indeed her mother.  Chris  continues  to
         be a significant figure in their lives and at some  point  will  no
         doubt be quizzed by his sons as to how he managed not to  sort  out
         his immigration status and his subsequent actions."


    In paragraph 32 the expert continues:


         "Annette and Chris's commitment to the  welfare  of  the  children,
         despite the difficulties in their marriage" which is another  issue
         addressed where she states:


         "As I commented in my first report, 'there is clearly a  desire  by
         both parents to focus on the welfare of the children -  Annette  at
         the present moment trying to protect them  from  the  uncertainties
         around  their  father's  legal  status  in  the  UK,  which  in  my
         professional opinion is the basis for the present conflict  between
         those parents'.  Subsequent to my visit in the spring, I have noted
         that Chris is spending more time at the family home constrained  by
         the bail conditions and by the impact of these proceedings  on  the
         family.  This is the beginning of a positive  healing  process  and
         the sooner Chris can have his status ratified and  so  be  able  to
         work and contribute financially to the household  expenditure,  the
         sooner the possible improvement in the parents' marriage."


11.  The First-tier Judge did not find that the impact of deportation  would
    result in unduly harsh consequences so far as  the  adult  relationship
    was concerned and although the Rule 24 response raises  various  points
    it is not a cross-appeal pleaded in time in relation to which Mr Karama
    has been granted permission to  proceed.   It  is  a  response  to  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of challenge to the determination.

12.  Ms Short submitted that this is not a situation on the evidence of  the
    children just becoming upset if their  father  is  removed  by  way  of
    deportation.  It is submitted that Annabelle in particular would suffer
    detriment  to  her  emotional  health.  Notwithstanding  this,  it  was
    important for the Judge to have considered all the available  evidence.
    The first point is that the primary carer  of  the  children  is  their
    mother  and  has  been  since  separation  and  during  their  father's
    imprisonment.  If the father was deported the children will remain with
    their mother and so their primary needs will be met by her  both  on  a
    physical and emotional level.  It has not been shown on  the  available
    material before the Judge that the mother will be incapable of  meeting
    such needs.  It has not been shown on the evidence that the  impact  of
    father's imprisonment or loss of contact or separation  has  caused  or
    led to any form of irreparable harm to  the  children.   There  was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Judge to show that if Annabelle suffered
    harm to her emotional health that this could not be met and managed  by
    her mother  undertaking  the  valuable  parenting  role  that  she  has
    undertaken to-date.

13.  The second point  of  interest  is  that  the  social  worker  makes  a
    statement "it would be detrimental  to  her  emotional  health  in  her
    professional opinion" and then stops.  There is no detailed analysis in
    what way emotional health would be impacted or what affect  that  would
    have upon the child in relation to her general day-to-day  functioning,
    emotional and physical development, or education.  The child is 7 years
    old, is in a settled stable environment with her mother and her  father
    visits, albeit that father and daughter are very close as  indeed  many
    fathers and their daughters are.   Separation  occurs  in  families  on
    divorce and separation but this does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
    impact on the child will be such that the  unjustifiably  unduly  harsh
    test can be said to be satisfied per se.

14.  It is interesting to note that Peter  and  Trevor  are  doing  well  at
    school in relation to their social  matters,  the  football  that  they
    undertake, and are making excellent progress.  This indicates that  the
    separation of their father from their lives has had no  adverse  impact
    upon them that could be classified as being  unduly  harsh.   I  accept
    that they want to live in a home with their father  and  that  was  the
    evidence they gave to the First-tier Tribunal but it was necessary  for
    the  Judge  to  consider,  if  their  father  was  deported,  what  the
    consequences of that will be in relation to the impact upon  the  boys.
    There is no evidence to suggest an impact  sufficient  to  satisfy  the
    definition of unduly harsh.  It appears these are  two  balanced  young
    men, and credit to their mother for that fact, who are getting on  with
    their lives, who love spending time with their father, and who  may  at
    some point in the future demand an explanation.

15.  In relation to Emmanuel there is no evidence of any undue  impact  upon
    the child and one assumes the three children the Judge was referring to
    are Annabelle, Peter and Trevor.

16.  A bold statement that deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  without  a
    proper analysis of the impact and consequence  of  the  deportation  is
    insufficient.  I find in that respect the Judge  has  materially  erred
    such that the finding made on that basis under Article 8  must  be  set
    aside.

17.  Ms Short was asked to address the Tribunal, in the alternative, on  the
    basis the decision reached was as set out above and the decision needed
    to be re-made on the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and how she submits unduly harsh consequences will arise.  Ms
    Short submitted that the unduly harsh consequences relied  upon  by  Mr
    Karama are the impact upon the welfare of the children and the fact the
    children, with their fathers presence, appeared to  be  taking  a  more
    optimistic rather than pessimistic view of life and its outlook for the
    future.  That may be the case but what needs to be  considered  is  the
    consequence of their father's removal, if their view changes, upon  the
    children.  The difficulty Mr Karama faces in relation to this matter is
    that the Tribunal can only make  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
    information provided  to  it.   That  information  indicated  that  the
    children wanted to live in a household with their mother and father.  I
    do not dispute that, that is what most  children  wish.   The  evidence
    indicated that their mother and father, to their credit as parents, put
    their children's best interests first.  That  again  is  not  disputed.
    The Judge found that there was a meaningful relationship between  their
    mother and father and indicated there could  be  better  prospects  for
    their future.  That is not disputed.  What the Judge  was  required  to
    find and what I am required to consider in re-making this  decision  is
    whether on the  basis  of  the  information  available  Mr  Karama  has
    established to the required  standard  that  the  consequences  of  his
    deportation upon his partner and children will be  unduly  harsh,  i.e.
    will result in consequences such that the refusal cannot be said to  be
    proportionate.  In this respect, when one considers the nature  of  his
    offending and the fact Mr Karama is subject to an automatic deportation
    order, the fact that a deterrent sentence was passed and  the  argument
    the deterrent element of deportation is very strong in a case  of  this
    nature involving the use of documentation for  purposes  for  which  Mr
    Karama intended, and balancing this against the case  relating  to  the
    family members set out above including the lack of sufficient  material
    to establish long term harm or consequences that materially impact upon
    the children's development and welfare or needs that cannot be  met  by
    their mother,  that the correct finding to make on the evidence is that
    Mr Karama has not discharged the burden upon him  and  accordingly  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Decision

     18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
         the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
         follows. This appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity.

     19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed                                  Date 31st December 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


