
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01220/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAFEEN HAMAD
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Rutherford, instructed by TRP Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the purposes of this decision we refer to the Secretary of State as
    the Respondent and to Mr  Hamad  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq and was born on 22 January 1961.

 3. This decision  remakes  Mr  Hamad's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 14 March 2013 to make a deportation order. The re-making
    follows our decision dated 30  September  2015  and  promulgated  on  7
    October 2015 which found an error of law in the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pirotta and Mr Sandall which allowed Mr  Hamad's  appeal
    against deportation.

 4. The parties were in agreement that the sole ground of appeal before  us
    was whether the decision breached Article 8 of the ECHR.

 5. We heard oral evidence from the Appellant, his partner, and her son, T.
     We heard submissions from Mr Smart and Ms Rutherford. We  also  had  a
    skeleton argument for the Appellant and the materials already  provided
    for the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  error  of  law
    hearing before us.

 6. The somewhat extensive background to this matter  is  set  out  in  our
    error of law decision  which  is  contained  in  Appendix  1.  We  draw
    particular attention to [3]-[26] thereof, which need not be  replicated
    here.

 7. The parties agreed that we should make two corrections to  the  history
    set out in the error of law decision.

 8. At [23] of the error of law decision we indicated  that  the  issue  of
    whether the Appellant applied in time to extend his discretionary leave
    to remain was still in dispute. There was agreement before  us  at  the
    hearing on 8 October 2015 that the Appellant did  apply  in  time,  his
    leave expiring on 24 August 2010 and the Respondent's  records  showing
    an entry to the effect that the application was received by  16  August
    2010 at the latest.

 9. At [25] of our error of law decision we suggested  that  the  Appellant
    did not appeal the decision of 14 March 2014  in  time.  That  was  not
    correct as he did so on 28 March 2013. Due to what appears to have been
    an administrative error the Tribunal did not  process  that  appeal,  a
    notice dated 21 June 2013 later confirming that  the  appeal  had  been
    lodged in time.

The Law

10. A number of statutory provisions now govern the approach we  must  take
    in a  deportation  appeal  which  raises  Article  8  ECHR.  These  are
    contained in Appendix 2 hereto.

11. It is now well understood that these legislative  changes  approved  by
    Parliament mandate that when  making  an  Article  8  assessment  in  a
    deportation case, great weight falls in favour of the  public  interest
    in the deportation of foreign national criminals.

12. The exegesis of the President of the Upper  Tribunal  in  the  case  of
    Greenwood (No.2) (para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC) puts  it
    thus:

         "10. In all cases belonging to this sphere, the contest is  between
         the several public interests favouring  deportation  -  deterrence,
         protecting the public, maintaining  firm  immigration  control  and
         promoting the economic wellbeing of the nation - and  the  private,
         personal interests of the offender and, frequently, the members  of
         his family circle. The potency of the public interest in  play  was
         emphasised resoundingly by the Court of Appeal in  SS  (Nigeria)  v
         SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  This theme has  continued  to  chime  in
         further decisions of the Court of Appeal.  In  LC  (China)  v  SSHD
         [2014] EWCA Civ 1310, ... at [24]:

             "The starting point for any such assessment is the recognition
             that the public interest in deporting foreign criminals is  so
             great that  only  in  exceptional  circumstances  will  it  be
             outweighed  by  other  factors,  including   the   effect   of
             deportation on any  children.  However,  in  cases  where  the
             person to  be  deported  has  been  sentenced  to  a  term  of
             imprisonment for less than four years and has  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a child under the age of
             18 years who enjoys British nationality and is in the UK, less
             weight is to be attached to the pubic interest in  deportation
             if it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             UK and there is no  one  else  here  to  look  after  him.  By
             contrast, however, where the person to be  deported  has  been
             sentenced to a term of four years' imprisonment or  more,  the
             provisions of paragraph 399 do not apply and  accordingly  the
             weight to be attached to the public  interest  in  deportation
             remains very great despite the factors to which that paragraph
             refers. It follows that neither the fact that the  Appellant's
             children enjoy British nationality nor the fact that they  may
             be separated from  their  father  for  a  long  time  will  be
             sufficient to constitute exceptional circumstances of  a  kind
             which outweigh the public interest  in  his  deportation.  The
             Appellant's children will not be forced to leave the UK since,
             if she chooses to do so, their mother is free to  remain  with
             them in this country."

         11.  Most recently, in PF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 251, the
         Court of Appeal, having emphasised the supreme  importance  of  the
         tribunal identifying exceptional, or compelling, factors sufficient
         to outweigh the public interest in deportation, stated at [43]:

             "I fully recognise that if the Judge's  factual  findings  are
             well founded, they will be a real and damaging impact  on  his
             partner and the children; but that is a common consequence  of
             the deportation of a person who has children in this  country.
             Deportation will normally be appropriate in cases such as  the
             present, even though the children will  be  affected  and  the
             interests of the children are a primary consideration."

         We are also mindful of the statement of the Court of Appeal in SSHD
         v MA Somalia [2015] EWCA Civ 48, at [17], that -

             ".... the scales are heavily weighted in favour of deportation
             and that something very compelling is required to outweigh the
             public interest in deportation." "

13. In Greenwood, the President of the Tribunal went on  to  refer  to  the
    case of Chege (Section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT  00165.
    The head note of Chege states:

         "The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds  has
         been brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to consider:

             (i)  is the Appellant a foreign criminal as defined  by  s117D
                  (2) (a), (b) or (c);

             (ii) if so, does he fall within paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the
                  Immigration Rules;

             (iii)    if not are there very compelling  circumstances  over
                  and beyond those falling within 399 and 399A relied  upon,
                  such identification to be informed by the  seriousness  of
                  the criminality and taking into account  the  factors  set
                  out in s117B.

         Compelling as an adjective has the meaning of having a powerful and
         irresistible effect; convincing.

         The purpose of paragraph 398 is to recognize circumstances that are
         sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
         deportation but do not fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         The task of the judge is to assess the competing interests  and  to
         determine whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
         for private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  or
         whether   the   public   interest    arguments    should    prevail
         notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8."

14. The guidance in Chege is entirely in line  with  the  learning  of  the
    Court of Appeal in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.  That  case
    indicates at [39] the correct approach to the role of  the  Immigration
    Rules - that is paragraphs 399 and  399A  -  in  the  "very  compelling
    circumstances" assessment:

         "39. The fact that the new rules  are  intended  to  operate  as  a
             comprehensive code is significant, because it  means  that  an
             official or a tribunal should seek  to  take  account  of  any
             Convention rights of an Appellant through the lens of the  new
             rules themselves, rather  than  looking  to  apply  Convention
             rights for themselves in a free-standing way outside  the  new
             rules. This feature of the new rules makes the decision-making
             framework in relation to foreign criminals different from that
             in relation to other parts of the Immigration Rules, where the
             Secretary of State retains a general  discretion  outside  the
             Rules in exercise of which, in some  circumstances,  decisions
             may need to be made in order to accommodate certain claims for
             leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  Convention  rights,  as
             explained in Huang and R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

         40.  The requirement that claims  by  Appellants  who  are  foreign
             criminals for leave to remain, based on the Convention  rights
             of themselves or their partners, relations or children, should
             be assessed under the new rules  and  through  their  lens  is
             important,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  has
             emphasised. It seeks to ensure uniformity of approach  between
             different officials, tribunals and courts who have  to  assess
             such claims, in the interests of fair and equal  treatment  of
             different Appellants with similar cases on the facts. In  this
             regard, the new rules also serve as a safeguard in relation to
             rights of Appellants  under  Article  14  to  equal  treatment
             within the scope of Article 8. The requirement  of  assessment
             through the lens of the new rules also seeks  to  ensure  that
             decisions are made in a way that is properly informed  by  the
             considerable weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  in
             deportation of foreign criminals, as declared by Parliament in
             the 2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State (as  the
             relevant Minister with responsibility  for  operation  of  the
             immigration system), so as to  promote  public  confidence  in
             that system in this sensitive area."

15. Following Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  we
    treat the provisions of paragraph 117C as mandatory considerations, the
    head note of that case stating:

         "(i) The public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted
         by the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8
         ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the state or is self-
         sufficient  or  is  likely  to   remain   so   indefinitely.    The
         significance of these factors is that where they  are  not  present
         the public interest is fortified.

     ii) The list of considerations contained in section  117B  and  section
         117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002
         Act") is not exhaustive.  A court or tribunal is entitled  to  take
         into account additional  considerations,  provided  that  they  are
         relevant in the  sense  that  they  properly  bear  on  the  public
         interest question.

    iii) In cases where the provisions of sections 117B-117C of the 2002 Act
         arise, the decision of the Tribunal must demonstrate that they have
         been given full effect."

    We also take cognisance of [17]:

         "We consider the correct analysis of sections 117A and 117B  to  be
         as follows:

          i. These provisions apply in every case where a court or tribunal
             is required to determine whether a  decision  made  under  the
             Immigration Acts breaches a  person's  right  to  respect  for
             private and family life under Article 8 ECHR and, as a result,
             would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
             1998.  Where a Court or Tribunal is not required to make  this
             determination, these provisions do not apply.

         ii. The so-called "public interest question" is "the  question  of
             whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for
             private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2).",
             which appears to embrace the entirety of  the  proportionality
             exercise.

        iii. In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must have regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
             section 117B in all cases: per section 117A(1) and (2).

         iv.  In  considering  the  public  interest  question   in   cases
             concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, the court  or
             tribunal must have regard to the section  117B  considerations
             and the considerations listed in section 117C.

          v. The list of considerations in sections 117B and  117C  is  not
             exhaustive: this is clear from the words in  parenthesis  "(in
             particular)".

         vi. The court or tribunal concerned has no choice:  it  must  have
             regard to the listed   considerations.

         To this we would add the following.  While the court or tribunal is
         clearly entitled to take into  account  considerations  other  than
         those listed in  section  117B  (and,  where  appropriate,  section
         117C), any additional factors considered must be relevant,  in  the
         sense that they properly bear on the  "public  interest  question".
         In this discrete respect, some assistance is provided by reflecting
         on the public law obligation to  take  into  account  all  material
         considerations which, by definition,  prohibits  the  intrusion  of
         immaterial factors.   We are not required to decide in the  present
         case whether there is any tension between section 117A  (2),  which
         obliges the court or tribunal concerned to have regard to the  list
         of considerations listed in section 117B  and,  where  appropriate,
         section 117C) and the contrasting terms of section 117B (5) and (6)
         which are framed as an instruction to  the  court  or  tribunal  to
         attribute little weight to the two considerations specified."

16. We also found the learning in Treebhawon and others  (section  117B(6))
    [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) of assistance in interpreting the provisions of
    s.117C, the second paragraph of the head note of that case stating:

         "Section 117B (4) and (5) are not  parliamentary  prescriptions  of
         the public interest. Rather, they operate as instructions to courts
         and tribunals to be applied in cases where the  balancing  exercise
         is being conducted in  order  to  determine  proportionality  under
         Article 8 ECHR, in cases where either of  the  factors  which  they
         identify arises"

    with elaboration of that part of the ratio at [18] to  [20],  including
    the comment at [19] that:

         "The effect of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is,  of  course,  that  this
         discrete public interest must yield to more potent public interests
         in certain circumstances."

Our Decision

    Paragraphs 399 and 399A

17. It was common ground before us that the Appellant is a foreign criminal
    as he is someone who has been convicted of an offence "that has  caused
    serious harm" as provided for in s.117D(2)(ii).   It  was  also  common
    ground before us that the Appellant cannot benefit from the  provisions
    of either paragraph 399 or paragraph 399A. The Appellant does not  have
    a relationship with a  child  under  the  age  of  18  so  cannot  meet
    paragraph 399(a).

18. The Appellant's relationship with his partner, a  British  citizen,  is
    not disputed. All the witnesses before us gave entirely straightforward
    and consistent evidence and their evidence was not subject to challenge
    from the Respondent. The Appellant and his partner explained that  they
    were  friends  for  some  years  and  then  formed  a  partnership   in
    approximately 2010.We accept, therefore, that  their  relationship  was
    formed in 2010  and has continued since then during a period  in  which
    the Appellant has been in the UK with leave. The Appellant cannot  come
    within  the  provisions  of  paragraph  399(b)(i),  however,   as   his
    relationship with his partner was formed whilst he was in the  UK  with
    discretionary leave to remain.  To  our  minds  that  is  a  precarious
    status; AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and Deelah and others
    (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC) applied.

19. Nor can the Appellant meet the requirements of paragraph 399A. He  came
    to the UK at the age of 38 in 1999, is now aged 54 and  has  been  here
    lawfully only since 2010.

    "Very Compelling Circumstances"

20. Therefore, following the rubric of paragraph 398,  we  now  assess  the
    question of whether the public interest in the Appellant's  deportation
    is outweighed by very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A, that assessment to have regard to
    the considerations set out in s.117B and s.117C of the  2002  Act.  The
    current approach is set out in Greenwood (No. 2), cited above.

21. We have indicated above that when carrying out this assessment, the law
    mandates that the scales are  heavily  in  favour  of  the  Appellant's
    deportation.  While  this  is  not  a  case  to  which  the   automatic
    deportation provisions of s.32  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  apply,
    because of the Appellant receiving sentences below 12 months, we do not
    find that much, if anything, turns on this since paragraph 398 provides
    down that "the presumption shall be that the public  interest  requires
    deportation" and s.117C(1) states unambiguously that  the  "deportation
    of foreign criminals is in the public interest".

22. Our starting point and  a  primary  consideration  in  our  assessment,
    therefore, is the  great  weight  which  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of the Appellant attracts.

23. At  the  outset  of  our  assessment  we  consider  the  facts  of  the
    Appellant's criminal history, comprising four convictions  between  May
    2001 to February 2008 and, in particular, the two convictions which had
    led to custodial sentences.   We  bear  in  mind  the  remarks  of  the
    sentencing judge on 25 February 2008 who handed down  the  three  month
    sentence for affray which activated the nine month  suspended  sentence
    for assault occasioning actual bodily harm with intent:

         "Mr [Hamad], you have pleaded guilty to an affray, taking place  on
         the 17th of October 2007, in the course of which you threw a  glass
         that injured your son. I have no doubt at all  that  you  are  very
         ashamed of what you did.

         The photograph of the injury shows  a  very  serious  wound,  which
         luckily has not had long-term effects. I suspect that you  had  had
         far too much to drink, which clouded your  judgement  and  affected
         your self control. I accept that behind the offence lay concern for
         your son's well-being. But in view of the  fact  that  you  have  a
         suspended sentence for an offence of violence, the  court  is  left
         with no alternative but to pass a  custodial  sentence.  The  court
         will  try  to  keep  the  sentence  as  short   as   is   possible,
         acknowledging the following points; that you pleaded effectively at
         the first opportunity, the difficulties that a single parent has in
         bringing up teenage children, the fact that you are in prison in  a
         foreign land and the fact that this, at the  age  of  47,  is  your
         first experience of custody. All those matters, combined  with  the
         principle of totality, mean that the sentence I shall pass will  be
         very much shorter than you might otherwise expect."

24. At this juncture, we turn to consider Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

25. Section 117B:

         'a.  The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  clearly
             engaged.

          b. The Appellant speaks English but  gains  no  positive  benefit
             from that following AM and Deelah.

          c. It weighs against the Appellant that he is not in work and not
             financially independent: s.117B(3).

          d. In line with s.117B(4) and (5) we give little  weight  to  the
             Appellant's private life  of  16  years  as  most  of  it  was
             established whilst he was here without leave and precariously.



          e. The provisions of s.117(4)(b) do not prevent us  from  placing
             weight on the Appellant's relationship with his  partner  this
             was formed whilst he was here  lawfully.  We  deal  with  this
             factor in more detail below as the relationship also falls  to
             be considered under s.117C(5).

          f. As s.117B(6) concerns a relationship with a child, it  has  no
             application here.'

25. Section 117C:

         'a.  Section 117C(1) reminds us again that the deportation  of  the
             Appellant is in the public interest.

          b. The provisions of s.117C(2) concern the  weight  to  be  added
             attract to the public interest depending on the seriousness of
             an  offence.  The  sentences  of  three   and   nine   months'
             imprisonment given to the Appellant are at the  lower  end  of
             the  scale  of  offending.  They  were  not,  in   our   view,
             sufficiently serious so as to add to the weight that  we  have
             already identified as attracting to the public interest.

          c. Following s.117C(3)  and  s.117C(5)  we  must  assess  whether
             "Exclusion 2" applies, that is,  whether  the  effect  of  the
             Appellant's deportation on his partner would be unduly  harsh,
             the remaining provisions of s.117C having no relevance here.

26. We have indicated that the evidence of the Appellant  and  his  partner
    was such that we were able  to  accept  it  at  its  highest.  We  also
    indicated above  that  the  genuine  and  subsisting  nature  of  their
    relationship was not challenged before us. They have known  each  other
    since approximately 2005 but became  partners  in  approximately  2010.
    They retain separate  accommodation  but   spend  most  of  their  time
    together. To this we add a series of specific findings as follows.

27. There are some notable features in their histories which appeared to us
    to explain their particular closeness and dependence upon  each  other.
    Prior to meeting the Appellant, his  partner  experienced  a  difficult
    marriage as her husband  was  an  alcoholic.  She  separated  from  her
    husband in 1998 and he died in 2008. From  approximately  2010  onwards
    the Appellant took on the role of a father to  his  partner's  children
    where their own father had not been able to act  as  such  due  to  his
    alcoholism and separation from their mother.

28. The Appellant's partner also cares for her widowed father, cooking food
    for him and visiting him on a daily basis accompanied by the Appellant.
    It is out of  respect  for  the  partner's  father  that  she  and  the
    Appellant do  not  live  together  formally  as  it  would  offend  his
    religious beliefs where the Appellant remains a Muslim and the  partner
    is Hindu.

29. The Appellant's partner supports him in the usual way that partners do,
    for example attending hospital and legal appointments with him. She was
    by the Appellant's side during the period when one of  the  Appellant's
    sons was seriously injured in a car accident and in hospital  for  some
    weeks. The Appellant looks to her and  to  her  children  for  support,
    including emotional support, where one of his sons  has  been  deported
    from the UK and the  other  has  become  estranged  from  him  and  his
    partner's family, due in part, it seems, to the after  effects  of  his
    car accident.

30. We find that there is a strong relationship between the  Appellant  and
    his partner's children. ST talked of the Appellant as his father and to
    feeling that, having lost his own father  because  of  his  alcoholism,
    separation from his mother and his death in 2008, his father-figure was
    being taken away from him again. He stated that his older  sister  felt
    the same. His evidence appeared to us to be  particularly  reliable  in
    this regard as he took  care  to  indicate  that  his  younger  sister,
    although close to the Appellant, would not be as badly affected by  the
    Appellant's deportation as he and his older sister. ST and his  younger
    sister continued to live with their mother, so saw the Appellant  every
    day. The Appellant continued to be in  close  contact  with  the  older
    sister who was at university, acting as a  father-figure  by  assisting
    her with her car and so on. The written  statements  of  the  partner's
    daughters were entirely consistent with the oral and  written  evidence
    of ST and the other evidence before us.

31. We attribute particular weight to the closeness of  the  Appellant  and
    his partner, taking into account  their  particular  circumstances  and
    mutually difficult histories and the importance he has in her  life  as
    the father-figure to her children. This impels us to conclude that  the
    Appellant's partner would experience great difficulty if he were to  be
    deported. Whilst alert to the very high threshold,  we  find  that  the
    effect of the Appellant's deportation on his partner  would  be  unduly
    harsh.

32. We are mindful, as set out above, that this relationship does not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and that the "very compelling
    circumstances" that can lead to an appeal being allowed must  be  "over
    and above" what is provided  for  under  the  Rules.  It  might  appear
    initially to be anomalous that  the  relationship  cannot  benefit  the
    Appellant under the Immigration Rules can become of significance in the
    "very compelling circumstances" assessment because of  the  wording  of
    s.117C. However, we consider that the primary legislation must prevail.
    We construe the  combined  wording  of  s.117(3)  and  s.117(5)  as  an
    instruction  as  to  how  we  should  approach  the  "very   compelling
    circumstances" assessment to the effect that the public  interest  does
    not require deportation if the Appellant's deportation would be  unduly
    harsh for his partner. As in Treebhawon:

         "The effect of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is,  of  course,  that  this
         discrete public interest must yield to more potent public interests
         in certain circumstances."

    Conclusion

33. We are mindful of that potent public interest  in  the  deportation  of
    this Appellant. The public interest must be  a  starting  point  and  a
    primary factor in our assessment. However, we conclude that s.117C  has
    the effect that the public interest in this case does not  require  the
    Appellant's deportation as that would result in an unduly harsh outcome
    for his partner.

34. We consider, as a minimum, that s.117C operates  to  place  significant
    weight on the Appellant's side of the balance  because  of  the  unduly
    harsh circumstances for his partner in the event  of  his  deportation.
    Further, we have taken into account and weighed factors over and  above
    those specified in Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

35. In summary, we conclude that the particular configuration of factors in
    this case, the unusual closeness and dependence of  the  Appellant  and
    his partner, the unduly harsh impact of his  deportation  on  her,  his
    importance to her children, the significant length of  time  since  the
    last offence and the  relatively  short  sentences  that  were  imposed
    amount to very compelling circumstances over and above  the  provisions
    of paragraphs 399 and 399A to the extent that the  public  interest  in
    deportation is, exceptionally, outweighed.

36. We recognise that our decision  is  finely  balanced  and  that  others
    adjudicating upon the same  kaleidoscope  of  competing  factors  might
    decide them differently. However, this is the very stuff of  individual
    and independent judicial adjudication.

Notice of Decision

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

38. The appeal is re-made as allowed.


Signed   [pic]    Date 20 December 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


      APPENDIX 1 - ERROR OF LAW DECISION PROMULGATED ON 7 OCTOBER 2015

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01220/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham                 |Decision Promulgated:                |
|On: 30 July 2015                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Safeen Hamad
                         (Anonymity Order Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rutherford, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pirotta and Mr Sandall promulgated on 11 February  2015  which  allowed
    the respondent's appeal against deportation on humanitarian  protection
    and Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. The appellant before us was the Secretary of State. For the purposes of
    this decision we refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent  and
    to Mr Hamad as the appellant, reflecting  their  positions  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. Even by the often quite protracted litigation in asylum and deportation
    cases, this matter has a complicated and troubling history.

 4. The appellant claims to have entered the  UK  illegally  on  22  August
    1999. He claimed asylum on grounds of political  activity  against  the
    Saddam Hussein regime. His two sons, Hardi Hamad (dob 1 June 1989)  and
    Ari Hamad (dob 20 December 1992) were  dependent  on  that  claim.  The
    respondent refused the asylum claim on 28 May 2001. The appeal  against
    the refusal was dismissed on 4 March 2002  by  Immigration  Adjudicator
    Lewis (the first appeal). The Adjudicator accepted that  the  Appellant
    was an opponent of the Saddam Hussein regime and would be at real  risk
    of serious harm from in Central and Southern Iraq, but noted  that  the
    Appellant resided in the KAA and that he would be afforded  sufficiency
    of protection there against any risk of harm from  the  Saddam  Hussein
    regime.  Permission to appeal that decision was  refused  on  22  April
    2002.

 5. Meanwhile, on 17 May 2001, the appellant was convicted of driving  with
    excess alcohol and find �100. He was disqualified from driving  for  12
    months. On 27 July 2001 he was convicted of driving with excess alcohol
    and otherwise than in accordance with the license and  fined  �120  and
    disqualified from driving  for  three  years.  On  14  March  2002  the
    appellant was cautioned for assault occasioning actual bodily  harm  in
    respect of his son Hardi.

 6. On 28 July 2004 the appellant applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    for himself and his sons under the "family exercise".  The  application
    was rejected as the  appellant  was  ineligible  due  to  his  criminal
    convictions. The respondent maintains that  the  appellant  misinformed
    his MP concerning his own convictions as she wrote to the respondent on
    5 June 2006 maintaining that the police  had  confirmed  the  appellant
    they had no criminal convictions. The respondent replied to the  MP  on
    26 April 2007, advising her that she had been misled by  the  applicant
    and informing her of his convictions as of that date.

 7. In April 2007 the appellant's oldest son, Hardi, was sent  to  a  Young
    Offenders Institution having received his own criminal conviction.

 8. On 3 August 2007 the Appellant was  convicted  of  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm and given a nine-month suspended prison sentence and
    an 18 month supervision requirement.

 9. On 17 October 2007 the appellant was involved in an incident  where  he
    injured his son, Ari, by throwing a glass at him. Ari was  subsequently
    taken into care by Social Services. This incident led to  a  conviction
    for  affray  on  25  February  2008.  He  was  sentenced  to  3  months
    imprisonment and his earlier 9 month suspended sentence from  3  August
    2007 was thereby activated, resulting in a total custodial sentence  of
    12 months.

10. On 8 April 2008 the respondent informed the appellant of his  liability
    to deportation and gave him the opportunity to present reasons  why  he
    felt he should not face deportation. The appellant did not reply.

11. On 17 April 2008 the respondent issued a decision to make a deportation
    order together with reasons for that order. On 7 July 2008  the  appeal
    against that decision (the second appeal) was  allowed  by  Immigration
    Judge Astle on Article 8 ECHR grounds. A claim for  protection  on  the
    grounds that the Appellant was at risk from his wife's  family  on  the
    grounds that he had married  her  without  her  family's  consent,  was
    rejected, in part on the basis that this matter had not been raised  in
    his earlier asylum application in 1999 and  that  his  evidence  on  it
    contained discrepancies.

12. However, on 25 September 2008, Senior Immigration  Judge  Warr  ordered
    reconsideration as the decision of Judge Astle was found to  contain  a
    material error of law. A  reconsideration  hearing  took  place  on  26
    November  2008  before  Designated  Immigration  Judge   O'Malley   and
    Immigration Judge Hobbs. In a determination promulgated  on  7  January
    2009 it was found that the appellant did not have a  family  life  with
    his sons, Article 8 ECHR was not engaged, and the appeal was  dismissed
    on all grounds. The appellant became appeal rights exhausted as  of  16
    February 2009 after being refused permission to appeal by the Court  of
    Appeal on 28 January 2009.

13. The matter might have ended there but on 24 March 2009  the  respondent
    wrote to the appellant in error indicating that his  deportation  would
    be reconsidered in light of country guidance case  law.  In  fact,  the
    decision of Judge Astle dated 7 July 2008 had concluded  that  the  new
    country guidance case law did not have any bearing on  the  appellant's
    protection claim and that finding was not set aside so the respondent's
    reconsideration was not necessary.

14. Seemingly as a result of that confusion, on 2 June 2009 the  respondent
    issued the appellant with a further decision to make deportation  order
    which generated a  further  in  country  right  of  appeal  (the  third
    appeal). The appeal was heard on 2 October 2009 and the  appellant  and
    his two sons gave evidence. The appeal was allowed on 7 October 2009 by
    Immigration Judge Obhi and Mrs Greenwood under Article 8 ECHR.

15. The Secretary of State sought to appeal  the  decision  of  Immigration
    Judge Obhi but permission was refused on 23 October 2009. As  a  result
    of the successful appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds,  therefore,  on  24
    February 2010 the appellant was granted 6  months  discretionary  leave
    valid until 24 August 2010.

16. The appellant maintains that he applied for an extension of  his  leave
    on 11 August 2010. That matter remains in dispute, of which more below.



17. What is not in dispute is that on 25 May  2011  the  appellant  made  a
    further asylum claim with his sons as his  dependents,  notwithstanding
    the fact that both sons were by then adults.

18. In a letter of 11 July 2011, the appellant reiterated his asylum  claim
    and requested further leave  to  remain  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds. The letter of 11 July 2011 also set out a claim for  leave  to
    remain on medical grounds under Article 3 ECHR.

19. The letter of 11 July 2011 was also accompanied by a statement from  Ms
    Bina D stating that she had been in a relationship with  the  appellant
    for six years from 2005 onwards. It is not disputed that the  appellant
    had not mentioned his relationship with Ms D at any point prior to  the
    letter of 11 July 2011.

20. On 3 December 2012  the  appellant  was  issued  with  a  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds in order for the respondent to be provided with  any
    change  in  circumstances  or  further  evidence  since  the   original
    application. The response was  dated  19  December  2012.  It  made  no
    mention of any medical issues or the relationship with Ms D but  relied
    only on the appellant's relationship with his sons.

21. The further applications for leave to remain on asylum and human rights
    grounds were refused on 14 March  2013.  The  respondent  rejected  the
    asylum claim as his claims on the basis of  opposition  to  the  Saddam
    Hussein regime and a blood feud due to his marriage  had  been  refused
    definitively  in  his  first  and  second  appeals  and   the   further
    representations raised nothing new as regards those claims.

22. The decision of 14 March 2013 also indicated that  the  respondent  had
    carried out an active review  and  concluded  that  there  had  been  a
    material change in the appellant's family circumstances. The grant of 6
    months discretionary leave following the third appeal was on the  basis
    of the appellant's relationship with his  sons.  Those  sons  were  now
    adults, one of whom was himself subject to deportation action.

23. It was  also  not  accepted  that  an  in-time  application  to  extend
    discretionary leave  had been made on 11 August 2010,  there  being  no
    evidence to that effect. The special delivery reference number provided
    was not held on record by Royal Mail and the respondent had nothing  to
    show that it had been received in time.

24. The decision of 14 March  2013  also  informed  the  appellant  of  the
    respondent's  decision  to  make  deportation  order  under   s.3(5)(a)
    Immigration Act 1971. The respondent relied  on  the  conviction  of  3
    August 2007 for assault  occasioning  actual  bodily  harm  and  of  25
    February 2008 for affray which, in combination, had led to  a  sentence
    of 12 months. The respondent also noted that  the  Appellant  had  been
    convicted of five offences in the UK.  He  was  found  to  come  within
    paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules as the respondent  considered
    the offending had caused serious harm or he was a  persistent  offender
    who had shown a particular disregard for the law.

25. It would appear that the appellant did not appeal against the  decision
    of 14 March 2013 in time, filing notice of appeal only on 17 June  2013
    (see section 4 'Appeal' of  the  Respondent's  bundle  index   on  form
    ICD.3237), by which time the respondent had, on  17 May 2013,  signed a
    deportation order against him. It remains the case that  he  lodged  an
    appeal which was  accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  fourth
    appeal).

26. In a supplementary reasons for refusal letter dated  4  July  2013  the
    respondent maintained her position that no application to extend  leave
    was made on 11 August 2010, her records only  containing  reference  to
    such an application being made out of time on 28  September  2010.  The
    letter of 4 July 2013 went on to indicate that even if  the application
    had been  received in time the respondent would have refused  it  under
    paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  a  result  of   the
    appellant's criminal conduct.

The Current Appeal

27. The fourth and current appeal  came  before  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Somal and Ms Endersy) on 19 December 2013. The decision does not
    indicate that the Appellant pursued a protection claim on  the  grounds
    of his original anti-Saddam Hussein political activities,  but  he  did
    pursue such a claim in relation to a claimed  fear  of  harm  from  his
    wife's family on the grounds of the blood feud. The  Tribunal  rejected
    the claim to fear harm on the grounds of a blood feud, placing  'little
    weight' on a country expert report produced by Sheri  Laizer  dated  16
    December 2013 on the grounds that  it  made  no  reference  to  earlier
    determinations of the AIT in relation to the Appellant, and was said to
    be based on a distorted picture  of  the  Appellant's  previous  asylum
    claims.

28. The Appellant also relied on Article 8 ECHR as regards his son,  Hardi,
    and his partner Ms D. The Tribunal accepted at [37] that the  Appellant
    did have a genuine and subsisting relationship Ms D and  was  impressed
    by her evidence and that of her son. The appeal was allowed on  Article
    8 ECHR grounds.

29. Both parties were granted permission to appeal the  decision  of  Judge
    Somal and Ms Endersby. In a decision dated 29 October 2014,  the  Upper
    Tribunal (Judge Coker) allowed the Appellant's appeal against dismissal
    of his protection claim as inadequate consideration had been  given  to
    the country expert report. Judge Coker also allowed  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal against the First tier Tribunal's decision on Article  8
    grounds, on the basis that the Tribunal had  failed  to  give  adequate
    consideration  to  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  The  appeal
    remitted to the First tier to be 'heard afresh'.

30. The Appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  of  14  March
    2013 therefore came again before the First tier Tribunal on 31  January
    2015, this time before Judge Pirotta and Mr Sandall.

31. At the hearing, Counsel for the Appellant did not pursue the protection
    claim in relation to the Appellant's past political activities but  did
    pursue the appeal in relation to his fear of  a  blood  feud  with  his
    former wife's family. The Article 8 ECHR claim was also pursued.

32. The Tribunal held for reasons set out at [30]-[39] that the Appellant's
    account in relation to the claimed blood feud with  his  wife's  family
    was not credible. There is no challenge before us in relation to  those
    findings. There is therefore no live asylum claim in existence.

33. However, the Tribunal held as  follows  in  relation  to  a  claim  for
    Humanitarian Protection, at [40]-[41]:

         "40. The objective country evidence and  Ms  Laizer's  report  show
         that the Appellant could not return to Iraq  or  any  part  of  the
         Kurdish areas because of the strategic violence of a war  zone  and
         his personal profile, which would impair his ability to relocate or
         obtain protection in a general sense against sectarian violence and
         generalized armed conflict.

         41.  As a Sunni Kurd, the Appellant would  find  conditions  unduly
         harsh in the KRG, could not relocate to any part of Iraq  with  any
         expectation  of  safety.  Article  15c  provides  that   in   these
         circumstances, the Appellant could not be returned to  a  situation
         of escalating violence, the policy of the Secretary of State not to
         return failed asylum seekers to  war  zones  where  armed  conflict
         produces anarchy demands that the Appellant cannot be  returned  in
         any event. He would be entitled to Humanitarian Protection in these
         circumstances as no alternative relocation process is available  to
         him."

34. The First tier Tribunal  noted  that  by  this  time,  the  Appellant's
    younger son, Ari, had been deported to Iraq,  and  that  there  was  no
    strength to the Appellant's relationship with the older son, Hardi, who
    had no leave to remain in the United Kingdom in  any  event  [53].  The
    Appellant did have 'some sort of' family life with Ms D,  however,  and
    the appeal against deportation was allowed on that basis.

35. The result was that the First tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  claim  on
    refugee grounds but found the Humanitarian  Protection  and  the  Human
    Rights Convention claims made out. The appeal against  deportation  was
    therefore allowed (the Tribunal, we think erroneously, referring to the
    Respondent's decision being a refusal to revoke a deportation order).

36. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on grounds, in summary, that
    the First tier Tribunal had erred in law in:

      i) failing to  give  adequate  reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  on
         humanitarian protection grounds, and failing to apply  the  country
         guidance case of HM (Iraq) v SSHD CG [2012] UKUT 00409 IAC;

     ii) insofar as the Tribunal had allowed the appeal on Article  3  ECHR,
         failing to give adequate reasons for doing so; and

    iii) failing to give adequate reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  under
         Article 8 ECHR, and in failing  to  give  adequate  regard  to  the
         pressing public interest in deportation.

37. Permission to appeal was given on those grounds by Judge of  the  First
    tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 10 March 2015.



Error of Law

Humanitarian Protection and Article 3

38. As above, the respondent's first ground challenges the finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  that  the  appellant  qualifies  for  Humanitarian
    Protection. The consideration of the issue appears to be found at [40]-
    [41] of the First tier  decision,  as  set  out  above.  The  reasoning
    appears to draw on country evidence, the expert report of Ms Laizer and
    the particular profile of the applicant.

39. We must admit to finding the decision of the First tier on Humanitarian
    Protection somewhat difficult to follow, however. The test is  not  set
    out and nor are the requisite parts of it discussed with any clarity at
    any  point.  There  is  no  identification  of  what  aspects  of   the
    Appellant's personal profile might raise the level of risk to him  such
    that the requirements that he would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm were met.

40. The second ground of appeal maintained that  inadequate  reasoning  had
    been given for, apparently, allowing the Article 3 claim, it not  being
    entirely clear if this was on  medical  grounds  [51]  or  the  country
    situation at [58], thus:

         "The return of the Appellant in the  current  political  situation,
         even between Muslims,  and  accentuated  hostility  towards  failed
         asylum seekers, would expose him to unreasonable risks of treatment
         contrary to the Human Rights Convention."

41. Given our difficulty in parsing the decision of the First tier Tribunal
    on Humanitarian Protection and Article 3,  we  were  grateful  for  the
    concession at  [4]  of  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  that  the
    respondent's challenge to the findings on Humanitarian  Protection  and
    Article 3 were conceded. Ms Rutherford also confirmed for the appellant
    that he no longer pursued either of those claims.

Article 8 ECHR

42. The only remaining issue in  dispute  before  us,  therefore,  was  the
    decision of the First tier Tribunal that deportation would  breach  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.

43. We can deal with this point relatively  quickly.  Through  primary  and
    secondary legislation the respondent has set down a structure  for  the
    consideration  of  deportation  decisions  including   appeals.   Those
    provisions are contained in s.117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ('NIAA 2002') and Part 13 of the Immigration Rules.

44. The Respondent argues in her grounds of  appeal  that  the  First  tier
    Tribunal misapplied the provisions of s.117 and that it  is  not  clear
    which aspects of the Immigration Rules  relating  to  deportation  have
    been applied.

45. We found the respondent's grounds in this regard had merit.  The  First
    tier Tribunal finds at [56] that it would be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the
    appellant to be deported and Ms D remain in the UK. Firstly,  there  is
    no  reference  to  the  provision  in  paragraph  399(b)(i)  that   the
    relationship must be established at a time when the appellant  was  not
    "precarious". The appellant began offending in 2001 and the  respondent
    has been trying to deport him since 8 April 2008.  It  appeared  to  us
    that an assessment of precariousness was necessary in order  to  assess
    whether paragraph 399(b)(i) applied at all and  where  that  assessment
    did not take place a material error arose.

46. Further, although the Tribunal  finds  at  [56]  that  the  Appellant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh on Ms D, the reasoning for so finding
    are unclear. It was accepted that the couple do not live  together.  It
    is nowhere  clear  that  the  Tribunal  appreciated  applied  the  high
    threshold for a finding of undue hardship, iterated,  for  example,  in
    the recent case of MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC)
    as  a   requirement   for   circumstances   being   "inordinately"   or
    "excessively" harsh.

47. The determination is not saved by the Tribunal having gone on to assess
    whether the "very compelling circumstances"  requirement  of  paragraph
    398 could allow the appeal to succeed even where  it  could  not  under
    paragraphs 399 and 399A. Any suggestion that the Tribunal attempted  to
    do so could not have merit given the  suggestion at [46]  and [49] that
    the weight that must attract to the public interest under s.117B(1) and
    s.117C(1) was in some way altered here by  the  respondent's  delay  in
    seeking to deport the appellant and the appellant not  offending  since
    2008.

48. We conclude that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal on  Article  8
    do not properly apply the relevant statutory criteria, in particular as
    regards whether the Appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" for
    Ms D. Where that is so, an error on a point of law arises such that the
    Article 8 decision must be set aside and re-made.

Decision

49. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law in the Article 8 ECHR assessment. That part of the  decision  is
    set aside to be re-made.

50. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on Article 3 of  the  ECHR  and
    humanitarian protection discloses an error on a  point  of  law.  Those
    parts of the decision do not need to be re-made  as  the  appellant  no
    longer maintains those grounds of appeal.

Directions

    (i)  Any further evidence on which the Appellant relies shall be  filed
         and served not less than 5 days before the adjourned hearing.

    (ii) The parties to file and serve skeleton arguments,  5  days  before
         the adjourned hearing.


Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
Date: 30.9.15


                              APPENDIX 2 - LAW

Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

    117A Application of this Part

           (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required
                to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                Acts-

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                    family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
                tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                    117B, and

                (b)    in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.



           (3)    In subsection (2), 'the public interest question' means
                the question of whether an interference with a person's
                right to respect for private and family life is justified
                under Article 8(2).

    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

           (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
                the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons who can
                speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United
                Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                    is established by a person at a time when the person is
                    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life
                established by a person at a time when the person's
                immigration status is precarious.

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                the public interest does not require the person's removal
                where-

                (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                    leave the United Kingdom.

    117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
           criminals

           (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                interest.

           (2)    The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation
                of the criminal.

           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the public interest requires C's deportation unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

           (4)    Exception 1 applies where-

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
                    for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                    Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                    integration into the country to which C is proposed to
                    be deported.

           (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
                relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
                subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,
                and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child
                would be unduly harsh.

           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
                to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the
                public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                compelling circumstances, over and above those described in
                Exceptions 1 and 2.

           (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
                taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering
                a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent
                that the reason for the decision was the offence or offences
                for which the criminal has been convicted.

    117D Interpretation of this Part

           (1)    In this Part-

                'Article 8' means Article 8 of the European Convention on
                Human Rights;

                'qualifying child' means a person who is under the age of 18
                and who-

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                    period of seven years or more;

                'qualifying partner' means a partner who-

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the
                    meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A)
                    of that Act).

           (2)    In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person-

                (a)    who is not a British citizen,

                (b)    who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an
                    offence, and

                (c)    who-

                    (i)    has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                        at least 12 months,

                    (ii)   has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                        serious harm, or

                    (iii)  is a persistent offender.

           (3)    For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject
                to an order under-

                (a)    section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act
                    1964 (insanity etc),

                (b)    section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act
                    1995 (insanity etc), or

                (c)    Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland)
                    Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted of an
                    offence.

           (4)    In this Part, references to a person who has been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain length of
                time-

                (a)    do not include a person who has received a suspended
                    sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the
                    sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to
                    take effect);

                (b)    do not include a person who has been sentenced to a
                    period of imprisonment of that length of time only by
                    virtue of being sentenced to consecutive sentences
                    amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

                (c)    include a person who is sentenced to detention, or
                    ordered or directed to be detained, in an institution
                    other than a prison (including, in particular, a
                    hospital or an institution for young offenders) for that
                    length of time; and

                (d)    include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or
                    detention, or ordered or directed to be detained, for an
                    indeterminate period, provided that it may last for at
                    least that length of time.

           (5)    If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as
                to whether a person is a British citizen, it is for the
                person asserting that fact to prove it.



The Immigration Rules

    396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall be
           that the public interest requires deportation.  It is in the
           public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make
           a deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK
           Borders Act 2007.

    397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal
           pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations
           under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.
           Where deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it
           will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
           interest in deportation is outweighed.

    Deportation and Article 8

    A398.    These rules apply where:

           (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
                deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
                obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

           (b)    a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
                against him to be revoked.

    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
           the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
           Convention, and

           (a)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                the public good and in the public interest because they have
                been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

           (b)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                the public good and in the public interest because they have
                been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                but at least 12 months; or

           (c)    the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in
                assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or
                399A applies and, if it does not, the public interest in
                deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
                there are very compelling circumstances over and above those
                described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -

           (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                in the UK, and

                (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                    least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                    immigration decision; and in either case

                    (a)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                        the country to which the person is to be deported;
                        and

                    (b)    it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                        in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                        or

           (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or
                settled in the UK, and

                (i)    the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                    (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration
                    status was not precarious; and

                (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                    the country to which the person is to be deported,
                    because of compelling circumstances over and above those
                    described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                (iii)  it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
                    in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

    399A.    This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
           if -

           (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most
                of his life; and

           (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

           (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to his
                integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                deported.

    399B.    Where an Article 8 claim from a foreign criminal is
           successful:

           (a)    in the case of a person who is in the UK unlawfully or
                whose leave to enter or remain has been cancelled by a
                deportation order, limited leave may be granted for periods
                not exceeding 30 months and subject to such conditions as
                the Secretary of State considers appropriate;

           (b)    in the case of a person who has not been served with a
                deportation order, any limited leave to enter or remain may
                be curtailed to a period not exceeding 30 months and
                conditions may be varied to such conditions as the Secretary
                of State considers appropriate;

           (c)    indefinite leave to enter or remain may be revoked under
                section 76 of the 2002 Act and limited leave to enter or
                remain granted for a period not exceeding 30 months subject
                to such conditions as the Secretary of State considers
                appropriate;

           (d)    revocation of a deportation order does not confer entry
                clearance or leave to enter or remain or re-instate any
                previous leave.


