
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01530/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral Decision given following the hearing     |                              |
|On 12 December 2017                           |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr Tashinga Alvin Musandu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office
                                 Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Musandu):    Mr M Walsh, Counsel, instructed by The
                                 Trent Centre for Human Rights


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Robson who had allowed Mr Musandu's appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision to deport him.  For ease of reference
    I shall throughout this decision refer to the Secretary  of  State  who
    was the original respondent as "the Secretary  of  State"  and  for  Mr
    Musandu, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. This appeal has had a long and unfortunate history because  a  previous
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in which the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to dismiss the claimant's appeal had been  dismissed  was  set
    aside due to procedural irregularity.  The  precise  reasons  why  this
    decision was set aside are  not  relevant  for  the  purposes  of  this
    hearing.

 3. The facts can be set out relatively briefly.  The claimant  arrived  in
    the UK in August 1999 with his mother who had previously been in the UK
    and then returned to Zimbabwe.  At the time the claimant  was  7  years
    old.  Regrettably from a very early age the claimant started offending.
     In 2007, when he would have been 14 or 15 years old, he was  cautioned
    for common assault.  In August 2009 he was  involved  in  an  attempted
    robbery and common assault and in September 2009 he threatened harm  to
    a witness on a jury.  Then  in  January  2010  in  respect  of  further
    offences he was sentenced to eight months' detention and training.  The
    following  month  he  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of  wounding  at
    Nottingham Magistrates' Court and sentenced to  ten  months'  detention
    and training.

 4. On 24 June 2010 the Secretary of State wrote to  the  claimant  warning
    him that deportation would be considered and would be considered in the
    future.  Thereafter on 30 May 2012 the appellant was convicted of  very
    serious offences indeed of robbery and attempted robbery in respect  of
    which, despite his relatively youthful age (he was  just  20),  he  was
    sentenced to eight years at a young offender's institution.  While  the
    claimant was serving his sentence the Secretary of State wrote  to  him
    informing him of the deportation order which was dated  14  July  2015.
    The basis of the decision was that removal was conducive to the  public
    good as provided within Section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    because pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  the  Secretary
    of State must make a deportation order in respect of foreign  criminals
    unless one of the Exceptions set out within Section  33  applies.   The
    claimant had been previously served with  a  notice  of  liability  for
    automatic deportation following his sentence, on 5 August 2012, and  by
    the time of the notice of decision he had not responded to that notice.



 5. As already noted the claimant appealed against this  decision  and  the
    original decision dismissing the appeal was set aside and so his appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge G R J Robson, sitting at Bradford
    Magistrates' Court  on  10  July  2017.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 21 August 2017,  for  reasons  which  will  be  set  out
    briefly below, Judge Robson had felt obliged to allow the appeal and it
    is in respect of this decision that the Secretary of State now appeals,
    leave having been granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker  on  31
    October 2017.

 6. Judge Robson in his decision considered whether the claimant  would  be
    entitled to remain in this country on human rights grounds (and  if  he
    would then the decision to deport would be unlawful under Section 33 of
    the UK Borders Act, being in breach of the ECHR) but it is  clear  from
    the decision that having considered  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
    Immigration Rules he concluded that his removal would not  be  unlawful
    under Article 8.  He sets out the relevant provisions from paragraph 78
    onwards.  At paragraph 79 he sets out paragraph 398 of the  Immigration
    Rules and  he  also  sets  out  the  other  relevant  Rules,  including
    reference to paragraphs 399 and 399A  subsequently.   The  findings  of
    fact include at paragraph 89 that "in relation to his  daughter,  I  am
    not satisfied that the best interests of that child will be  served  by
    the [claimant's] continued residence in the United Kingdom".

 7. He refers to Section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, inserted by the Immigration Act 2015, and notes that the sub-
    paragraphs relevant in this case apply to all ECHR Article 8 claims for
    foreign criminals decided on or after July 2015, as is the  case  here.
    However having considered all the evidence (and of  course  this  is  a
    case where the claimant is to be deported if the Secretary  of  State's
    decision is upheld on the basis that he has been sentenced to a  period
    of imprisonment of over four years), he concludes at paragraph 96  that
    "in view of what I have found  above,  I  conclude  there  will  be  no
    exceptional compelling reasons for  the  appellant  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, despite  the  length  of  his  presence  here  and  his
    integration  into  this  country".   He  makes  this   finding   having
    considered the best interests "not only of the appellant's but also the
    other children involved", finding in terms, "that their  best  interest
    would [not] be breached by removal of the appellant".

 8. In other words, it is abundantly clear from the decision that so far as
    the merits of the application are concerned there is no basis on  human
    rights or any other grounds why the decision of the Secretary of  State
    could be said to be unlawful.

 9. However, in four short paragraphs thereafter (paragraphs 99 to 102) the
    judge then goes on to allow the appeal because, at  paragraph  102,  of
    his finding as follows:

         "102.    I therefore, in  respect  of  my  findings  above,  solely
             because  I  am  bound  by  the  decision  in  JM   [Zimbabwe],
             reluctantly allow the Appeal on human rights grounds only".


10. This is a reference to JM  (Zimbabwe)  [2016]  EWHC  1773,  (Admin)  (a
    decision of Jay J) in which the judge had been considering  whether  or
    not a decision under Section 35 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  requiring
    the applicant in that case to cooperate with the Secretary of State  by
    giving consent to his return to Zimbabwe if  requested  to  do  so  was
    unlawful.  In that case Jay J had concluded that that was not, although
    he made it clear at paragraph 137 that "Nothing in my  judgment  should
    be interpreted as condoning the Claimant's continued unlawful  presence
    in the UK, at public expense".

11. The judge clearly considered that because the court  in  JM  (Zimbabwe)
    had concluded that the applicant in that case could not  be  forced  to
    return to Zimbabwe, that meant that this appeal had to be allowed,  but
    his finding that for this reason he was obliged to allow the appeal  on
    human rights grounds is in the submission of the  Secretary  of  State,
    not only not adequately reasoned  but  simply  wrong.   Before  us,  on
    behalf of the claimant Mr Walsh, consistent  with  his  obligations  as
    Counsel, stated that although he could not concede the point there  was
    no basis upon which  he  could  legitimately  argue  that  the  judge's
    reasoning was sustainable.  The fact that somebody  cannot  practically
    be returned does not make unlawful a decision to deport  him.   In  our
    judgment Mr Walsh was clearly right to concede that such  a  submission
    would be unarguable.  As long ago as  2005,  in  R  v  SSHD  (ex  parte
    Khadir) [2005] UKHL 39 the House  of  Lords  had  found  that  where  a
    decision was made to  remove  a  person  in  circumstances  where  that
    removal was not at that time  practical,  there  was  nothing  unlawful
    about the decision itself which could remain in place pending such time
    as circumstances in the host country might change.  In  this  case  the
    judge appears to have incorrectly concluded that  Mr  Justice  Jay  was
    saying something different, whereas all he was concluding was that  the
    Secretary of State could not lawfully require an applicant to cooperate
    in seeking travel documents.  There is nothing in that decision to make
    unlawful the deportation decision itself, as Mr Walsh accepted was  the
    case although not formally conceding the point.

12. Although there is a document before the court, submitted on  behalf  of
    the claimant, seeking to cross appeal the decision, Mr  Walsh  formally
    withdrew any cross appeal  to  the  extent  that  one  was  before  the
    Tribunal recognising that it could  not  possibly  succeed.   Again  we
    concur with his decision; the findings of fact  which  the  judge  made
    were on the facts of this case inevitable.  This claimant, in light  of
    his extremely serious criminal offending, could not  possibly  persuade
    anyone that there are exceptionally compelling reasons his  deportation
    would not be proportionate and there was nothing  before  Judge  Robson
    which could possibly persuade him otherwise.  It follows that  we  must
    set aside Judge Robson's decision as containing a material error of law
    (that is his incorrect interpretation of what had been decided  in  the
    first  instance  of  the  decision  of  JM  (Zimbabwe))  and   in   the
    circumstances of this case, we are able to remake the decision  without
    further hearing because it is not now suggested before us that there is
    any meaningful or material error in  the  factual  findings  which  the
    judge made with regard to the Article 8 position.  The highest that  Mr
    Walsh seeks to put the claimant's case is that it might be appropriate,
    given the mistake made with regard to JM (Zimbabwe), to send the  whole
    appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal for further  consideration,  but
    as in our judgment the  factual  findings  which  the  judge  made  are
    sustainable, and in light of these findings  there  is  no  basis  upon
    which the claimant's appeal could succeed, this is not  an  appropriate
    course to follow.  Accordingly we remake the decision as follows:

Notice of Decision

We set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robson as  containing
a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  deport
him is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
    Date: 14 March 2018
