

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01959/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th May 2015                        |On 19th May 2015                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MNR
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramall instructed by Raj Law Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    PJM Hollingworth promulgated on the  29th  January  2015  in  which  he
    allowed the Appellants appeal against the  order  for  his  deportation
    from the United Kingdom.

Background


 2. The Appellant is a national of Mauritius born on 12th March 1992.

 3. His immigration history shows he entered the  United  Kingdom  on  25th
    December 2004 as a visitor with his parents and was granted six  months
    leave to  enter.   Further  applications  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    dependant were rejected on 20th June, 27th July and 15th  August  2005.
    On 19th September 2005 the Appellant was granted leave to remain  as  a
    student dependant of his father valid until 30th April 2006  which  was
    extended until 31st May 2010.

 4. On 10th January 2010 the Appellant married  a  British  national  in  a
    religious ceremony and  on  26th  May  2010  applied  for  leave  as  a
    dependant over  18  which  was  refused.   On  11th  November  2010  an
    application for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules was  made
    on Article 8 grounds as the partner of a  British  national  which  was
    refused with no right of appeal on 12th December 2010  on  the  grounds
    the Appellant was an overstayer and  the  Islamic  wedding  which  took
    place when he was underage  was  not  recognised  under  UK  law.  That
    decision was reconsidered but upheld with no right of appeal.  Judicial
    review proceedings followed which were settled by a consent  order.  On
    19th April 2011 the Appellant was  granted  discretionary  leave  until
    19th April 2014.

 5. The Appellant was convicted on  27th  July  2012  at  Leicester  Market
    Harborough and Lutterworth Magistrates Court of "Possession of a  knife
    blade/sharp pointed article in a public place" for which he received an
    eight week prison sentence wholly suspended for twelve months.

 6. On 23rd May 2013 the Appellant was convicted  on  his  guilty  plea  at
    Leicester Crown Court for three counts of  Robbery  for  which  he  was
    sentenced on 15th  November  2013  to  three  sentences  of  two  years
    imprisonment to run concurrently and, for the offence of the commission
    of further offences  during  the  operational  period  of  a  suspended
    sentence,  a  further  seven  days  period  of  imprisonment   to   run
    concurrently. An application to appeal against conviction/sentence  was
    withdrawn.

 7. The Appellant  challenged  the  deportation  order  on  the  basis  his
    deportation will be in breach of his rights under  Article  8  ECHR  in
    relation to his partner, two children and extended family  members  and
    private life based upon length of residence in the UK and lack of  ties
    to Mauritius.

 8. The Appellant was sentenced for the Robbery offences with five  others.
    In his sentencing remarks HHJ Pert QC stated:

         ...The offence or robbery, taking something from someone  by  force
         in public is a very serious matter and the word must  go  out  that
         these courts -this court in particular - will treat  as  a  serious
         offence such an offence.

         ...

         The third offence, concerning you again,  [SS],  you  [G]  and  you
         [MNR]; 11th October 2012 in the afternoon in Victoria Park, just up
         the road here, the victim and his friend  were  approached  by  two
         men, "I want some money, give me �2.  If you haven't got any  money
         let me see your phone.  If you don't come back  I'll  batter  you,"
         and he  was  under  the  impression,  it  may  have  been  a  false
         impression, but in his terror it's hardly surprising, that  one  of
         you had a knife.  The next offence, robbery  of  [ZI],  29th  April
         2013, he's  14  years  of  age  and  he's  walking  home  and  he's
         approached by you, [MNR], and you [G] , and asked  if  he  had  any
         money, told to empty his pockets, "Give me the money or  I'll  fuck
         you up.  Give me the money if you don't want to get hurt."

         The next three robberies of you again [G], you [MNR] and you  [MR].
         All of the victims were 16.  They'd been at the gym.  As they  were
         walking away they were approached by the three of  you,  asked  the
         time, surrounded him. Asked if you could borrow his  phone  and  he
         said he had no credit, "Don't lie," demanded  the  phone  and  just
         took it and then, when the other two denied that they  had  phones,
         searched them both and took their phones.  You then had the gall as
         you walked away to complain about the quality of  the  phones  that
         you had just stolen.

         This is appalling behaviour and it  simply  cannot  -  the  message
         simply cannot go out that that type  of  conduct  is  going  to  go
         unpunished or is going to be dealt with by a slap on the wrists.

         ...

         [MNR], you're 18. You're nearly 19. I have to deal with you for the
         robbery on 11th October.  You pleaded  guilty  at  the  preliminary
         hearing, which takes your sentence down from what would have been 3
         to 2 years.  I also have to deal with you for the  April  offences,
         29th and 30th.  For 29th  April  you  were  obvious  on  bail.  You
         pleaded guilty at the preliminary hearing, which takes the sentence
         from 3 years down to 2 years.  For the offences the next  day,  all
         three of them, again you pleaded guilty at the preliminary hearing,
         again you were on bail for those offences, that takes the  sentence
         from 3 to 2. Again I'll make the April offences concurrent one with
         another consecutive to the earlier offences, which  again  makes  a
         sentence of 4 years, and in your case there's 84 days to  be  taken
         into  consideration  -  taken  off  your  sentence  by  virtue   of
         qualifying curfew, and I so order.

 9. The 28 day period for the breach of the suspended sentences was imposed
    for although the sentence had expired at the  date  of  the  sentencing
    exercise it was in existence, albeit at the end of its term,  when  the
    offences were committed. As a result the Sentencing Judge imposed  what
    he thought was the minimum term  of  seven  days  consecutive  for  the
    breach of the suspended sentence.

The determination


10. The Judge considered the procedural history and evidence at  paragraphs
    1 to 26 before setting out his findings  which  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

       . The evidence of the Appellant and his partner was  accepted.  There
         had been a religious but not a civil marriage. The evidence of  the
         witness was accepted. No inconsistencies go to the heart of any  of
         the witnesses. Nothing has undermined them [27].

       . The key issue to be determined is paragraph 399A of the Immigration
         Rules and whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
         remain in the UK without the Appellant [28].

       . Applying section 55 it is in the children's best  interests  to  be
         with their father [29].

       . The Appellants  release  and  return  to  the  family  has  enabled
         corroboration to be obtained of the effect of separation [30].

       . The Respondent has accepted that it would be unduly harsh  for  the
         Appellant's children to live in Mauritius [31].

       . The Appellant has shown remorse [32].

       . The children are very young although  the  Appellant's  son  is  of
         sufficient age to understand the  importance  of  the  relationship
         with his father. The Appellants daughter has shown  the  degree  of
         awareness her mother indicated. Both children will be  affected  by
         the Appellants absence. The development of  the  children  will  be
         harmed if the Appellant is not present given the period of time for
         which he would be absent following deportation and the ages of  the
         children  and  their  awareness.  The   criteria   of   significant
         impairment are fulfilled in this specific context [32].

       . The children have been cared  for  by  their  mother  who  received
         substantial help in the  Appellants  absence.  Both  families  have
         helped. The Appellants partner has suffered from stress  which  she
         seeks to conceal from all bar her mother.  The  Appellants  partner
         was able to cope whist his absence was of a  finite  nature  during
         which contact was maintained. The partner received help of  both  a
         practical and  emotional  nature.  Even  if  she  were  to  receive
         practical help the emotional damage which would be done to her  and
         the stress from which she would suffer would affect  the  wellbeing
         of the children if the Appellant was deported [33].

       . The degree of contact that  can  be  satisfactorily  maintained  is
         significantly affected by the ages of the children. Contact will be
         indirect. In light of their ages they require direct  contact.  The
         children are British citizens who have lived with their father both
         before and after his period of custody [34].

       . In relation to 339B of the Rules the issue is whether it is  unduly
         harsh for the Appellants partner to remain in the  UK  without  the
         Appellant.  It  is  accepted  she  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with the Appellant [35].

       . The Appellant has not been in employment since August 2012 and  was
         unemployed  and  reliant  upon  state   benefits   prior   to   his
         imprisonment. The family supported  themselves  whilst  he  was  in
         prison but struggled to remain solvent.  She is paying certain debt
         slowly [37].

       . The couple had known each other for a substantial period before the
         religious marriage. The practical impact of separation  has  to  be
         considered. The onus is upon  the  Appellant  to  demonstrate  this
         would be unduly harsh [38].

       . The Appellant's partner would not be able to  cope  even  with  the
         practical assistance of members of  her  family  and  that  of  the
         Appellant.  In  the  ordinary  course  of  events  the  effect   of
         separation would be harsh [39].

       . The criterion  of  undue  hardship  is  satisfied  because  of  the
         additional impact upon the Appellants partner. Given the period  of
         time the Appellant would be removed the  criterion  of  significant
         impairment will be fulfilled due the passage of  time,  the  effect
         upon the partner of separation, and the clear inference that may be
         drawn upon the  circumstances  that  would  exist.  The  degree  of
         support to date has not prevented the partner suffering in the  way
         she has. This is not a case in which the  Appellant  could  provide
         practical help because of  a  physical  condition  which  could  be
         substituted by medical assistance or care from the relevant  social
         services. The root cause is  the  Appellant  absence  and  external
         measures will not assist. No period  of  unlawful  residence  as  a
         minor should be held against the Appellant. When  the  relationship
         was formed the Appellants immigration  status  was  not  precarious
         [41].

       . The outstanding issue has been resolved in  the  Appellants  favour
         making it unnecessary to consider  private  life  under  the  Rules
         although it is necessary to consider Section 117 [42].

       . The maintenance of immigration control is in the  public  interest.
         The Appellant was here unlawfully for a month. He has worked in the
         past as a carer and can work in the future [43].

       . Under section 117C(3) exception 1 does not apply,  exception  2  is
         met as the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
         a qualifying child [44].

       . The effect of deportation has been found to be unduly harsh. As the
         criteria in section 117 have been resolved in the Appellants favour
         the appeal is allowed [45].

       . In relation  to  proportionality,  the  public  interest  does  not
         require the Appellants deportation [47].

The law


11. The relevant Rules in force are not disputed.  The  relevant  provision
    states that "the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
    the public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
    convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a  period
    of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months" - 398 (b).

12. Paragraph 399 applies as paragraph 398 (b) applies if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                       (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                  the country to which   the person is to be deported; and

                       (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                  in the UK without      the person who is to  be  deported;
                  or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

13. The issue in relation to the children and the  Appellants  partner  was
    whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the  UK  without
    the person who is to be deported.

Discussion


14. It is not disputed that the Appellant is a foreign criminal as  defined
    by s117D (2) (a), (b) or (c).

15. It is not disputed that paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules applies.
    The issue was whether the evidence supported the claim  it  was  unduly
    harsh for the children and/or the Appellants partner to have to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without him.

16. The Oxford English Dictionary defines  "unduly"  as  "excessively"  and
    "harsh" as "severe, cruel".

17. The IDIs: Chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in  Article  8  ECHR  Cases
    V5.0 (28 July 2014) in relation to this element states:

         2.5.3 The effect of  deportation  on  a  qualifying  partner  or  a
         qualifying child must be considered in the context of  the  foreign
         criminal's immigration and criminal history. The greater the public
         interest in deportation, the stronger  the  countervailing  factors
         need to be to succeed. The impact of deportation on  a  partner  or
         child can be harsh, even very harsh, without  being  unduly  harsh,
         depending on the extent of the public interest in  deportation  and
         of the family life affected.

         2.5.4 For example, it will usually be more difficult for a  foreign
         criminal who has been sentenced more  than  once  to  a  period  of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months but  less  than  four  years  to
         demonstrate that the effect of deportation would  be  unduly  harsh
         than for a foreign criminal who has  been  convicted  of  a  single
         offence, because repeat offending increases the public interest  in
         deportation and so requires a stronger claim to respect for  family
         life in order to outweigh it.

         2.5.5 It will usually be more difficult for a foreign  criminal  to
         show that the effect of deportation on a  partner  will  be  unduly
         harsh if the relationship was formed while the foreign criminal was
         in the UK unlawfully or with precarious immigration status  because
         his family life will be less  capable  of  outweighing  the  public
         interest than if he was in the UK with lawful, settled  immigration
         status.

         2.5.7 Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act states  that  it  is  in  the
         public interest that those  who  seek  to  remain  in  the  UK  are
         financially independent. If a foreign criminal  cannot  demonstrate
         that he is financially independent, it will be more  difficult  for
         him to show that  the  effect  of  deportation  on  his  qualifying
         partner  or  qualifying  child  will  be  unduly  harsh.  Financial
         independence here means not being a  burden  on  the  taxpayer.  It
         includes not  having  access  to  income-related  benefits  or  tax
         credits, on the basis of the foreign criminal's income  or  savings
         or those of his partner, but not those of a third party.  There  is
         no  prescribed  financial  threshold  which  must  be  met  and  no
         prescribed evidence which must be submitted. Decision-makers should
         consider all available information,  though  less  weight  will  be
         given  to  claims  unsubstantiated  by  original,  independent  and
         verifiable documentary evidence, e.g. from an employer or regulated
         financial institution.

18. The determination contains an arguably flawed  structural  approach  in
    that it assesses the element of undue harshness before making reference
    to the Respondents case. As it is necessary to  consider  all  relevant
    matters before arriving at this conclusion the core finding is arguably
    legally flawed.

19. There is also a relevant evidential issue. The Judge heard the evidence
    of  the  witnesses  which  he  accepted.  The  evidence  was  that  the
    Appellants partner had  found  it  very  difficult  to  cope  with  the
    children whilst he was in prison. She had the support of her sister and
    family members. This was a situation in which the  Appellant  was  away
    from home for a defined period whilst he was serving his  sentence  and
    not for the period that  would  be  experienced  as  a  result  of  the
    deportation order.

20. Mr Smart put the physical availability of family support  into  context
    when he referred to the fact the Appellant's partner's father  actually
    lives next door and to the fact the Appellant's own parents live only a
    short distance away in the same locality.

21. It is not enough per se for a partner to claim that he or she will  not
    be able to cope based upon the emotional loss they may feel and sadness
    and distress that may result, as this is the effect of  separation  for
    most if not all loving couples. Similarly the  fact  the  children  may
    loose daily interaction with a parent and have to be brought  up  in  a
    single parent family or with addition  support  is  not  determinative.
    This was recognised in AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348  where  Sedley
    LJ found "the tragic consequence is that this family... Would be broken
    up forever, because of the appellant's  bad  behaviour.  That  is  what
    deportation does."

22. The offences committed by the Applicant are  serious.  Robbery  is  the
    crime of taking or attempting to take anything of  value  by  force  or
    threat of force or by putting the victim in fear of violence to him  or
    herself. The length of the sentence  on  a  guilty  plea  reflects  the
    serious nature of the offending as does the content of  the  sentencing
    remarks where, in particular, reference is made to the strong deterrent
    element in preventing street crimes of this nature  where  the  victims
    are often young persons targeted as a result of their possessing a type
    of mobile telephone or for cash. Offences were also committed in breach
    of a suspended sentence imposed for  the  possession  of  a  blade  and
    represent an escalation in the seriousness of the offending.

23. As a result of the serious nature of the offence, the strong  deterrent
    factor in preventing the same, and the public interest in  deportation,
    stronger countervailing factors are needed to be able to succeed.

24. The Judge refers to certain elements  of  the  evidence  which  can  be
    summarised and commented upon as follows:

       . The Appellants statement that his son and daughter  would  see  the
         situation as his not being there for them, they will grow up hating
         him with no one to look up to as a role model or to tell  them  the
         right from wrong as a father [3]. Certain elements  of  this  claim
         are mere speculation. The children at the date of the hearing  were
         four [a son born 9-11-2011] and two [a daughter  born  22-01-2013].
         There is no evidence to support the claim they will grow up  hating
         the Appellant. His comment in relation to being a  role  model  may
         raise an issue as a good role model does  not  carry  a  blade  and
         commit robbery on younger more vulnerable victims.

       . The Appellants claim that if deported he and  his  wife  will  miss
         each other [4]. This is an  interesting  response  which  arose  in
         reply to a questions asked in examination in chief in relation to a
         claim in his witness statement at paragraph 8 that his  wife  could
         not cope by herself. The response set out the role  played  by  the
         Appellant before loosing his job as a  carer  (2010-2012)  and  the
         time he and his partner have been together, but little else.

       . The Appellants wife will look after the children in the  UK  if  he
         were to be deported. Contact would be by telephone. His wife  could
         not visit as money is the problem [9].

       . The Appellants  partner  when  asked  about  the  effect  upon  the
         children if their father was to be deported  claimed  it  would  be
         upsetting for the children, especially their son as  he  has  spent
         more time with the Appellant. He was quiet when his father  was  in
         prison and changed "quite a bit" but since his father's release was
         playing better, is louder, and talks a lot [11]. This  may  be  the
         case and there is  no  evidence  to  the  contrary.  This  arguably
         reflects the reaction of a normal  child  to  the  absence  of  his
         father in a situation he is too young to understand.  The  reaction
         to his father's return is further evidence of this.

       . If deported the children will not have the father's love they need.
         Their mother did not want them to grow up without  a  father.  They
         will dislike their father as he had misbehaved leading to  removal.
         If deported their son will go  quieter,  their  daughter  will  not
         understand, there will be big impact upon them both. It will not be
         nice for them not to have their father.  The  partner  claimed  she
         could not cope on her own as she struggled whilst the Appellant was
         in prison. She became stressed but did not show her emotions to the
         children but only to her mother [12].  The Judge accepted that  the
         best interests of the children are to live with both  their  father
         and mother  but  that  is  only  one  element  as  the  section  55
         assessment is not  the  determinative  factor.   This  evidence  is
         illustrative of a trend in this case in which statements  are  made
         of desire or intent which are not supported by additional evidence,
         but accepted. During the hearing Mr Bramall was  asked  about  such
         additional evidence  of  which  none  was  provided.  When  it  was
         suggested there was an evidential lacuna in the material he  argued
         there was not as the Appellant had submitted all  the  evidence  he
         was seeking to rely upon. This may be the case but in  a  challenge
         to a deportation appeal  the  Judge  is  required  to  assess  that
         material from an objective standpoint  rather  than  accepting  the
         subjective  assertions  as  being  all  that  are  required  to  be
         considered, especially when assessing the impact  of  the  evidence
         against the public interest. It is not the role  of  the  Judge  to
         seek such evidence as there is a legitimate  expectation  that  all
         the evidence to be relied upon will be provided -  SS  (Nigeria)  v
         SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 refers in which Mr Justice Mann found:

             MR JUSTICE MANN:

             61.  I agree with the masterful analysis of Laws LJ,  and  for
                  my part wish to emphasise only one thing.

             62.   In  this  appeal  counsel  for  the   appellant   placed
                  considerable emphasis on   the need for  the  Tribunal  to
                  satisfy itself as to the interests of the child in    such
                  a way as suggested an  inquisitorial  procedure.  I  agree
                  with Laws LJ  that the circumstances in which the Tribunal
                  will require further inquiries  to be made, or evidence to
                  be obtained, are likely to be extremely rare. In       the
                  vast majority  of  cases  the  Tribunal  will  expect  the
                  relevant interests of   the  child  to  be  drawn  to  the
                  attention  of  the  decision-maker  by   the    individual
                  concerned.  The  decision-maker  would  then   make   such
                  additional inquiries as might appear to him or her  to  be
                  appropriate. The  scope for the Tribunal to require,  much
                  less indulge in, further inquiries of   its own  seems  to
                  me to be extremely limited, almost to the  extent  that  I
                  find     it hard to imagine when, or how, it could do so.

         Many children live  in  single  parent  families  as  a  result  of
         separation through divorce  or  events  such  as  deportation.  The
         initial impact of separation is often  reflected  in  an  emotional
         reaction. In some cases such a reaction can lead  to  developmental
         issues that are amenable to intervention by services such as  a  GP
         or if required the Child and Adolescent Services that form part  of
         Social Services if they  cannot  be  resolved  within  the  family.
         Schools are experienced in such matters and give important  support
         to children if they are aware of the issues and such assistance  is
         sought. It is not known how the children with  react  as  they  get
         older. If they are settled in a routine with their mother in the UK
         the contact with their father will maintain him in their minds  but
         it is known that as a child develops into  a  young  person  it  is
         ordinarily their peer group that can become of more  importance  to
         them  than  their  patents.  The  evidence  does  not  support  the
         implication that if the Appellant is removed the  effect  upon  the
         children will be unduly harsh or that  any  problems  the  children
         experience are incapable  of  being  resolved  through  appropriate
         support. The  children's  mother  claims  she  did  not  shown  her
         emotions to the children suggesting she remained in control of such
         issues and was able to restrict those she shared her true  feelings
         with to her  own  mother.   If  required  it  has  not  been  shown
         appropriate support would not  be  available  for  the  partner  if
         required.

       . When the Appellant was not at home they did not have enough  money.
         Financial assistance was provided by family but it is claimed  this
         was not sufficient. Bills were not paid, bills are being  paid  off
         slowly. The Applicants partner suffered panic attacks and could not
         sleep. There is no medical help. The partner  stated  that  if  the
         Appellant is deported she  will  be  stressed  and  depressed.  She
         stated she does not know how she will care for her  children  [13].
         It is accepted that the partner will  have  been  affected  by  the
         absence of the Appellant as the relationship appears  to  be  close
         both between them and within the wider/extended  family.  There  is
         reference by the use of medical  terminology  (depression)  to  the
         impact upon the partner which is not supported by medical evidence.
         For example  it  is  claimed  she  will  become  depressed  if  the
         Appellant is deported but this is a self diagnosis if referring  to
         the medical definition of depression rather than  feeling  low  and
         very sad. True depression can result in a person  being  unable  to
         function which may have an effect upon the ability of  that  person
         to parent adequately but it also has various degrees/levels most of
         which do not prevent a sufferer functioning adequately.  The reason
         there is no medical diagnosis or evidence in support is because  it
         was admitted during the Upper Tribunal hearing that none  had  been
         sought. Parents, including single parents, with depression can care
         for their children very well. Whether intervention  or  support  is
         needed will depend upon the level of depression and impact  of  the
         same. In the absence of a diagnosis it is arguable  all  the  Judge
         had was a claim by the partner that this is  what  will  happen  to
         her. This is arguably insufficient as otherwise all  couples  could
         make such a claim to avoid the impact of a deportation  order.   It
         is also a relevant factor that the partner has  a  very  supportive
         family network. In paragraph 7 the Judge noted that  the  Appellant
         and his partner had been living with his father  and  mother  since
         January 2010.  When the partner fell pregnant they obtained a  flat
         where they stayed for  ten  months  before  moving  back  into  the
         parent's house. Other accommodation was then  found  before  moving
         into a house next-door to the partner's father where they remain to
         date. It said there is daily contact, the  partner's  mother  baby-
         sits and both parents come in to play with  the  children  and  the
         partner goes to her mother's house every day.  When in  prison  the
         family provided help with the shopping, the rent, and the children.
         The partner's  mother  kept  the  son  for  four  months  when  the
         Appellant was in prison as the daughter was young (which  may  have
         further confused the child if his father was in prison and  he  was
         taken from his mother too, rather than just  as  a  result  of  his
         father's absence). The partner's sister moved in  and  remained  to
         provide support until the Appellant  returned.   It  has  not  been
         shown such support would not continue  to  be  available  following
         deportation and the level of support indicates it will, as there is
         nothing to suggest that the family who have been so  supportive  to
         date would abandon their daughter/daughter in law and grandchildren
         if the Appellant is deported. The evidence does not shown that with
         such support from both family and professionals, if  required,  any
         impact upon the partner or children could not be managed  or  would
         result  in  unduly  harsh  consequences.  I   accept   that   harsh
         consequences may arise but this is not the required legal test.  It
         is also noted that the partner's evidence in relation  to  why  she
         could not travel to Mauritius with the  Appellant  is  because  she
         will be without the practical and  emotional  help  of  her  family
         indicating she was aware that such will be available [14].

         In relation to the issue of money, the family were  in  receipt  of
         State Benefits whist the Appellant was in prison  and  it  has  not
         been shown they will not remain so post deportation. The  Appellant
         has worked as a carer in the past but his  conviction  may  be  one
         that impacts upon  the  prospects  of  similar  employment  in  the
         future. The evidence does not adequately analyse the cause  of  the
         financial problems/issues which are  being  managed  by  instalment
         payments and other assistance in any event. It is not suggested the
         children or partner will be homeless or destitute or the problem is
         such as to establish undue  hardship  for  this  reason.  Financial
         advice and assistance is available from the CAB  or  other  similar
         services if required. This may  cause  stress,  especially  if  the
         partner is debt averse, but it has not been shown this is an  issue
         that cannot be managed and which will satisfy the require test.

25. The Judge considered the Pre-Sentence Report and noted  the  assessment
    of risk of reoffending as medium and the assertion by the Appellant  in
    his letters that he has  grown  in  maturity  and  shown  remorse.  The
    content of the report is a relevant factor. It reports that  the  three
    victims were young males younger than the Appellant.  All  the  victims
    were frightened of the Appellant and his two accomplices. Two tried  to
    prevent themselves being robbed by claiming they did not have  a  phone
    which did not prevent a personal search of  their  belongings,  through
    pockets and bags.  The report specifically states:

         '[MNR]  denies  instigating  these  robberies.   However,   witness
         statements clearly identify him as the instigator. He is  also  the
         older of the three men, each of whom are related to him.  [MNR]  is
         unclear about why he committed the offences.  He states that it was
         his cousin's suggestion and that he went along with it. Whether  it
         was his suggestion or not, [MNR] appears to have taken the lead  in
         the actual robberies.  He admits to feeling nervously  excited  and
         to have no financial motive whilst he engaged the offences.  He was
         adamant that he had never considered acting in this manner  before.
         My assessment is that this indicates a motive of power and  control
         over others who [MNR] considers to be weaker  than  him.  The  peer
         influence contributes to his offending, in that, one of his younger
         peers has suggested undertaking in illegal act,  a  dare  as  such,
         which [MNR] has regarded as a challenge to his status of being  the
         older male in the group, although he  did  not  admit  to  this  in
         interview. There appears to have  been  no  previous  planning  and
         [MNR] appears to have responded to  a  suggestion  by  his  cousin,
         without considering the consequences of his behaviour,  other  than
         trying to impress his  two  accomplices.   This  would,  therefore,
         appear to have been impulsive.  [MNR] states that, with  hindsight,
         he should have admonished his cousin for making such an anti-social
         suggestion, which would have been a more responsible and  effective
         proof of his peer status, whilst increasing his family's  trust  in
         him as a good influence on his younger relatives.

         [MNR] accepts he did wrong  and  immediately  regretted  committing
         these robberies.  He recognised the impact of his offending has had
         on his  victims.   However,  he  does  not  fully  accept  that  he
         instigated the offences,  since  he  complained  that  it  was  his
         younger cousin's suggestion.  This indicates a  minimum  acceptance
         of responsibility and poor assertiveness skills.

         [MNR] has committed these offences as  a  result  of  an  impulsive
         decision to demonstrate some sort of male  bravado  to  his  peers.
         This amounts to immature and anti-social attitudes  concerning  the
         use of aggression and bullying behaviour to demonstrate  power  and
         control as part of establishing for himself  status  and  notoriety
         among his peer group. [MNR] did not consider the negative impact of
         his offending behaviour on his victims at the  time  of  committing
         the offence. However, it is  apparent  to  me  that  he  must  have
         decided that the risk was worth taking as  part  of  his  impulsive
         decision making.'

26. The author of the report noted the negative influence of the  Appellant
    associating with his brother and cousin and the degree of  risk  taking
    behaviour in respect of the decision to commit robberies for  the  sake
    of not loosing face. The author  also  concluded  that  the  Appellants
    behaviour involved a predatory element in that he chose to target those
    he perceived to be weaker than him as a means to demonstrate his  power
    to his associates.  It was also found that:

         '[MNR's] offending behaviour indicates poor consequential thinking,
         impulsivity,  instrumental  aggression  to  manipulate  others  and
         egocentric attitudes.  Other areas of his life indicate a  lack  of
         direction  and  assertiveness  in  decision  making   with   little
         commitment to long term goal setting.

         [MNR] appears to appreciate the rights of others in society  to  be
         able to not become victims of crime. His remorse toward his victims
         appeared genuine in that respect during interview, and according to
         his account of  wanting  to  put  things  right  immediately  after
         committing these offences. However, it is of concern  that  he  did
         not appear to consider the likely impact of his offending, prior to
         engaging in these offences.  I consider  that  [MNR]  exhibits  the
         potential to reoffend as a result of this impulsivity and  lack  of
         forethought if he fails to address it.'

27. In relation to the assessment of risk the author of the report states:

         '[MNR] is considered to present a medium risk of  serious  harm  in
         respect of direct physical violence or by presenting  a  threat  of
         violence.  His history of past cautions and warnings  for  offences
         against the person leads me to  believe  he  is  capable  of  being
         violent towards others if so motivated.  His motivation appears  to
         be largely in relation to wanting to impress his peers.

         It is my view that [MNR] can  effectively  reduce  these  risks  by
         addressing his immaturity about his self image and by improving his
         consequential thinking and pro-social reasoning skills. An increase
         in his understanding of the victim would also serve to improve  his
         ability to take  more  responsibility  for  his  behaviour  in  the
         future.'

28. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Bradshaw repeated the claim
    that the Appellant  considered  his  cousin  was  responsible  for  the
    offending  and  there  is  insufficient  evidence  of   the   Appellant
    undertaking  targeted  work   to   address   the   identified   factors
    contributing to his criminal conduct.

29. A Judge is entitled to come to a conclusion that  others  such  as  the
    Secretary of State may not accept and to have that decision defended on
    appeal and upheld provided the evidence provided  has  been  considered
    with the required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny,  adequate  have  been
    reasons given for the  findings  made,  and  the  conclusions  are  not
    irrational or contrary  to  the  evidence.  In  this  appeal  there  is
    sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  when  all  relevant  factors  are
    considered this process was not adequately undertaken.

30. The further submission that the Judge had not erred in not  considering
    the issue of proportionality when making the decision under  the  Rules
    has no arguable merit.  Assessing whether the impact of deportation  is
    harsh is a question of fact not arguably involving a need to weigh  the
    competing interests. Assessing whether any harshness  is  unduly  harsh
    does involve the need to  undertake  a  proportionality  assessment  as
    demonstrated by the information set out above  and  the  provisions  of
    section 117 and in relation to the fact the more  serious  the  offence
    the greater the public interest in  deportation  and  the  greater  the
    public interest in deportation, the stronger the countervailing factors
    need to be to succeed.

31. The Judge failed to undertake such  an  assessment  before  finding  in
    paragraphs 39 and 40 that the test of undue harshness has been shown to
    be met on the basis of the evidence that he accepted, despite the clear
    limitations in the same illustrated above and failure to  consider  the
    public interest until much later in the decision where he sets out  the
    Appellants case with no reference to the  competing  arguments  in  the
    same  detail  and  why  he  found  as  he  did  in  relation   to   the
    proportionality/unduly  harsh   element.  I  find  this  amounts  to  a
    material legal error of law and set the determination aside. It has not
    been shown the decision was one properly open to the Judge on the basis
    of the evidence and the manner in which the same was assessed.

32. It was accepted that this is a family splitting case. This comes  about
    as a result of the Appellants criminal conduct and the acceptance  that
    it would be unduly harsh to expect the partner or children to  relocate
    to Mauritius.

33. I proceed to re-make the decision as no additional  evidence  had  been
    provided and the findings made in relation to the  composition  of  the
    family and acts of criminality were not challenged. The issue was  that
    of the correct assessment to be made on that material. Directions  were
    sent with the grant of permission in relation to the provision  of  any
    additional evidence to be relied upon and no  rule  15(2A)  application
    was made on behalf of [MNR].

34. It is clear in this case that the Tribunal are dealing  with  a  family
    unit of the Appellant, his partner, and their two young children. It is
    accepted the deportation of the Appellant will cause upset and distress
    within the family and that this may be considered by  some  within  the
    family to be harsh although there is no  evidence  bar  that  from  the
    family of the  consequences  of  removal  being  such  that  severe  or
    irreparable  physical  or  emotional/psychological  harm  will  result.
    Claims made to this effect are not supported by additional professional
    or other  evidence.  The  claim  of  resultant  depression  is  a  self
    diagnosis. It has not been shown the standard of care the children will
    receive from their mother if the Appellant is deported is such that  it
    will fall below that of a competent parent.   It  has  not  been  shown
    family will not provide support as they have previously  for  both  the
    Appellants partner and the children. It has not been shown  medical  or
    other support/assistance is not available or effective as  no  one  has
    asked for it. Although the Appellant  expresses  remorse  and  to  have
    matured he maintains his claim that he was  not  responsible  when  the
    author  of  the  pre-sentencing  report  clearly  refers   to   witness
    statements demonstrating that he was. The assessment of the medium risk
    of the Appellant committing crimes of violence is also pertinent as  is
    the fact the Sentencing Judge  recognised  the  very  strong  deterrent
    factor in a case involving crimes of street robbery which blights  some
    cities and towns in the  UK.  The  deportation  is  also  an  automatic
    deportation in relation which clear guidance has been provided  by  the
    Court of Appeal in cases such as SS (Nigeria), LC (China)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1310, and others in relation to the nature  of  the  weight  to  be
    given to the pubic interest.

35. I find on balance that [MNR] has failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof upon him to the require standard to  show  that  his  deportation
    will result in underlay  harsh  consequences  for  either  his  partner
    and/or their children. The decision has been shown to be proportionate.
     None of the exceptions contained in section 117 have been proved to be
    applicable.  Having undertaken the  task  of  assessing  the  competing
    interests to determine whether  an  interference  with  the  Appellants
    right to respect for the private and family  life  he  relies  upon  is
    justified under Article 8(2), or whether the public interest  arguments
    should prevail notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8, I find  the
    Secretary of State has established that the balance falls in favour  of
    the public interest argument and the Appellants removal.

Decision

36. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside  the
    decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.  This
    appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity.

37. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14th May 2015
