
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01787/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd June 2016                            |On 5th July 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                      Jose Alberto Oliveira De Almeida
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, instructed by ULaw Legal Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Portugal born on 7th  October  1971.   He
    appeals against the decision to deport him dated 20th August 2013 under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   The Appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell and the Secretary of  State  appealed.   I
    found that there was an error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 16th February 2015 and set  it  aside  for  the  reasons
    given in my decision promulgated on 29th January 2016.

3.   I set aside the judge's findings at paragraphs 70, 72, 78 and 79.   The
    findings at paragraph 77 were preserved save for the last  sentence  in
    which the judge concludes that the Appellant was not a genuine, present
    and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to   justify   his
    deportation on public policy grounds.  It  was  quite  clear  from  the
    decision on the error of law that that is where  the  judge  fell  into
    error. I therefore have to  remake  the  decision  and  decide  firstly
    whether the Appellant does constitute a genuine,  present  and  serious
    threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society  and
    secondly whether his deportation would be proportionate.

4.   The Appellant relied on the material that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  and  submitted  a  supplementary  bundle  of   eleven   pages
    containing a further witness statement, a letter of support from  Steve
    Nixon, an email from  Peter  Taylor,  an  email  from  the  Appellant's
    brother, a letter of support from Andy Porter, recovery worker at  High
    Level and a letter of support from Claire Jefferies, project leader  at
    Petrus.

5.   Mr Burrett also submitted a skeleton argument  in  which  he  submitted
    that on the current evidence before me the Appellant's personal conduct
    did not represent a genuine, present and serious threat, but if it  did
    the decision to deport was disproportionate taking into account all the
    circumstances.


Appellant's evidence

6.   The Appellant  gave  evidence  confirming  his  name  and  address  and
    relying on his witness statements dated 22nd June 2016 and 2nd February
    2015.  In cross-examination he stated that he had been living in the UK
    for 21 years but had been unable to obtain permanent residence  because
    he had been working on and off for five years and could not obtain  the
    relevant evidence to do so.  He accepted that his offending was  linked
    to drugs and alcohol and he had been addicted  to  heroin  for  fifteen
    years.  He had not used heroin for seven years, but has had an  alcohol
    problem for the last three or four years.  His last drink  was  on  his
    birthday last year. He did not have enough to get drunk and just  drank
    with his meal. The last time he got drunk was in January 2013  when  he
    committed the offence of  assault  for  which  he  was  imprisoned  for
    fifteen months. He would not go back to drinking because his ability to
    stay in the UK depended on him staying drug and alcohol-free.   He  had
    no choice but to remain clean.

7.   The Appellant had started drinking because he had no direction and  had
    effectively been off sick for ten years. He was not doing anything with
    his life and had no objectives or goals. He took one day at a time  and
    was not doing anything constructive. He had goals now. He would like to
    work, but even if he was unable to do so he did not want to go back  to
    using alcohol because that only made the situation  worse.   He  had  a
    different view on life since he had been  detained  and  since  he  had
    lived in Rochdale.  He did not want to live that life.

8.   The Appellant had a brother and sister-in-law in the UK  and  they  had
    just had a baby. They lived in Heathrow and he talked to  them  on  the
    telephone every two weeks.  He had a sister in Portugal  with  whom  he
    kept in contact through social media. He did not keep in  contact  with
    any other relatives in Portugal because he had  not  really  spoken  to
    them and they did not want to have anything to do with him  because  of
    his drug problem.

9.   In answer to questions from me, the Appellant stated that had not  been
    in trouble since the offence in January 2013, but he did  not  know  if
    this was the longest time he had  spent  without  committing  offences.
    Looking at his previous convictions, there was a gap between  2009  and
    2012.  He stated that this was when he stopped using class A drugs  and
    moved away from the area in which  he  was  living.  He  stopped  using
    heroin and moved to Maidstone. He would like to move back to Maidstone,
    but he did not know if he was able to do so because his job  offer  was
    in Ashford. He did not want to remain living in Rochdale because he had
    never seen a place quite like Rochdale before.

10.  He started working with the homeless  charity  because  he  had  to  do
    something constructive.  I asked if he enjoyed  working  there  and  he
    replied that it was different, but he had made a good friend  in  Steve
    Nixon, who would probably still help him if he moved away.   There  was
    no re-examination.


Respondent's Submissions

11.  Mr Duffy relied on the reasons for  deportation  given  in  the  letter
    dated 15th April 2014. He said that  the  first  test  was  that  of  a
    genuine, present  and  serious  threat,  which  in  essence  meant  the
    Appellant's risk of reoffending.  In the NOMS report the Appellant  was
    assessed as high risk of reoffending and medium risk of  harm.  He  was
    only released from detention in July 2015, so had only been at  liberty
    for one year. The Appellant's  offending  and  the  index  offence  was
    because of his abuse of alcohol. Although he said he was  not  drinking
    at the moment he had his last drink on his birthday  in  October  2015.
    Alcohol addiction was something that remained with him and  could  well
    be linked to depression. It was conceivable that he could  get  into  a
    situation where things would go against him and he would turn to drink.

12.  Mr Duffy did not ask me to go behind the  Appellant's  belief  that  he
    had the motivation to stay clean and accepted that that was  often  the
    case. However, it was not uncommon for those in  the  position  of  the
    Appellant to relapse  under  stress.   The  Appellant's  offending  was
    linked to drugs and alcohol. Along with this was the risk in  the  NOMS
    report. Mr Duffy submitted that  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  the
    Appellant would rely on drugs or alcohol at some point  in  the  future
    and therefore reoffend.  The  Appellant  was  a  genuine,  present  and
    serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of  society.   If  I
    concluded that that was in fact  the  case  then  I  should  go  on  to
    consider whether the Appellant's deportation was proportionate.

13.  The Appellant had returned  to  Portugal  in  2004  and  2011  but  had
    essentially been living in the UK for 21 years, although he  could  not
    demonstrate permanent  residence.  This  was  an  indication  that  the
    Appellant was not socially and culturally integrated in the UK  because
    he was not exercising treaty rights here. In terms of EU law he was not
    integrated. He had lived as a drug addict and had  abused  alcohol.  He
    therefore  lived  on  the  fringe  of  society  causing  nuisance   and
    committing crime.  On those facts it could not  be  said  that  he  was
    integrated in the  UK  and  there  was  little  beyond  his  length  of
    residence that went in his favour.

14.  The Appellant had  some  contact  with  his  brother,  but  it  was  by
    telephone and could be maintained from Portugal. His rehabilitation was
    not a weighty factor  given  that  permanent  residence  had  not  been
    acquired.  In all the circumstances his deportation  was  proportionate
    and Mr Duffy invited me to dismiss the appeal.


Appellant's Submissions

15.  Mr Burrett submitted that rehabilitation may not  attract  much  weight
    in relation to proportionality, but it was relevant to the  first  part
    of the test which was whether the Appellant was a serious, genuine  and
    present threat.  If the Appellant established he was rehabilitated then
    it would support the finding that he should be assessed as low risk  of
    reoffending.

16.  The Appellant had been remanded in custody in January 2013  and  served
    seven months of his prison sentence. He was not released, but  remained
    in immigration detention where he completed his licence. He should have
    been released in September  2013  but  had  been  kept  in  immigration
    detention for nearly two years.  The Appellant had rehabilitated during
    that period. He had not used drugs or alcohol in prison  and  that  was
    something that I should take into account. He had taken steps in prison
    to rehabilitate himself at an early stage, so over three years  ago  he
    began seeking help for his alcohol problem.   He  had  dealt  with  his
    heroin problem seven years ago and this may  well  have  assisted  him,
    although he accepted that he had used cannabis.

17.  The NOMS Report described the Appellant as behaving differently  if  he
    drinks heavily. The prison record states that the Appellant did not get
    into trouble in prison.  He followed directions and was given  enhanced
    status. The reason for this was because the Appellant was  not  abusing
    drugs or alcohol.

18.  Quite early on in his detention in 2013, he was notified  that  he  was
    at risk of deportation.  This had a  material  effect  and  significant
    impact on his  attitude,  enough  to  make  him  seek  to  address  his
    problems.  He is well aware that if he steps out of line again he  will
    be removed.


19.  The Appellant's first response to the intention to deport him was  that
    he could not go back to Portugal because he had no ties. He  stayed  in
    immigration detention in the UK for two years because he had no ties to
    Portugal and nothing to go back for. The Appellant had built a life  in
    the UK and had taken steps to address his drug and alcohol problems.

20.  Given the Appellant's level of education and  background,  his  history
    of drug use, living on the streets, and being in and out of  work,  the
    steps taken by the Appellant to address his  offending  behaviour  were
    significant and likely to be genuine.  He had been released on bail  to
    an address in an area he did not know  and  where  he  had  no  support
    network. If he was likely to 'fall off the wagon' he would have done so
    during the last year.  The  circumstances  he  found  himself  in  were
    enough to tip him over the edge, but that was  not  the  case.  To  the
    Appellant's credit, he had obtained a support network  and  had  become
    involved in charity work. He had not drunk heavily since the offence.

21.  The NOMS Report in July 2013 was completed after  only  one  visit  and
    only five months into the Appellant's sentence.  At that stage he could
    not be anything other than at high risk of  re-offending.  However,  he
    pleaded guilty and accepted the offence.  It was for the Respondent  to
    establish that three years later the Appellant  was  still  a  genuine,
    present and serious threat. The NOMS Report was of little relevance  in
    this case given its age and the fact that the Appellant had not had the
    opportunity at that time to address his alcohol and drug problems.

22.  Putting the NOMS Report aside, there  was  only  the  Appellant's  past
    conduct to assess.  This was  the  longest  period  the  Appellant  had
    stayed out of trouble and this  period  was  different  to  the  others
    because the Appellant had actually sought and obtained support and  was
    under the threat of  deportation.   All  factors  taken  together,  the
    Appellant's past conduct was not sufficient  to  show  that  he  was  a
    genuine, present and serious threat today.  It was  three  and  a  half
    years since his last offence and he had rehabilitated himself.  It  was
    a  sufficiently  long  time  to  show  that  he  was  at  low  risk  of
    reoffending.

23.  On the Appellant's conduct today he was  not  a  genuine,  present  and
    serious threat.  He had addressed his alcohol  problems  and  therefore
    the  risk  of  re-offending  was  negligible.   He  could  manage   his
    alcoholism because he had put support networks in place to  enable  him
    to do so. He had been living in an unfamiliar part of the  UK  when  he
    had set up and obtained support.  He was still seeking  support  today,
    so he acknowledged that it is still required.  He  recognised  that  he
    needed to work and was currently doing charity work and keeping himself
    occupied.  His intention was to go back to work, not to abuse  alcohol.
    He had a job offer in Ashford and all these matters  were  relevant  to
    the risk of re-offending.

24.  On the facts the Respondent had not established that the Appellant  was
    a genuine, present  and  serious  threat  to  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society.  If I did find him  to  be  such  threat  then  I
    should go on to consider proportionality.

25.  The Appellant had no ties in Portugal.  He had resided in  the  UK  for
    over twenty years and he had been  in  immigration  detention  for  two
    years, which was far longer than any sentence of imprisonment that  had
    been imposed for  criminal  offences.   Rehabilitation  was  a  factor,
    though not a weighty one.  The Appellant had no life in  Portugal,  but
    had made a life here in the UK. There were many letters of support  and
    the Appellant had managed to accomplish a great deal in the past  three
    years whilst subject to the difficulties of detention and  with  little
    financial support or accommodation.

26.  The Appellant did not want to return to Portugal and had  not  offended
    whilst on bail.  There were  strong  arguments  to  support  him  being
    allowed  to  remain,  even  if  Regulation  21(c)  was  engaged.    The
    Appellant's past criminal history alone was not sufficient to show that
    his deportation was proportionate. Mr Burrett invited me to  allow  the
    appeal.


Findings and conclusions

27.  I found the Appellant to be a credible witness. He  gave  his  evidence
    in a straightforward manner and clearly accepted responsibility for his
    actions in the  past.   It  was  quite  clear  from  listening  to  the
    Appellant that he did not want to return to a lifestyle  of  drugs  and
    alcohol which led him into offending. I accept the Appellant's evidence
    that if he  were  to  relapse  then  he  would  have  to  give  up  the
    opportunity to live in the UK.  He was well aware that this was a  last
    chance for him and he must do everything in his power to  remain  drug,
    alcohol and conviction-free.  The Appellant has taken numerous steps to
    achieve this goal.

28.  There was evidence in the bundle that  the  Appellant  had  been  doing
    charity work since September 2015 for an  organisation  called  Petrus.
    The Appellant assisted with van  collections  and  also  in  the  shop.
    There was a letter from Steven Nixon which stated that the Appellant is
    a very reliable work colleague who had never  been  late.  He  and  the
    Appellant had become very good friends.  Mr Nixon was well aware of the
    Appellant's past, but felt that he had displayed great integrity and  a
    willingness to work.

29.  There was also a letter from High Level  Northern  Trust  which  stated
    that the Appellant started attending this service on  31st  July  2015.
    He started attending one to one support sessions with the author,  Andy
    Porter, and these sessions were related to  drug  and  alcohol  issues.
    Initially the sessions were conducted weekly and the Appellant attended
    all of those sessions and was making an effort to  move  forward.   The
    sessions had then become fortnightly and as the Appellant improved they
    were currently monthly.


30.  The Appellant had shown continuous improvement  over  the  last  twelve
    months and had also started attending sessions with a  counsellor.  The
    Appellant had only just started the counselling sessions,  but  so  far
    had attended all those that had been scheduled for him.  He also signed
    up for an eight  week  anger  management  course  and  had  only  three
    sessions left to complete. Andy Porter stated in  the  letter  that  he
    believed the Appellant was committed to rehabilitation and he was  also
    aware of his work with Petrus.

31.  There was a letter from a project leader at Petrus who stated that  she
    had met the Appellant in church in July or August 2015 and he had begun
    volunteering at the Petrus People Store for two to four days per  week.
    He had received a certificate of thanks from Petrus and she  was  happy
    for him to continue to volunteer for two days a week.

32.  I find that the Appellant's evidence taken  with  this  evidence  shows
    that he has taken all necessary steps to rehabilitate himself and  that
    his wish to do so was genuine  and  ongoing.  The  Appellant  has  done
    everything it seems possible to address his offending behaviour and  to
    address his drug and alcohol problem to ensure that he becomes  at  low
    risk of reoffending in the future.  I am  satisfied  from  hearing  his
    evidence that something has changed since his last offence.  He  stated
    that his time spent in detention and his time in Rochdale had made  him
    realise that he needed to turn his life around and do  something  about
    his behaviour.  I accept that that is what he is seeking to do. He  has
    sought help of his own accord, he is continuing to seek help and he  is
    improving with that help.

33.  It is particularly noteworthy that he  was  bailed  to  an  address  in
    Rochdale  which  was  an  area  where  he  had  not  lived  before  and
    immediately on release he sought help from High Level. Soon  after  his
    release he met Claire Jefferies, from the Petrus Community Project,  at
    church, and volunteered to do charity work. His rehabilitation  clearly
    started whilst he was in immigration detention and the reports of  that
    time show that he was  drug  and  alcohol-free.  He  was  an  exemplary
    detainee who did all that was asked of him.

34.  Therefore, I  am  of  the  view  that  the  Appellant  appreciates  the
    seriousness of his situation and has done all in his  power  to  ensure
    that he does not re-offend.  I acknowledge Mr Duffy's  submission  that
    under stress the Appellant may well relapse and therefore be at risk of
    reoffending, and that is always a possibility. However, on the evidence
    I have  heard,  I  find  that  this  is  unlikely  in  the  Appellant's
    particular case.

35.  I find that the Appellant is not a genuine, present and serious  threat
    to one of the fundamental interests of society because he currently has
    the support that he needs, he  has  the  motivation  to  continue  that
    support  and  he  has  obtained  that  support  himself  in   difficult
    circumstances.   Even  if  the  Appellant  does  relocate,   his   past
    experience in seeking  out  help  and  finding  work  in  a  new  area,
    Rochdale, will enable him to do the same again should he move.
36.  Accordingly, I find that the Respondent has failed  to  establish  that
    Regulation  21(5)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations   2006   is
    satisfied.

37.  In any event, I find that the  Appellant's  deportation  would  not  be
    proportionate in the particular circumstances of this case. I take into
    account the entire circumstances, including all the efforts he has made
    to rehabilitate himself. I bear in  mind  the  serious  nature  of  his
    previous convictions and the escalation from driving  a  motor  vehicle
    with excess alcohol,  to  possession  of  class  A  drugs,  to  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm. I acknowledge that  the  Appellant  has
    seventeen convictions for 34 offences since 1997 and his  last  offence
    in January 2013 was an attack on his neighbour in his  neighbour's  own
    home in front  of  his  neighbour's  child.  This  conduct  is  clearly
    serious.

38.  I balance this  against  the  Appellant's  current  situation  and  the
    efforts that he has made to address his  offending  behaviour.  I  have
    taken into account not only the witness statements  of  the  Appellant,
    but also of a Mr Paulo Rodriguez, Mr Peter Taylor and  Miss  Ana  Maria
    Marquez. Also the support from the Appellant's brother.

39.  The Appellant has no ties to Portugal, save for  his  sister,  and  has
    built a life in the UK.   I  accept  Mr  Duffy's  submission  that  his
    integration has been limited because of his offending behaviour and the
    lifestyle he leads.  However,  it  cannot  be  said  that  he  has  not
    integrated at all. The Appellant is 44 years old and has  spent  nearly
    half his life here in the UK. There are no very  significant  obstacles
    to his integration in Portugal.

40.  Therefore, I find that the  Appellant  is  a  44  year  old  man  whose
    brother, sister-in-law and niece live in the  UK  and  he  has  regular
    telephone contact with them. He has resided in the UK for  over  twenty
    years and has only made two brief  visits  to  Portugal.   He  has  the
    support of friends and a job doing charity work. He also  has  his  own
    support network which he  has  set  up  with  High  Level  and  another
    counsellor to enable him to address his alcohol and drug  problems.  He
    is committed to working and improving himself and  therefore  in  those
    circumstances the Appellant's efforts to live a law-abiding life in the
    UK, his family ties here and his lack of significant ties  to  Portugal
    lead me to conclude that on the  particular  facts  of  this  case  the
    Appellant's deportation is not proportionate.

41.  Accordingly, I allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.

Notice of Decision
Appeal allowed.
No anonymity direction is made.

             J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 1st July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



             J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 1st July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
