

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01048/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 November 2014                           |On 27 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 ASIM PARRIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chirico of Counsel:  Birnberg Pierce and Partners

For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the respondent's decision of 24 May 2013 to
       make a deportation order in terms of section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
       Act 2007.  The appellant appealed to the  First  tier  tribunal  (the
       Tribunal) on human rights grounds.  After a  hearing  on  18  October
       2013 and 19 June 2014 the appeal was refused.

    2. The appellant was born on 11  November  1987  and  is  a  citizen  of
       Trinidad and Tobago.  Although there is no record, it appears that he
       entered the UK in 1999 to join his mother.  He was granted indefinite
       leave to remain on 5 April  2000.    Since  2008  he  has  accrued  a
       substantial criminal record and has  served  a  number  of  custodial
       sentences.  He has 11 convictions for 16 offences between March  2005
       and March 2011.  In particular, in October 2010 he was  convicted  of
       battery and criminal damage in which the victim was  his  ex-partner.
       This was committed in the presence of his baby daughter, born  on  22
       July 2007 (see page 54 of the appellant's bundle).  In  May  2008  he
       was convicted of possession of a class A drug with intent  to  supply
       and sentenced to 18 months  imprisonment.  In  October  2009  he  was
       convicted of common assault  (while  on  licence  from  the  previous
       sentence) and sentenced to 26 weeks.   In March 2011 he was convicted
       of wounding with intent to intent to do grievous bodily harm and  was
       sentenced to 6 years imprisonment.   Interweaved in that  history  is
       the making of deportation orders and appeals  against  those  orders.
       An appeal against a deportation order, originally  made  in  December
       2008, was allowed in May 2011 after protracted procedure but, in  the
       light of the conviction of March 2011, he was notified again  of  his
       liability to deportation in July 2011.  The order itself was made  in
       May 2013.

    3. The respondent considered that the appellant  constituted  a  serious
       future risk of harm to the public.  He was liable to deportation  and
       that the public interest required it.  The position under  Article  8
       of the Convention was examined and it was concluded that the decision
       to deport  was  proportionate  and  did  not  contravene  his  rights
       thereunder.

The Hearings of 18 October 2013 and 19 June 2014

    4. Hearings before the Tribunal took place on 18  October  2013  and  19
       June 2014.  Written and oral evidence was given by the appellant  and
       others at the first hearing.  His ex-partner provided a statement and
       gave evidence.  The appellant had only lived with his ex-partner  and
       daughter from her birth in July 2007 until  January  2008.   Although
       the relationship had ended, the appellant maintained contact with his
       daughter.  While serving his latest period of  imprisonment,  he  had
       seen her regularly at the prison when she was brought  there  by  the
       appellant's mother.  He had been released on 10 October 2013 and  had
       continued to see her at his mother's house and would continue  to  do
       so each week. His ex-partner, who gave her address in writing so that
       the appellant would not become aware of  it,  nevertheless  supported
       the appellant's appeal because she knew that her daughter  would  "be
       devastated if she could not see him again".

    5. Due to the delay between the hearings, a supplementary  statement  by
       the appellant (which bears the date 19 June 2014) was provided and  a
       further OASys report  was  prepared.   The  statement  narrated  that
       contact had stopped about 4 weeks before by the  mother  but  he  was
       hopeful that the matter could be resolved without legal  proceedings.
       However, the situation had moved on by the time of the second hearing
       and he gave further oral evidence which is set out  in  paragraphs  5
       and 6 of the grounds in support of the application for permission  to
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal dated 13 July 2014.

    6. In examination-in-chief he was referred to paras  11  to  14  of  the
       statement 19 June and asked whether there  had  been  any  change  in
       position.  He replied that since the statement had  been  drafted  he
       had had contact with his daughter and things were going  fine.   This
       had happened the previous day.  It had been arranged through  contact
       between his mother and the mother  of  his  child.   He  had  had  no
       contact  with  the  child's  mother.   In  cross-examination  and  in
       response to questions from the Tribunal, the appellant  said  he  did
       not know why contact had stopped.  He explained that his daughter had
       come to him the previous day, she was at his home  with  his  mother,
       and would return to her mother on the coming Saturday or Sunday.

The Tribunal's Determination

    7. The Tribunal considered the  appellant's  criminal  history  and  the
       terms of the OASys reports (the last of which assessed him to  be  of
       medium risk in the community to "known adult", children  and  to  the
       public).  It also  observed  that  such  risk  may  increase  due  to
       relationship  stressors,  such  as  relationship  difficulties  which
       included problems with contact  with  his  child.   Previous  violent
       offending had occurred with his ex-partner when the child was present
       and the nature of the risk he posed was that he might commit offences
       "causing physical or psychological harm  when  frustrated,  angry  or
       unable to articulate his  emotions"  (paragraph  42).   The  Tribunal
       accepted that contact with his daughter was of benefit to both father
       and child (paragraph 64) and that "in normal circumstances"  a  young
       child whose parents live apart  should  have  regular  face  to  face
       contact with the father.   It  bore  in  mind  the  appellant's  past
       behaviour of violence to the mother in the  presence  of  the  child,
       that he had lived in family with the child for  a  short  period  and
       thereafter most of the  contact  had  been  in  prison  or  detention
       (paragraph 66).  He had been in the UK for  20  years.  The  Tribunal
       found that deportation would interfere with his right to  family  and
       private life.  Article 8 was engaged.  Against  that,  the  appellant
       had committed serious crimes (paragraph 71).  He  had  no  employment
       record of note (paragraph  72).   The  mother  had  "until  recently"
       supported ongoing contact.   While  in  most  cases  it  was  in  the
       interests of the child to have contact with both  birth  parents,  it
       found that there were well founded  concerns  about  the  appellant's
       past offending behaviour and the risk of  his  re-offending  was  not
       insignificant (paragraph 73).  It concluded that the  best  interests
       of the child, while an important feature of this case, did  not  tilt
       the balance of  its  assessment  of  proportionality  in  his  favour
       (paragraph 80).

The submissions on the first ground of appeal

    8. The first ground of appeal contends that the  Tribunal  left  out  of
       account the oral evidence given at the continued hearing of  19  June
       2014.  Mr Chirico submitted that this was a material error in respect
       that the Tribunal had failed to deal and consider  the  evidence  set
       out above and had thus proceeded on a mistaken factual basis,  namely
       that all contact with  the  appellant's  daughter  had  stopped  (see
       paragraphs 22, 41, 46, 50 and 73  of  the  determination).   As  such
       there was a legal error leading  to  unfairness  and,  separately,  a
       relevant consideration had not been taken into account.  The omission
       was significant in respect of the consideration of the best interests
       of the child and to the nature and extent of  the  interference  with
       the  appellant's  right  to  respect  for  family  life   which   his
       deportation would involve.

    9. Further, no rational proportionality exercise could properly be  done
       in circumstances where the Tribunal has  not  accurately  appreciated
       the nature of the contact between the appellant and his daughter.  Mr
       Chirico referred us to Zoumbas v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department  [2013]  1WLR  3690  at  paragraph  10  where  Lord  Hodge
       delivering the judgment of the court set  out  the  legal  principles
       applicable in a case of this sort as follows:

           "(1)  The best interests of a child are an integral part of  the
                proportionality  assessment   under   Article   8   of   the
                Convention.

           (2)   In making that assessment, the best interests of  a  child
                must be a primary consideration,  although  not  always  the
                only primary consideration; and the child's  best  interests
                do not of  themselves  have  the  status  of  the  paramount
                consideration.

           (3)   Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed
                by the cumulative effect of other considerations,  no  other
                consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

           (4)   While different judges might approach the question of  the
                best interests of a child in different ways, it is important
                to ask oneself the right questions in an orderly  manner  in
                order to avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child
                might be undervalued  when  other  important  considerations
                were in play;

           (5)   It is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
                circumstances and of what is in  a  child's  best  interests
                before  one  asks  oneself  whether  those   interests   are
                outweighed by the force of other considerations;

           (6)    To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
                examination of all relevant factors when the interests of  a
                child are involved in an Article 8 assessment; and

           (7)   A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
                is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

   10. Mr Shilliday argued that any error of fact upon  which  the  Tribunal
       proceeded was not material.  Given the fact that contact had occurred
       in the past and that the child had stayed with the appellant's mother
       overnight, the Tribunal must have  contemplated  that  the  situation
       might change and contact be resumed.

Decision on the first ground

   11. We do not consider  that  the  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  their
       treatment of the evidence of contact between the  appellant  and  his
       daughter.   It  is,  in  our  view,  plain  from  a  reading  of  the
       determination as a whole that the Tribunal did not proceed  upon  the
       basis that contact with the child had permanently ceased.  The  judge
       accepted at paragraph 64 that the contact had been of benefit both to
       father and child and that he continued to want to have such  contact.
       It is also accepted at paragraph 65 that the child herself wished  to
       maintain contact.  That evidence came from the  mother  herself.   At
       paragraph 73 it is acknowledged that "some continuing  face  to  face
       contact with the child may be in the best interests of both child and
       father" and at paragraph 76 it is pointed out that,  on  deportation,
       no face to face contact would be possible.  These  passages  indicate
       to us that continuing contact was assumed in the  assessment  of  the
       nature and quality of the appellant's family life in the UK.  In  any
       event, as set out below, the Tribunal's  assessment  of  the  child's
       best  interests  proceeded  on  the  assumption  that  contact  would
       continue and, in such circumstances, the  risk  of  re-offending  was
       "not insignificant" (see paragraph 73).  Although there is no express
       reference to the oral evidence given at the hearing on 19 June  2014,
       it is stated at paragraph 6 that what is set out below is  a  summary
       of the evidence given, a full note  of  which  is  contained  in  the
       Record of Proceedings.  The evidence is set out there.  There  is  no
       basis  for  the  contention  that  this  evidence  was  ignored.   We
       therefore reject the first ground of appeal.

Submissions of the second ground of appeal

   12. The second ground contends that the Tribunal erred in considering the
       best interests of the child since there is  no  clear  assessment  of
       where the best interests of the  child  lay.   Paragraph  66  of  the
       determination could be read as a conclusion that it would not  be  in
       the best interests of the child to have regular face to fact  contact
       with the appellant.  On the other hand, in paragraph 73 the  Tribunal
       state that some continuing face to face contact with her "may  be  in
       the best interests  of  both  child  and  the  father".   There  were
       contradictory findings on the best interests of the  child.   In  the
       absence of a concluded view as to where the best  interests  lay,  no
       proper proportionality  assessment  could  be  made.   There  was  no
       consideration of the child's views and the tribunal erred in  finding
       that family life could be maintained by means of telephone or  email.
       Further, it failed to have regard to the fact that Article  8  rights
       included the right to develop relationships in the future.

   13. Mr Shilliday accepted that it was not entirely  clear  what  findings
       had been made in respect of the best interests of the child.  If,  on
       the one hand, the Tribunal felt that the best interests  lay  in  not
       having contact  that  in  itself  could  not  be  categorised  as  an
       irrational decision, having regard to the history of violence by  the
       appellant.  That history had included assaults on the mother  in  the
       child's presence and therefore constituted, at least, emotional  harm
       suffered by  the  child  at  the  hands  of  her  father.   The  risk
       assessment had found that the appellant was at  medium  risk  in  the
       community to known adults, children and the public.  If, on the other
       hand, the conclusion was that  it  was  in  the  best  interests  for
       contact to continue it is clear from paragraph 80 that  the  Tribunal
       consider that those interests did not outweigh the public interest in
       his deportation.

The decision on the second ground

   14. It was not submitted before us that  the  Tribunal  had  in  any  way
       failed to regard the  best  interests  of  the  child  as  a  primary
       consideration.  Rather, it was submitted that it had failed to  reach
       a conclusion on where those interests lay and  had  omitted  to  give
       consideration to all the material components of his  family  life  in
       their assessment of the proportionality of  the  deportation  of  the
       appellant.  The Tribunal was faced  in  this  case  with  conflicting
       evidence as to where the best interests of the  appellant's  daughter
       lay.  There was evidence that the appellant had assaulted the  mother
       in the past in the child's presence.  While  that  incident  occurred
       when the child was very young, the Tribunal required to consider  the
       risk that continued contact  between  the  appellant  and  his  child
       posed.   It  found  that  the  past  behaviour   of   the   appellant
       "highlighted a risk of physical and/or mental  harm  to  the  child".
       That was a legitimate approach having regard  to  the  assessment  of
       risk from the  OASys  reports.   On  the  other  hand,  the  tribunal
       accepted that "in normal circumstances" it was in the best  interests
       of children to have face to fact contact with the parent who did  not
       have day to day care of her.  However the  tribunal  noted  that  the
       circumstances were not normal because of the risk it had highlighted.
        Accordingly this case was one  where  the  evaluation  of  the  best
       interests of the child did not point unequivocally in  one  direction
       or the other.   In those circumstances, we cannot conclude  that  the
       absence of an explicit finding of precisely where those interests lay
       renders  the  tribunal's  determination  erroneous   in   law.    The
       Tribunal's approach was wholly justified on the  evidence  before  it
       and meant, in  effect,  that  it  was  not  possible  to  accord  the
       interests of the child a determinative weight in  the  assessment  of
       the proportionality of deportation.

   15. Having regard to the fact that  it  was  not  possible  to  reach  an
       unequivocal view, it was then wholly legitimate for the  Tribunal  to
       proceed to examine the factors that it did in  order  to  assess  the
       proportionality of deportation.  We do not accept that  the  Tribunal
       fell into error in the ways which Mr Chirico maintained.  It  plainly
       had very firmly in mind that the child's views were  as  recorded  at
       paragraphs  65  and  66  and  that  it  had  regard   thereto.    The
       observations at paragraph 76 about other means of communication  with
       the child cannot properly be read as a conclusion that  such  contact
       was any substitute for family life or its future development.  It  is
       merely a factor to  which  the  Tribunal  points  as  mitigating  the
       effects of deportation.  It was apposite in this case since, while in
       prison,  he  had  required  to  have  recourse  to  those  types   of
       communication with his daughter.

   16. The Tribunal was bound in  the  proportionality  assessment  to  have
       proper regard not only to the equivocal nature of where  the  child's
       best interests lay but to the relevant and material considerations on
       the other side of  the  scale.   Those  are  succinctly  set  out  at
       paragraphs 77 to 80.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  conclusion  it
       reached was based on any material error.  We therefore  must  dismiss
       this appeal.

DECISION

       The Tribunal made no error on a point of law and the original
       determination of the appeal will stand.



Signed      Date 23 December 2014

Lord Burns

