
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01455/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates'     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Court                                |                                     |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             Fed Edward Drummond
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vokes, instructed by Ian Henry Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Fed Edward Drummond, was born on 1 December 1972 and  is
    a male citizen of Jamaica.  The appellant appealed against the decision
    to deport him dated 21 July 2014 to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge A  J
    Parker/Mr G H Getlevog) which, in a decision and reasons promulgated on
    8 June 2015, dismissed the appeal on all grounds.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds are helpfully summarised in  the  grant  of  permission  of
    Judge Osborne which is dated 10 July 2015:

         "The grounds assert the panel erred and that it made a misdirection
         of law at [13] by misquoting paragraph 339(a)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules - the panel stated that it required a child to be British and
         have resided in the United Kingdom for seven years.  This is  wrong
         as the Rule states or and not and.   The  panel  then  went  on  to
         misquote the rest of the Rule.  This was a  material  consideration
         as the respondent submitted the  children  are  not  British.   The
         finding at [41] does not apply the correct test and is inadequately
         reasoned.  The panel failed to properly consider Section 55 of  the
         2009 Act and the best interests of all  the  appellant's  children.
         At [20] the panel  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
         children's mothers could not provide the four care points listed in
         the Children's (sic) Act 2004.  This was inadequate.  At  [33]  the
         panel cited paragraph 398(c)  and  then  at  [41]  found  that  the
         appellant  is  a  persistent  offender.   This  is  perverse.   The
         appellant has a previous conviction from 2007 and  a  caution  from
         2009 which the panel wrongly described as  a  conviction  at  [11].
         The appellant  cannot  rationally  be  described  as  a  persistent
         offender.  This was a case where the  appellant  was  sentenced  to
         sixteen months' imprisonment and so paragraph 398(b) applies.   The
         panel's findings at [42] are confused and inadequate in relation to
         Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act."

 3. I find that the grounds have merit.  As  Judge  Osborne  observed,  the
    Tribunal misquoted paragraph 399(a) of HC 395 (as amended) at [13]; the
    Tribunal appeared to believe that it was necessary under the  Rule  for
    there to be a genuine and subsisting relationship between an  applicant
    and a child under the age of 18 years who is in the United Kingdom,  is
    a British citizen and who has lived for seven years preceding the  date
    of the immigration decision in the United  Kingdom.   For  the  reasons
    stated by Judge Osborne, this is not correct.  The nationality  of  the
    children concerned was material; at [44] having  received  the  written
    submissions  from  the  representatives  the  panel  decided  that  the
    children were not British citizens and that their  passports  had  been
    revoked "as they were issued on the basis of false documentation".   It
    was difficult to see how the  Tribunal  could  have  applied  the  Rule
    accurately if it believed (wrongly)  that  the  children  had  to  have
    resided in the United Kingdom for seven years and be  British  citizens
    (whilst at the same time finding that  their  British  citizenship  had
    been revoked).  It is unclear how this misinterpretation  of  the  Rule
    may have played out in the Tribunal's analysis.  As  a  result  of  its
    misinterpretation, the Tribunal has fallen into serious error.

 4. As Mr Vokes, for the appellant, pointed out,  there  are  also  serious
    factual inaccuracies in the decision.  At [15]  the  Tribunal  recorded
    that one  of  the  appellant's  former  partners  (Donnaree)  had  been
    "residing in the appellant's  home  from  Monday  to  Friday  with  her
    children".  At [40] the Tribunal stated that  the  appellant  had  been
    separated from his children and  had  "not  lived  with  any  of  their
    mothers since 2007 when he parted from Donnaree".  It may be  the  case
    that the Tribunal rejected Donnaree's evidence  regarding  living  with
    the appellant and the children Monday-Friday but, if that is the  case,
    the Tribunal should have given reasons for doing so.  It must be  said,
    however, that the factual matrix in this case is extremely  complicated
    with the appellant having had a number of relationships over the  years
    and children by different women.  However, it is all the more important
    in such cases for the fact-finding Tribunal to  make  every  effort  to
    record the evidence accurately.

 5. I refer to the comments made above in the grant of permission by  Judge
    Osborne as to the Tribunal's finding at [41] that the  appellant  is  a
    persistent offender.  At [41] the  Tribunal  has  made  no  attempt  to
    explain why it considers the appellant's offending to be persistent; it
    simply asserts that it has been.  I find that the lack  of  any  proper
    analysis on this matter represents a serious flaw in the decision.

 6. I also agree that the Tribunal's analysis in respect of Section  55  is
    inadequate.  The Tribunal records the somewhat cryptic  remark  of  the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter that  "there  is  no  evidence
    that the children's mothers cannot provide the four care points  listed
    in the Children's Act 2004" [20].  It is not at  all  clear  (least  of
    all, I imagine, to the losing party, the appellant) what  is  meant  by
    that statement; the Children Act 2004 is not referred to again  in  the
    refusal letter or, indeed, in the Tribunal's decision.   The  basis  of
    the Tribunal's reasoning is far from clear.

 7. In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I set aside the findings of fact  of  the  Tribunal.   There
    will need to be a new fact-finding exercise which is best conducted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 8 June  2015  is
    set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The decision  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  A  J  Parker/Mr  G  H
    Getlevog) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 1 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

