
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01295/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 April 2014                              |On 28 May 2014               |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MS K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (the Secretary of State):  Mr P Nath, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Ms K): Ms K Cronin, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
Peirce


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination  of
    a panel of the First-tier Tribunal consisting  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Munonyedi and Mrs S  E  Singer,  non-legal  member,  which  in  a
    determination promulgated on 24 December 2013, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 29 November 2013 allowed  Ms  K's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to deport  her.  For  ease  of  reference
    throughout this determination  I  shall  refer  to  Ms  K  who  is  the
    respondent to this appeal but  was  the  original  appellant,  as  "the
    claimant" and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  who  was  their  original
    respondent as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The deportation  order  was  made  on  the  basis  that  following  her
    conviction for what has been accepted  by  all  parties  including  the
    claimant as  quite  appalling  offences  for  which  the  claimant  was
    sentenced to five years' imprisonment (this was  for  three  counts  of
    false imprisonment, causing  actual  bodily  harm  and  blackmail,  the
    sentences running concurrently) the claimant was subject  to  automatic
    deportation pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  This
    order was of course subject to an  exception  in  the  event  that  her
    removal would be in breach of any of her rights under the ECHR but  the
    Secretary of State considered that no exception applied.

 3. The background to this appeal will need to be gone into in some  detail
    but I will summarise it briefly at the outset.  The claimant, who is  a
    citizen of Jamaica, was born in 1991 and came to this country  in  2001
    aged 10 with valid entry clearance as a visitor in order  to  join  her
    mother who had arrived in this country in  November  1991.      Shortly
    after the claimant had arrived in this country  she  was  subjected  to
    very serious abuse indeed (this will be referred to in  a  little  more
    detail below) and it appears to be common ground that in consequence of
    this abuse coupled with the failure of social services to give her  the
    assistance which she needed, she became  traumatised  to  some  extent.
    This will also be discussed in more detail below.

 4. On 21 May 2010 in respect of the offences which the claimant  committed
    when she was  18,  she  was  sentenced  at  Southwark  Crown  Court  to
    concurrent sentences of imprisonment totalling five years.  The  public
    in general has a right to  be  protected  from  foreign  criminals  who
    commit these  sorts  of  offences  and  it  is  only  in  really  quite
    exceptional circumstances that such a  foreign  criminal  will  not  be
    deported, and so it is right that I set out  in  a  little  detail  the
    circumstances of these offences. I do so by reference to the sentencing
    remarks of Judge Taylor.

 5. There was apparently a drug deal which went wrong as a result of  which
    a young man [W] was abducted, imprisoned and tortured  by  a  group  of
    individuals. He was taken to a garage where he  was  held  against  his
    will overnight for a period of about seventeen hours  during  which  as
    the judge states, he was  subjected  to  violent  and  humiliating  and
    repeated assaults. He was threatened with electric shocks while a paint
    stripper and a heat gun were held near his body.  He  was  punched  and
    kicked and beaten on his back and arms with cam  belts  to  the  extent
    that the impression of those belts were clear on his  body  afterwards.
    His face was beaten so that it was swollen and he had black  eyes.   He
    was at one stage chained to his chair.

 6. As the judge went on to state, this  ordeal  lasted  many  hours,  with
    demands being made of him for details of those who had  been   involved
    in supplying the drugs and for the money paid for them, �4,000 which he
    did not have.  Threats were made to him and calls made to a friend  and
    to his sister in order to try and get the money.  It was only  after  W
    promised to pay the money that he was released.

 7. As the jury found (because the defendants had all pleaded not  guilty),
    this was a planned abduction and a cruel  and  sustained  group  attack
    carried out for revenge and debt collection as the defendants  in  this
    case had seen it, and it was a terrifying ordeal  for  the  victim  who
    believed that he would die.   He had past  mental  health  difficulties
    and was in consequence vulnerable. The judge considered  that  all  the
    defendants had clearly thought that the victim would stick to the story
    that he had been told to give, would not go to the police and that they
    would "get away with it".

 8. The judge referred to a victim impact  statement  which  he  had  seen,
    dealing with the lasting psychological and  some  physical  effects  of
    this attack. The judge rightly considered (as anybody  considering  the
    circumstances of these offences would do), that these were very serious
    offences and the sentences of imprisonment  which  he  imposed  on  the
    defendants reflected this.

 9. With regard to this claimant's involvement, the judge said as follows:

         "[Ms K], you were not involved in the kidnap but you  came  to  the
         garage and took the willing part in guarding [W] overnight  and  in
         assaulting him by taking a main role in hitting him with cam belts,
         pouring hot and cold water on him and in demanding details  of  the
         drug dealers and money from him.  You too have shown no remorse.

         I have taken into account the contents of the pre-sentence  reports
         and all that has been said about you and on  your  behalf.  I  take
         into account, in particular, your age, 18  at  the  time  of  these
         events and also your background and the extent to  which  you  were
         influenced by what you did by others.

         I also take into account the  fact  that  you  have  previous  good
         character, but again, taking  the  totality  in  respect  of  these
         offences, there will be a sentence in respect of false imprisonment
         of five years in a Young  Offenders'  Institution;  in  respect  of
         causing actual bodily harm, four years concurrent and in respect of
         blackmail, five years concurrently."

10. As already noted, the claimant not being a British citizen,  by  virtue
    of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act, she was  subject  to  automatic
    deportation and the Secretary  of  State  made  a  decision  that  this
    section applied to her and she should be deported.

11. The claimant appealed against this decision and, as already noted,  her
    appeal was heard at Taylor House on 29 November 2013 before a panel  of
    the First-tier Tribunal whose composition has been set out above.   The
    claimant was represented at this hearing by Ms Cronin, Counsel, who has
    also represented the claimant  before  me.   She  prepared  a  skeleton
    argument which was before the Tribunal and she  also  was  assisted  by
    evidence provided by Dr Roxanne Agnew Davies, who gave oral evidence in
    support of a report which she had prepared dated 13 September 2013.

12. At paragraph 13 of its determination the  panel  set  out  briefly  the
    facts of this case which it considered were not in dispute  and  it  is
    right that these facts are  now  recorded  for  the  purposes  of  this
    determination.

13. The claimant was born in Jamaica in 1991.  When she was only  8  months
    old, her mother emigrated to this country leaving her with her maternal
    grandmother.   The  claimant  was  beaten  and   ill-treated   by   her
    grandmother and raped by two men while  in  her  care.   This  occurred
    while the claimant was no more than 8 years old.   In  early  2000  the
    claimant's half brother, K, came to the UK.

14. On 25 April 2000 the claimant's half sister, I, was born in the UK and
    on 18 July 2001 the claimant and another half brother were brought to
    the UK as visitors by her mother.  Then in December 2001 the claimant's
    mother married a Mr T.  Things did not get any better for the claimant
    because in or around 2001 she was raped by Mr T's brother and a friend
    of her mother's.   She was then aged about 10.

15.  On 17 May 2002 the claimant ran away from home to  escape  abuse,  was
    seen by her  teacher  and  disclosed  domestic  violence  and  her  own
    physical but not  sexual  abuse.    She  was  admitted  to  Whittington
    Hospital following a fainting spell.  The  claimant's  mother  admitted
    that she would give the claimant a "good beating" because she  wet  her
    bed.  Notes of a strategy meeting recorded lots of  old  scars  on  her
    body consistent with whipping.  The  claimant  was  initially  held  in
    social  services  care  under  an  emergency  protection  order.    The
    claimant's mother agreed for her to be in voluntary care.

16. On 30 May  2002  the  claimant  was  discharged  from  the  Whittington
    Hospital and placed with  foster  carers  in  Isleworth.   This  was  a
    voluntary placement agreed by the claimant's mother, not a care  order.
    Then in June 2002 the claimant's mother applied for leave to remain  as
    a spouse and for her children, including the claimant, to be allowed to
    remain as her dependants.

17. On 2 June 2002 the claimant was admitted to St  Mary's  Hospital  after
    cutting her wrists.  She was then aged 11.

18. On 19 June 2002 the claimant disclosed to social workers that  she  had
    been raped in Jamaica and in the UK.  Sexual penetration was  confirmed
    by medical examination in July 2002.  In her description  to  Dr  Agnew
    Davies it is clear, as noted by the panel, that there had  been  repeat
    occasions of rape including one occasion where her mother knew  of  the
    offence but counselled the claimant not to tell.

19. On 26 June 2002 the claimant again tried to cut her wrist  with  broken
    glass and was removed to a new  foster  placement  in  Kent.   She  was
    referred for child and adolescent mental health assessment due  to  the
    risk of suicide.  At some time in June 2002 Mr T left the family home.

20. On 12 July 2002 the  claimant  was  entered  on  the  Child  Protection
    Register because of her previous history of physical and  sexual  abuse
    and neglect.

21. On 27 October 2002 the Entry Clearance Officer wrote to inform the Home
    Office Immigration and Nationality Enquiry Bureau that the claimant had
    been taken to  the  UK  by  her  mother  and  retained  there  but  the
    claimant's father (with whom the  claimant  had  had  frequent  contact
    before coming to the UK) wished her to be returned to  his  care.   The
    father was aware of allegations that the claimant had been  abused  and
    was in foster care.

22. As the panel records, on 5 February 2003 "through  social  work  error"
    the claimant was removed from her foster  carer,  Ms  M  "causing  real
    distress" to the claimant "who had settled well in  her  care  and  was
    very attached to her".

23. The following day, 6 February 2003, the  claimant  was  placed  in  [C]
    Young  Peoples'  Resource  Centre  on  an  emergency  basis.  She   was
    maintained there.  Her bedwetting was noted.  She was forced to perform
    oral sex with a boy in the unit and was beaten  by  another  boy  (this
    being during a time when she was supposedly  under  the  protection  of
    social services).  The police were involved and the matter was pursued.
     The boy was removed from the unit.  The claimant was then aged  almost
    12.

24. On 30 April 2003 the claimant's half brother T was born.

25. On 12 May 2003 a  risk  assessment  concluded  the  claimant  had  been
    chronically abused, had low self esteem, suicidal  ideation,  emotional
    and behavioural difficulties  and  required  but  was  yet  to  receive
    therapeutic care. The report  recommended  that  her  legal  status  be
    clarified.

26. On 17 June 2003 the claimant was placed in  a  therapeutic  residential
    care unit in Wiltshire [X].

27. On 13 August 2003 the claimant's mother applied for  ILR  as  a  spouse
    victim of domestic violence and for the children as her dependants.

28. On 22 June 2004 the claimant was removed  from  X  and  placed  in  [W]
    Children's Home in Wood Green.  Apparently she had settled well  in  X;
    her enuresis improved significantly and she had 95% attendance, but she
    became distressed  and  disruptive  when  her  close  friend  died  and
    favourite staff left.

29. In July 2004 the claimant moved to [C]  Children's  Care  Home.  On  24
    September 2004 the claimant's mother  removed  her  from  care  to  the
    family  home  where  their  relationship  quickly   deteriorated.    So
    notwithstanding that she  had  been  placed  on  the  Child  Protection
    Register, the claimant was allowed to return  to  live  with  the  same
    person who (to the knowledge of social  services)  had  been  aware  of
    incidents of abuse but had counselled her to say nothing about them and
    who had admitted that she would give  the  claimant  a  "good  beating"
    because she wet her bed (which from the  scarring  recorded  by  social
    services must have occurred repeatedly).

30. On 11 December 2004 the  claimant  contacted  Childline  to  seek  help
    because her mother was hitting her.  She was directed to London  Refuge
    who arranged a medical  examination  which  showed  bruising,  but  the
    claimant was yet again returned to her mother against her wishes.

31. On 21 January 2005  the  claimant  was  placed  on  the  Enfield  Child
    Protection Register as at risk of  physical  and  emotional  abuse  and
    neglect.

32. On 27 June 2005 the ILR claim was refused.

33. On 21 July 2005 another half brother of the claimant, J, was born.

34. In May 2006 there were  further  reports  to  social  services  of  the
    claimant being hit and taunted  by  her  mother  and  feeling  "empty",
    "highly distressed" and suicidal.  The claimant had not attended school
    for two years.  The claimant notes  hiding  her  urine  soaked  clothes
    because of embarrassment.  The Enfield file was  apparently  closed  in
    July 2006.  The closing summary records that the claimant  should  have
    been  removed from her mother's care.

35. On 3 April 2006 Dr Ogunde reported  that  the  claimant's  relationship
    with her mother had broken down,  that  the  claimant  needed  and  was
    motivated to access therapeutic services but  had  no  safe  base  from
    which  to  access  these  services.  He  advised  that  the  claimant's
    psychological development, education,  risk  of  self-harm  and  mental
    health were all likely to be "greatly impaired" if she remained  living
    with her mother and "strongly advises"  an  alternative  placement  for
    her.

36. In April 2006  the  family  (including  the  claimant)  moved  back  to
    Haringey.   Enfield  Transfer-In-Child  Protection  conference  records
    apparently stated that if the family remained in Enfield  the  claimant
    would be removed from her mother's care.  Haringey seem  to  have  been
    unhappy  about  the  case  responsibility  and  it  appears  that  they
    considered that there was enough  evidence  at  Enfield  to  take  care
    proceedings.  However,  no  action  was  taken  by  either  Enfield  or
    Haringey.

37. On 5 February 2007, the appeal against refusal of  ILR  was  dismissed.
    The claimant's mother did not attend or provide evidence.

38. On 6 June 2007 the claimant's mother made a  human  rights  application
    and in August  2007  the  family  returned  to  Enfield  and  care  and
    responsibility was transferred.

39. On 4 October 2007 the claimant, who at that time would  have  been  16,
    had a miscarriage.

40. On 21 November 2007 there is an Accident and Emergency  record  showing
    that the claimant had a severe burn to her right  arm  and  psychiatric
    symptoms,  being  low  mood,  checking   rituals   and   paranoia.    A
    professional noted that  "I  am  worried  that  this  16  year  old  is
    vulnerable and by attending A&E is slipping through the net."

41. On 21 October 2008 the claimant was admitted to  hospital  for  another
    burn injury.  She  was  noted  to  be  suffering  from  OCD  (obsessive
    compulsive disorder) and reported  suicidal  ideation.   It  was  on  3
    October  2009  that  these  offences  which  have  given  rise  to  the
    deportation decision and to this appeal were committed.   The  claimant
    was then 18.

42. On 7 October 2009 the claimant  was  remanded  in  custody.   While  in
    prison she suffered a panic attack, her fourth burn injury in two years
    and repeated head banging and hair pulling.

43. On 15 October 2010 as already noted, she was  convicted  of  blackmail,
    false imprisonment and ABH for which on 21 May 2010  she  received  the
    concurrent sentences of imprisonment referred to above.

44. On 14 June 2011  the  claimant's  mother  (who  as  already  noted  was
    complicit in  the  serious  sexual  and  other  abuse  which  had  been
    perpetrated on the claimant and who had herself physically  abused  the
    claimant)  together  with  the   claimant's   siblings   were   granted
    discretionary leave to remain but the claimant was refused  such  leave
    because of her conviction.

45. The claimant was released from prison on 5 April  2012  on  immigration
    bail.

46. On 9 August 2012 the claimant's GP confirmed  that  she  was  suffering
    depression and had a history of OCD and self-harm.

47. As the panel remarks at paragraph 14 of its determination:

         "14. It was not in dispute that the [claimant] had suffered severe,
             chronic and prolonged sexual,  emotional  and  physical  abuse
             from  an  early  age  and   throughout   her   childhood   and
             adolescence.  This abuse included:

             .    Being left in her grandmother's care when her mother knew
                  the [claimant] suffered extreme physical chastisement.

             .    She was sexually abused by two men when she  was  aged  8
                  and in the care of her grandmother and stepmother

             .    She was raped (full vaginal penetration and anally)  aged
                  10 by her stepfather's brother and a male  friend  of  her
                  mother's when in the care of her mother in the UK. The man
                  threatened to kill the [claimant] if  she  disclosed.  The
                  [claimant]'s  mother  admitted  the  man  slept   on   the
                  [claimant]'s bedroom floor 'but  she  thought  nothing  of
                  it'.

             .    She was severely and routinely beaten by her  grandmother
                  and mother  (the  medical  examination  showed  whip  mark
                  scarring - including on the [claimant]'s  arms  which  she
                  appears to have raised up to protect herself).

              The [claimant]'s mother admitted hitting her on  the  back  of
             the neck, pulling her by her ears, pulling her  hair,  pushing
             and 'cussing her'. The mother received a police warning.

             .    The [claimant]  was  routinely  taunted,  humiliated  and
                  punished 'given a good beating' by her mother because  she
                  suffered from persistent enuresis (itself an indicator  of
                  stress) and her  enuresis  is  shown  to  recur  for  [the
                  claimant] when she is under severe stress. [The  claimant]
                  is noted to be self-harming - including cutting her wrists
                  with broken glass from May 2002 (aged 11) and four  severe
                  burns from 2007 - 2010

             .    The [claimant's] mother did not contact her when she  was
                  admitted to hospital and for much of her time in care. The
                  social services assessment was that the omission by mother
                  'almost equate with abandonment'. The hospital noted  that
                  the [claimant] manifested psychosomatic symptoms to  avoid
                  being returned to her mother's care.

             .    The [claimant] was routinely required to act as carer for
                  her siblings, to take responsibility for household  chores
                  and kept home from school by her mother for this  purpose.
                  She was required to wash her  own  bed  linen  (without  a
                  washing machine) when they were soiled with urine.

             .    She witnessed repeat serious  domestic  violence  against
                  her mother by the mother's various partners. (One  partner
                  was later imprisoned for murder)."

48. The panel then in the determination sets out the medical evidence of Dr
    Agnew Davies, the clinical  psychologist  who  had  given  evidence  in
    support of her report dated 13 September 2013.

49. There is an issue in this appeal as  to  precisely  how  much  of  this
    report had been accepted by the Secretary of State which  is  a  matter
    which has to be addressed below.  I do  not  intend  to  set  out  this
    report in detail, but it is is clear that  the  panel  considered  this
    report very carefully indeed and especially the conclusions  which   Dr
    Davies reached.  It is also  apparent  that  the  panel  considered  Dr
    Davies' diagnosis of the trauma that the claimant  was  suffering  from
    (from paragraphs 16 to 20 of its  determination)  separately  from  the
    consideration which it gave at paragraph 21 to Dr Davies' understanding
    "through her professional contacts in  Jamaica"  "that  the  specialist
    trauma focussed treatment that the appellant required was not available
    in Jamaica".

50. To summarise Dr Davies'  opinion  briefly,  she  considered  that  this
    claimant was currently suffering from "a very severe degree and complex
    and chronic form of post-traumatic stress disorder and major depressive
    disorder", that this profile "is  highly  consistent  with  victims  of
    extensive and  severe  abuse,  physical  abuse,  conceptual  abuse  and
    neglect perpetrated by a number of people over time", that  the  abuses
    which the claimant "suffered throughout her childhood  and  adolescence
    are also consistent with life experiences of people who  have  resorted
    to crime" and  that  her  "psychiatric  condition  renders  her  highly
    vulnerable to the risk  of  further  abuse  and  severely  impedes  her
    ability to manage situations of risk to avoid further harm".

51. Dr Davies considered that there was little risk of the claimant further
    offending but that her prognosis was poor "given the longevity  of  her
    symptoms and the duration and multiple types of abuse,  as  well  as  a
    lack of effective safeguarding throughout her childhood".  The key part
    of her finding is recorded by the panel at paragraph 20 as follows:

         "It was also her view that the  [claimant's]  psychiatric  symptoms
         and difficulty in functioning would be greatly exacerbated  if  she
         was returned to Jamaica and/or  to  be  removed  from  the  limited
         factors in her daily life that offer some sense  of  hope  for  her
         future such as her involvement with  'User  Voice'.   Returning  to
         Jamaica is highly likely to aggravate her severe,  acute  PTSD,  as
         well  as  her  depressive  disorder,  and  other  symptoms.    This
         exacerbation of mental illness is highly  likely  to  increase  her
         risk of suicide and/or self harm to a clinically significant extent
         from moderate to  high risk.  Moreover the loss of  limited  social
         support network that she has in the UK including  an  understanding
         of how statutory services work can be assessed would  significantly
         reduce her rehabilitative prospects."

52. As noted, Dr Davies understood through  her  professional  contacts  in
    Jamaica that the specialist focus trauma treatment  that  the  claimant
    required (and which to some extent she was receiving in  this  country)
    was not available in Jamaica.  It is also right in this regard  that  I
    note that it is recorded at paragraph 11 of the determination that  the
    Secretary of State was of the  view  "that  there  is  adequate  mental
    health provision in Jamaica for the  [claimant]  to  access"  and  that
    "furthermore the [claimant] would be offered help and support from  the
    female prisoners' welfare project - Hibiscus Jamaica ..." and also that
    it was the Secretary of State's case that the claimant's "medical needs
    did not meet the high threshold required, as set out in N (FC ) v  SSHD
    [2005] UKHL 31".

53. The basis of the claimant's appeal was that her removal to  Jamaica  in
    the circumstances of this case would be in breach of both her Article 3
    and Article 8 rights and for this  reason  would  be  unlawful  because
    Section 33 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  provides  that  an  automatic
    deportation order should  not be made (even though such an order  would
    be conducive to the public good) in circumstances where this  would  be
    in breach of an applicant's protected rights  which include the  rights
    she is entitled to enjoy under Articles 3 and 8 of the  ECHR.   It  was
    the Secretary of State's case that deportation would not be  in  breach
    of the claimant's Article 3 rights and that it would  be  proportionate
    under Article 8.

54. Having considered the issues in this case very  carefully  indeed,  and
    having set out its findings  in  clear  and  cogent  terms,  the  panel
    reached findings that the deportation of this claimant would indeed  be
    in breach of the claimant's Article 3 and Article 8 rights.

55. The panel noted (and this has been the subject of some challenge in the
    grounds) that Dr Davies' report had not been challenged  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.  It is said in the grounds  that  this  is  not
    correct, and this  is  a  matter  with  which  I  deal  below.   Having
    considered  this  report  and  in  particular  the  diagnosis  of   the
    claimant's medical condition, the panel concluded that there  had  been
    substantial failures by social services by reason  of  social  services
    taking no  effective  remedial  action  to  prevent  the  abuses  which
    continued for some years even after they should have  been  aware  that
    this claimant needed proper protection which was not being provided  to
    her.

56. In this regard it is worth setting out the conclusions of the panel  at
    paragraph 26 onwards of  its  determination  which  it  reached  having
    regard to the decision in the Grand Chamber in Z and  Others  v  United
    Kingdom application number 29392/95, 10 May 2005.

57. The panel found as follows:

         "26.  In the [claimant's]  case  we  have  had  an  opportunity  to
             consider the extensive social services file and records.

              It is our finding that the [Secretary of State] as early as 27
             October 2002 was aware that social services were involved with
             the [claimant].

              They were also informed by Entry Clearance Officer Andy Fenell
             the [claimant's] father was concerned that his daughter was in
             foster care and wanted her returned  to  him  in  Jamaica.  It
             would appear that the [Secretary of State]  did  nothing  with
             the letter or the information. This failure in our view  meant
             that this [claimant]  was  denied  the  opportunity  of  being
             removed from an abusive  and  highly  damaging  situation  and
             being looked after by her father.

         27.  Having regard to the facts in this case we  are  of  the  view
             that the state failed to protect  this  particular  [claimant]
             from serious long term neglect, physical and sexual abuse  and
             therefore there has been a violation of Article 3.

               This  state's  failure  to  protect  has  resulted  in   this
             [claimant]  suffering  from  complex  depressive  illness  and
             chronic post traumatic stress disorder that  requires  complex
             and specialist trauma focused therapy over a prolonged  period
             of time."

58. The panel then had regard to what was said at page 528  of  Oppenheim's
    International Law 9th edition, to the effect that "the principal  legal
    consequences of an international wrong are reparation of the  emotional
    and material harm done. The  essential  principle  is  that  reparation
    must, as far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the  illegal
    act and re-establish the situation which would in all probability, have
    existed if that act had not been committed."

59. Where the European Court of Human Rights find that a state has breached
    an individual's human rights, the  result  is  the  imposition  on  the
    Secretary of State of "a legal obligation to put an end to  the  breach
    and make reparation for its consequences in such a way as to restore as
    far as possible the situation existing before the breach".

60. It was the panel's view that the decision of the Secretary of State now
    to deport this claimant in circumstances where the  state  had  clearly
    failed to comply with its obligations  to  this  claimant  would  be  a
    further breach of her Article 3 rights.  At  paragraph  30,  the  panel
    stated as follows:

         "It is the [claimant's] case that reparation involves providing her
         with a chance to recover with the support basis she has established
         and on which she depends.  In our view had the state  not  breached
         Article 3, the [claimant] would have been protected and  would  not
         have had to experience the trauma in her life which has led to  her
         suffering  from mental illness.  Had she been properly cared for it
         is highly likely that she would  not  have  involved  [herself]  in
         criminal activity and therefore would have been granted  the  right
         to remain with her mother and other siblings.  The state's  failure
         to look after  this  [claimant]  has  greatly  contributed  to  her
         involvement in crime and her mental illness.  In our view the state
         has an obligation to assist this [claimant]."

61. The panel also considered that the removal  of  this  claimant  in  the
    circumstances of this case would be in breach of her Article 8  rights.
    The panel set out her circumstances  from  paragraph  31  onwards.   It
    found that the claimant did not  have  any  close  cultural  ties  with
    Jamaica and did not have family there. It is stated in  moderate  terms
    that "she has a difficult relationship with her mother" but noted  that
    "the majority of here life has been in the United Kingdom.  For a  good
    part of her minority the state was involved through social services".

62. The panel had regard to the Tribunal decision in MF v SSHD [2012]  UKUT
    00393 in which the panel had found that there was a two stage test with
    regard to Article 8 but it also had  regard  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in that case reported as MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192.
    The panel also had regard to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  SS
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 as well as to the  Presidential  decision
    of this Tribunal in  Masih  (Deportation  -  public  interest  -  basic
    principles) Pakistan [2012] EWCA Civ UKUT 0086.  The panel  set  out  a
    number of other authorities to which it also had regard.

63. The Tribunal  noted  at  paragraph  51  that  it  had  eventually  been
    conceded on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  that  "help  was  only
    available [in the Hibiscus Jamaica Project]  to  women  who   had  been
    involved in drug related offences" which was not  the  case  with  this
    claimant  and  concluded  at  paragraph  54  that  "In  our  view,  the
    [claimant's] private life is highly dependent upon  her  support  base,
    including "User Voice" and that "such social support has  to  be  given
    significant  weight in this case, as it provides  the  [claimant]  with
    security, a sense of purpose critical to her self-worth, some degree of
    health care,  purpose  and  containment."  The  panel  found  that  "It
    provides the necessary base from which she can be helped to recover."

64. It is important to note that the panel did not attempt to  minimise  in
    any way the very serious nature of the offences  of which the  claimant
    was convicted, noting at paragraph 39 that she had been  "found  guilty
    of very serious offences which included acts  of  violence".   However,
    the panel did take into  account  as  it  was  entitled  to,  that  the
    claimant had indicated her genuine remorse, noting at paragraph 39 also
    that "we have heard the oral testimony of the [claimant] and we  accept
    that she is genuinely remorseful and ashamed  of  her  conduct".    The
    panel sets out what the claimant  herself  has  now  said  about  these
    offences, at paragraph 41, as follows:

         "The [claimant] herself states that

             'What I did to the victim [W] was terrible and I  deserved  to
             go to prison for it.  I am ashamed of what I did and  I  think
             shame was part  of  the  reason  why  I  didn't  fully  accept
             responsibility for my actions - and indeed  denied  committing
             the offence at the time.  I believe another reason was that  I
             felt that I had been harmed by others and that  they  had  not
             taken responsibility for what had happened to me so that  when
             it came to admitting my own wrong-doing I was reluctant to  do
             so. I have learnt the importance of taking responsibility  for
             my own actions and that I must deal  constructively  with  the
             abuse I suffered not become a person who abused others.  These
             are the sorts of issues I began to face in prison and which  I
             now put to use in my voluntary work with User Voice.'"

65. The panel also noted at paragraph  42  that  the  NOMS  assessment  had
    assessed the claimant as a high risk to the victim but a  low  risk  to
    the public and a low risk of reoffending and that in that report it had
    been  stated that the risk of future harm would reduce if the  claimant
    accepted (as she now has) full responsibility for her actions  and  the
    harm caused.  It is also noted that the assessing  officer  recommended
    counselling support  to  explore  her  emotions,  increase  her  victim
    empathy and reduce the risk she poses to others.

The Hearing

66. I should state at the outset  my appreciation to  both  representatives
    in a case which is a very sensitive one both because of the seriousness
    of the offences but also because of  the  appalling  history  of  abuse
    which this claimant has suffered from a very early age and  from  which
    she had the right to be protected, especially as she was under the care
    of social services for the majority of the time  when  this  abuse  was
    being perpetrated against her. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Cronin has
    had a very detailed knowledge of this case because she has  represented
    the claimant from an early stage and was  present  during  the  hearing
    concerning which there was some dispute as to what precisely  may  have
    been agreed.

67. I am also grateful to Mr  Nath  for  the  sensitive  way  in  which  he
    maintained the arguments which he was obliged to make on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State,  especially  in  circumstances  where  he  did  not
    receive his instructions until much later than he ought to  have  done.
    No blame can attach to Mr Nath for this but in a case such as  this  it
    is very regrettable indeed that the Secretary of State or those who  at
    the time were holding the file of this  case  on  her  behalf  did  not
    ensure that it was better prepared.  In  particular  and  I  will  make
    further reference to this below, it is very  regrettable  indeed  given
    the basis upon which permission to appeal was granted, that  directions
    which had been made by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor as long ago as  26
    February 2014 were not complied with by the Secretary of State.

68. The Secretary of State's case can be summarised  very  briefly  indeed.
    It is argued on her behalf in the grounds that the panel had failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for finding  that  the  claimant's  Article  3
    rights would be breached if she was deported to Jamaica. In this regard
    it is said (at paragraph 1 of ground 2 in the grounds) that  the  panel
    had found that the claimant's expert report's  findings  had  not  been
    challenged, whereas they had been.

69. It is asserted in the  grounds  that  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  had  challenged  the  expert's
    findings "given that both the  experts  and  their  colleagues  had  no
    formal experiences of knowledge of medical treatment  in  Jamaica"  and
    therefore, it is asserted, "the [panel's] findings are  inadequate  and
    inadequate reasons have been given as to why the expert's findings  can
    be relied upon".

70. Further, it is submitted in the grounds that the panel had  "failed  to
    provide adequate reasons as to why the medical treatment in Jamaica  is
    not adequate or why the access to unlimited support here will  lead  to
    an exacerbation of her condition upon return".

71. It is also asserted that the panel had not given adequate reasons as to
     why the claimant's circumstances were exceptional enough  to  outweigh
    the public interest in  deporting  her  and  that  the  panel  made  no
    assessment of the claimant's cultural ties to Jamaica or why she  would
    be unable to continue her private life in that country.

72. When granting permission to  appeal  Judge  O'Connor  setting  out  his
    reasons stated as follows:

         "The Secretary of State appeals against a decision  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal on  Article  3  and  8
         ECHR grounds.

         Contrary to [what is] asserted in the first ground, Article  3  was
         in issue before the First-tier Tribunal. It was dealt with  in  the
         Secretary of State's refusal decision, and was specifically pleaded
         in the claimant's IAFT1 appeal form. It is not  arguable  therefore
         that the First-tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to  consider
         Article 3 grounds.

         Given the assertion made in paragraph 1 of ground 2, it is arguable
         that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its  consideration  of  the
         evidence provided by Dr Davies. It is also arguable that the First-
         tier Tribunal's reasons for allowing the application on  Article  3
         grounds are inadequate. In  the  former  regard  both  parties  are
         directed to serve and  file  copies  of  any  record  made  of  the
         proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal, with the parts relevant
         to this ground appropriately sidelined. [my emphasis]

         Although there appears to be little merit in the other  grounds,  I
         do not restrict the grant of permission."

73. On behalf of the claimant Ms Cronin settled a Rule  24  response  which
    substantially complied with the direction which  had  been  given.   At
    paragraph 7 of this response it was stated as follows:

         "Counsel's note (and her  clear  recollection)  of  the  Presenting
         Officer, Ms Laverack's submission on Dr Agnes Davies's evidence  is
         that the challenge to her evidence was a narrow one, restricted  to
         the care available to A in Jamaica.  Thus:

         i.   in answer to the FtTJ's direct question 'do you agree with the
             conclusion of Dr Agnew Davies' Counsel's note to  Ms  Lavarack
             responses records 'I think  in  terms  of  her  conclusions  -
             [there is] no agreement re support in Jamaica'.

         ii.      Counsel's note (again concurring  with  her  recollection)
             records  concerning  Ms  Lavarack's  submission  on  Dr  Agnew
             Davies' evidence 'Does not challenge expertise and  diagnosis.
             No knowledge Jamaica [support and treatment]'

         iii.  Counsel's note further records Ms  Lavarack's  submission  to
             include a reference to 'psychiatrists there [Jamaica] -  there
             is some form  of  therapy.  Not  the  same  level'.   (Counsel
             underlined 'some form' as a prompt for  her  own  submission).
             The note further shows that the FtTJ then intervened  to  pose
             the question 'but needs  suitable  [treatment]'  and  that  Ms
             Lavarack replied that A had 'chosen not to take psychiatric  t
             [treatment] here."

74. Notwithstanding the  direction  which  had  been  made,  there  was  no
    evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  in
    particular no copy of any record made in the proceedings by Ms Laverack
    was submitted to the court and nor was any witness  statement  from  Ms
    Laverack provided.  As I have already indicated earlier, Mr Nath cannot
    be blamed personally for this failure because he was not given the file
    in this case, if at all, until the day of this hearing.

75. During the course of the hearing,  at  the  invitation  of  Mr  Nath  I
    examined the Record  of  Proceedings  which  had  been  made  by  Judge
    Munonyedi and her notes record that the report of Dr  Davies  was  "not
    challenged".  It is also  recorded  that  the  Presenting  Officer  who
    presented the case on behalf of the Secretary of State accepted she was
    a formidable expert who was "not challenged today".  It was recorded in
    the notes (as set out in paragraph 11 of the determination)  that  "The
    [Secretary of State] is of the  view  that  there  is  adequate  mental
    health provision in Jamaica for the [claimant] to access" and  that  it
    was argued on behalf of the Secretary of State that  "doctor  does  not
    have knowledge of services in Jamaica"; however, there  is  nothing  in
    the Record of Proceedings to suggest that other than this point  (which
    was anyway recorded in the panel's determination),  there  was  at  any
    point any challenge made to Dr Davies's diagnosis.

76. Mr Nath, as I have said doing the  best  he  could  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State in a very sensitive case, felt obliged to ask for an
    adjournment in order that a witness statement could be prepared  by  Ms
    Laverack so that if this was possible some flesh could be added to  the
    Secretary of State's submissions. I remarked during the course  of  the
    hearing, and I repeat in this determination, that in my judgement  such
    an adjournment would in the circumstances of this case  be  scandalous.
    The Secretary of State knew what she had to do in order to make out her
    case and had been specifically directed to provide the  evidence  which
    it is now suggested might be available if an adjournment was granted.

77. In this case this claimant has been let down by the state over  such  a
    long period of time, that even bearing in mind the seriousness  of  the
    offences which she now admits having  committed,  it  would  be  wholly
    improper to delay this decision any longer merely to give the Secretary
    of State  a  further  opportunity  of  putting  in  evidence  which  if
    available should already have been provided.  I also do not consider in
    light of the Record of Proceedings when viewed in the  context  of  the
    panel's determination that any further  evidence  would  be  likely  to
    assist the Tribunal in this case.

78. For these reasons I consider that I can justly  determine  this  appeal
    now without an adjournment and I shall do so.

79. Mr Nath in his oral argument  essentially  tried  to  expand  upon  the
    submissions advanced within the grounds, in particular with  regard  to
    the medical facilities which are available within  Jamaica,  but  given
    the total failure  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  comply  with  the
    directions which had been made to provide proper evidence in support of
    these submissions and given also  what  is  recorded  both  within  the
    Record of Proceedings made by the panel and the notes  supplied  by  Ms
    Cronin, there was no basis upon which this Tribunal could properly find
    that the arguments which had been advanced before the  panel  had  been
    misrecorded in its determination.  In these circumstances, although  he
    did his best, Mr Nath lacked the material on which he could advance the
    Secretary of State's case further.

80. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Cronin  made  her  points  concisely  but
    cogently. She reminded the Tribunal that at paragraphs 10  and  11  the
    panel had set out exactly what the Secretary of State's case was as  it
    had been put at the hearing before it.   The  Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted Dr Davies' diagnosis and the cause of her mental  illness  but
    it had been recorded that it was the Secretary  of  State's  case  that
    there were adequate mental health facilities available in  Jamaica.  So
    that contention was understood by the panel at the outset.

81. At paragraph 51  it  was  recorded  that  the  Presenting  Officer  had
    conceded that although the Secretary of  State's  case  had  originally
    been that the claimant would be  offered  support  from  Hibiscus  this
    support would only be available to criminals who had been  involved  in
    drug related proceedings which this claimant had not.  Ms  Cronin  then
    referred to her recollection which is set out in the Rule  24  response
    made on behalf of the claimant.  It was the claimant's case that if one
    looked at the way in which the panel carefully set out the evidence  of
    Dr Agnew Davies it could  be  seen  that  it  had  first  set  out  her
    professional view which was not in dispute but then at paragraph 21 had
    referred to Dr Davies's "understanding" as to what the position was  in
    Jamaica.  So it was entirely clear that the panel understood that  this
    aspect of the report had not been accepted without more  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.

82. With regard to the finding under Article 3 it was the  claimant's  case
    that this finding was sustainable. The panel had first of all  referred
    to the decision in Z and Others and referred to the breach of Article 3
    in the way that the claimant had been treated (or rather  not  treated)
    as a child.

83.  Ms Cronin then referred to what was said by the panel at paragraphs 26
    and 27, which I have already set out above.    Ms  Cronin's  submission
    was that this Tribunal now should find that there had not only  been  a
    breach  of  Article  3  but  that  the  removal  of  this  claimant  in
    circumstances where that would lead to a serious deterioration  in  her
    conditions would be a further breach of Article 3.  I will just  add  a
    gloss on this submission which is that it is not for this  Tribunal  so
    to find; the decision of the panel to this effect is sustainable if  it
    had been open to the panel so to find.  It is the claimant's case  that
    in this appeal this finding flowed from the findings  which  the  panel
    had made.

84. Although it was the Secretary of State's position that the risk to  the
    claimant did not reach the threshold of N, since that  time  there  had
    been the decision of the European Court in MSS v Belgium and  Greece  -
    30696/09 [2011] ECHR 108 [2011] 53 EHRR 2, [2011] INLR  533  which  had
    been concerned with the situation which would  arise  where  there  had
    been  serious harm or privation for an applicant, for which  the  state
    through its action or inactions would be  held responsible.  Particular
    reference was made (and  set  out  at  paragraph  16  of  the  Rule  24
    response) to the finding at paragraph 263 of MSS as follows:

         "263.  In ... view  of  the  obligations  incumbent  on  the  Greek
             authorities under the European  Reception  Directive  ...  the
             court considers that the Greek authorities  had  not  had  due
             regard to the applicant's vulnerability as  an  asylum  seeker
             and must be held responsible, because of  their  inaction  for
             the situation in which he found himself  for  several  months,
             living on the street, with no resources or access to  sanitary
             facilities,  and  without  any  means  of  providing  for  his
             essential needs. The court considers that  the  applicant  had
             been  the victim of humiliating treatment showing  a  lack  of
             respect for his dignity and that this situation  has,  without
             more, aroused in  him feelings of fear, anguish or inferiority
             capable of  inducing  desperation.   It  considers  that  such
             living conditions, combined with the prolonged uncertainty  in
             which he has remained, and the total lack of any  prospect  of
             his situation improving, have attained the level  of  severity
             required to  fall  within  the  scope  of  Article  3  of  the
             Convention.

         264.     It follows that, through the fault of the authorities, the
             applicant has found himself in a situation  incompatible  with
             Article 3 of the Convention.  Accordingly  there  has  been  a
             violation of that provision."

85. It is submitted that the findings in this case were clear, rational and
    sustainable.

Discussion

86. I deal first with the submission made on behalf of the claimant founded
    on the decision of the Strasbourg Court in MSS.    Although  the  panel
    found that there had been a breach of Article 3 in this case, from  the
    extract of MSS relied upon by the claimant, I do not consider that this
    by itself takes this claimant any further.  The issue in this  case  is
    not whether or not there had been a breach of Article 3,  which  in  my
    judgement the panel was entitled to find there had, but whether or  not
    the removal of this claimant to Jamaica now would itself be a breach.

87. However, in my judgement the claimant does not need to rely on MSS  for
    this  purpose.   The  panel's  conclusion  that  the  failure  of   the
    authorities in this country had been such as to amount to a  breach  by
    the  state  of  its  obligations  towards  this  claimant  was  in  the
    circumstances of this case not  only  open  to  the  panel  but  in  my
    judgement inevitable.  The facts are as the panel  found  quite  simply
    appalling.  On repeated occasions the claimant suffered abuse which was
    preventable and should have been prevented.  That it was  not  reflects
    extremely badly on the social services involved (in particular  Enfield
    and Haringey).  While it is not a defence to criminal activity that the
    criminal has suffered abuse in the past, nonetheless  when  considering
    this claimant's situation in the round as the panel had to do, this was
    an extremely important factor which had to be taken  into  account  and
    was.

88. The sad facts regarding this claimant as the panel found  and  as  this
    Tribunal would have found on the facts as  presented to it, the bulk of
    which were accepted by  the  Secretary  of  State,  is  that  following
    serious breaches by the state of her  Article  3  rights,  she  is  for
    perhaps the first time in her life in a  position  where  there  is  at
    least some prospect that she may be able to come to terms with her past
    and with the help that she is currently receiving go on  to  lead  some
    kind of useful life.

89. The panel's finding, which  was  based  upon  that  part  of  Dr  Agnew
    Davies's report and evidence which was not challenged, that removal  of
    the support she is currently receiving would be likely  to  lead  to  a
    serious deterioration in her condition, in my  judgement  was  entirely
    open to it on the evidence and the  panel's  conclusions  are  reasoned
    very clearly in a determination to which considerable care has  plainly
    been given.

90. I deal with Article 8 below because in my  judgement  the  claimant  is
    entitled to succeed under Article 8 also but so far  as  Article  3  is
    concerned, this is very far from being a case which is comparable to N.
      It would in the circumstances of this case be unconscionable for  the
    Secretary of State simply to remove this claimant  to  Jamaica  thereby
    not only enabling the state to avoid its responsibility to  attempt  to
    repair the damage to a young person whose condition has deteriorated to
    the extent that it has at least partly because of the  state's  failure
    to comply with its obligations towards a  vulnerable  child,  but  also
    causing further damage to her on top of  that  which  she  has  already
    suffered.  The contrast between the claimant's prospects were she to be
    returned to Jamaica and her prospects if she remains in the UK  are  so
    marked that in light of the background as described above, her  removal
    would be in yet further breach of her article 3 rights.

91. I will turn now to Article 8.  I will summarise the  law  very  briefly
    indeed because there is really no need to set  out  all  the  competing
    authorities.  Following the decisions of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Nigeria) and MF (Nigeria) it is clear that where a "foreign  criminal"
    is convicted of serious criminal offences (and  the  offences  in  this
    case are very serious indeed) there need to be very compelling  reasons
    indeed to justify departing from the usual  course  of  deporting  that
    person.  As the Court of Appeal noted in SS (Nigeria), the court has to
    give great weight to the will of parliament as expressed in legislation
    that such deportation is conducive to the public good, which of  course
    it is.  In MF (Nigeria) the Court of Appeal was careful  to  note  that
    although there was not a test  of  exceptionality  as  such,  it  would
    nonetheless only be where the factors  militating  against  deportation
    were "very compelling" that these would outweigh the public interest in
    deportation.

92. In my  judgement  if  ever  there  were  very  compelling  reasons  why
    deportation would not be appropriate, even were  this  removal  not  in
    breach of Article 3 as such, they would be present  in  this  case.   I
    would  sincerely  hope  that  the  circumstances  in  this   case   are
    exceptional; I consider that  Parliament  (as  representatives  of  the
    public) would be entitled to expect that the circumstances in  which  a
    10 year old child is let down by social services  to  the  extent  that
    this claimant was (and for so long), are so exceptional that they would
    occur only very infrequently indeed and preferably never.

93. This Tribunal is very conscious indeed of the will of  parliament  that
    foreign criminals  should  be  deported  unless  there  are  such  very
    compelling reasons, and would not lightly find that a  person  who  has
    committed offences such as this claimant has should  not  be  deported.
    But as I have noted, and as the panel found, the circumstances in  this
    case are very exceptional indeed; this is a case  not  only  where  the
    consequences to this claimant if she is removed could be  catastrophic,
    but also where the state has an obligation to  try  to  put  right  the
    wrongs done to her partly as a result of its neglect .

94. The fact is that this claimant has been badly let down by the state  in
    this country. She has served the  penalty  of  imprisonment  which  she
    acknowledges it was right that she served because of the  offences  she
    committed, but she is now for perhaps the first time in her life facing
    up to the consequences of her offending and to the circumstances of her
    upbringing.  It would be quite wrong for this country now, by deporting
    this claimant,  to  avoid  the  responsibility  which  it  has  towards
    allowing this claimant an opportunity to recover from the damage  which
    has been done to her.

95. Accordingly even  though  the  offences  of  which  this  claimant  was
    convicted and which she now admits having committed, are  very  serious
    and even though but for the mitigating factors in this case  she  would
    have been  subject  to  deportation  under  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions, in this case such a decision is unlawful because it  is  in
    breach of her Article 8 rights as well as her Article 3 rights.

96.  Accordingly  for  the  reasons  which  are   contained   within   this
    determination it is my firm conclusion that the very thorough, detailed
    and careful determination of the panel does not  contain  any  material
    error of law and that the Secretary of State's appeal must  accordingly
    be dismissed.

97. On behalf of  the  claimant  Ms  Cronin  submitted  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to make an anonymity direction.  In light of the background
    to this appeal, involving a history of abuse to a  vulnerable  child  I
    agree and I so order.



Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.

The  decision  of  the  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing  the
claimant' appeal under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR is affirmed.

No report of these proceedings shall be published  which  may  identify  the
claimant.



Signed:                                 Date: 27 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


