
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01794/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 15 October 2015                   |
|Delivered Orally                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Pawal Skobel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Respondent in Person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan, who,  sitting
    at Taylor House on 29 April 2015 and in  a  determination  subsequently
    promulgated on 15  May  2015  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Respondent
    (hereinafter called the claimant), a citizen of Poland born on 18  June
    1984 against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 15  September
    2014 to make a deportation order in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 with reference to  Regulation
    19(3)(b) of the 2006 Regulations that the claimant  should  be  removed
    from the United Kingdom and an order made in accordance with Regulation
    24(3) that required him to leave the United Kingdom and prohibiting him
    from re-entering whilst the order was in force.  The Secretary of State
    was  satisfied  that  the  claimant  posed  a  genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat to the interests  of  public  policy/public
    security if he were allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  that
    his deportation was thus justified under Regulation 21.

2.   It was apparent to me at the outset of the hearing  that  the  claimant
    was not legally represented and I therefore carefully explained to  him
    that my first task was to decide whether or not  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge disclosed an error or errors on  a  point
    of law such as may have materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

3.   In granting permission to appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett
    noted  inter  alia  that  it  was  "said  that  there  was   procedural
    irregularity in that the Judge rushed the hearing and refused to  allow
    the Presenting Officer the opportunity to read the Appellant's  bundle"
    and that this issue was arguable in light of the evidence  produced  by
    the Presenting Officer.  For the  reasons  that  will  follow  it  will
    suffice if I limit therefore my consideration of this  appeal  to  that
    particular ground.

4.   There was indeed attached  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of
    challenge a statement dated 29 April 2015 that being the  date  of  the
    hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  Sandra  McKenzie,  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing, and it stated as follows:

         "This case was substantively heard before IJ Morgan today at Taylor
         House.  The Appellant was unrepresented.  The IJ arrived at 11.40pm
         to start the hearing and I told him that I thought  it  was  a  CMR
         today.  We had a number of list changes and I was told this was  an
         immigration list.  I however said I had read and prepped  from  the
         RFRL so was ready to proceed having read the  RFRL  but  needed  to
         read the Appellant's bundle which I did not have but he  had.   The
         Judge did not let me read the Appellant's bundle though I asked for
         time to do so, he did not even let me see the Appellant's bundle so
         I could check whether a copy of the papers he had  was  already  in
         our files.  All he allowed was a copy of the  partner's  WS  to  be
         photocopied for me to read and ask  questions  about.   I  was  not
         given a copy of the Appellant's WS.  On hearing the  evidence  from
         the Appellant a woman at the back of  the  court  was  feeding  him
         answers and I commented this could not be allowed.   It  transpired
         the woman at the back of the court was the Appellant's partner  and
         the IJ having arrived in court late did not conduct the usual court
         procedural checks and as it appeared  he  wanted  to  get  on  with
         things quickly I did not even realise this part of the  checks  had
         not been done and the partner remained seated at the back.

         I made my submissions on the fact the Appellant had  not  addressed
         his alcohol habit - which was said to be one of the main indicators
         for his offending behaviour.

         I raised ESSA the IJ said this was not an ESSA case.

         The Judge allowed the case on the spot  stating  he  had  taken  on
         board the probation report and the risk assessment being low to the
         public.

         The hearing lasted all of twenty minutes or so.  I asked the IJ  to
         dismiss."

5.   This account was challenged by the claimant in his written response  to
    the grounds and insofar as it relates  to  this  particular  ground  of
    challenge, he expressed his disagreement in the following terms:

         "At the first hearing in December it was clearly  stated  that  the
         next hearing is the last.  The Judge set the date for  delivery  of
         documents by  the  Appellant  by  31  March  2015.   The  Appellant
         delivered all documents on time.

         On hearing 29 April 2015 Judge David Morgan simply noticed that  Ms
         McKenzie was completely unprepared.  There was enough time for both
         parties to prepare.

         The  Judge  did  not  hurry,  there  was  time  for  questions  and
         statements given on both sides.

         It is not true that the Judge did not allow the Respondent to  read
         the documents of Appellant.  There was an opportunity given by  the
         Judge but Respondent did not accepted (sic).

         It is clear that the Respondent  was  not  prepared  or  ready  for
         hearing."

6.   Before me Mr Skobel  has  helpfully  clarified  those  remarks,  having
    heard the brief submissions of Ms Pal for the Secretary of  State.   He
    told me as follows:

         "I complied with the  directions  and  sent  my  documents  to  the
         Tribunal and the Home Office.  The Presenting Officer  should  have
         been ready because she should have had in  her  possession  all  my
         documents and at the previous hearing  when  directions  were  made
         before another Judge he said that the next hearing will be final.

         I do not remember whether the Presenting Officer asked for a set of
         my own documents but I do remember that she asked for more time and
         that the Judge refused."

7.   It follows therefore from the claimant's  helpful  clarification,  that
    he indeed confirmed to me, that  he  could  not  be  sure  whether  the
    Presenting Officer had made a request for his  bundle  or  whether  the
    Judge refused that request, but he made the  point  that  whatever  may
    have been the position, the Presenting Officer should have  been  ready
    to proceed in compliance with the earlier directions made.

8.   It is apparent to me that the only basis upon which  I  could  find  in
    favour of the claimant's submission would be if I was to conclude  that
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing  had  dishonestly  misrepresented
    the situation in the face of the true circumstances.  I am not prepared
    to make such a  finding  in  the  light  of  the  Presenting  Officer's
    representations as to the position she found herself in at the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and in any event the claimant  has
    most fairly told me  that  he  cannot  exactly  recollect  whether  the
    Presenting Officer made a request for the claimant's documents or not.

9.   In those circumstances it is sufficient to say that  the  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge cannot  stand  as  there  has  been  a
    procedural irregularity which is sufficiently serious to amount  to  an
    error of law.  In those circumstances it is not  necessary  for  me  to
    look any further at all in relation to the Secretary of  State's  other
    grounds because this ground is in itself sufficient to  show  that  the
    decision cannot stand.

10.  To illustrate why this  is  conclusive  in  the  determination  of  the
    appeal is to  consider  what  the  position  would  have  been  if  the
    circumstances were reversed.  It is  inconceivable  that  an  Appellant
    could properly be asked to present his or her case without being  aware
    of the evidence relied on by the  other  party.   No-one  can  sensibly
    suggest that it is procedurally fair or acceptable to expect one  party
    to proceed with the  hearing  without  being  aware  of  the  submitted
    evidence upon which the other party has relied.

11.  For those reasons the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  will
    be set aside in its entirety.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
    allowed but only to the extent  that  the  appeal  is  remitted  to  be
    determined afresh by a different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date 13 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
