
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01714/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Magistrates' Court |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               SCOTT UYI IGIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Krause, Meritz Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Scott Uyi Igie, was born on 25 May 1982 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Nigeria.  The appellant claimed asylum in 2011  (he  claimed
    to have been in the United Kingdom since 2006) and, although his  claim
    was refused, he was given discretionary leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules until 9 August 2014.  On  28  January  2013,  the  appellant  was
    convicted at Leeds Crown Court of conspiracy/knowingly concerned in the
    evasion of a prohibition or restriction on the  import  of  a  class  A
    drug.  He received a  sentence  of  imprisonment  of  six  years.   The
    appellant sought the revocation of a deportation  order  signed  on  26
    August 2014 but his application was refused.  He appealed to the First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Birkby)  which,  in  a  decision  and   reasons
    promulgated on 18 February 2015, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are  two  grounds  of  appeal  as  summarised  in  the  grant  of
    permission issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley:

         "1.  It was [arguably]  procedurally  unfair  not  to  adjourn  the
             [First-tier Tribunal] hearing as [the appellant] was not  able
             to be represented on the day and did not have the  opportunity
             to provide updated evidence from his wife and a psychologist's
             report.

         2.    It  was  said  that  this  procedural  unfairness  materially
             affected the determination of the appeal under Article 8  ECHR
             as the Tribunal was deprived of  relevant  evidence  regarding
             the appellant's family life ties with his daughter and because
             a wrong assessment was made of the appellant's criminality due
             to  assumptions  made  by  his  continuing  to  maintain   his
             innocence.  In this connection it was said inter alia that  he
             had  an  outstanding   appeal   relating   to   his   criminal
             conviction."

 3. The appellant appeared in person before the First-tier Tribunal at  the
    hearing on 23 January 2015.  I was told  by  Ms  Krause,  who  appeared
    before the Upper Tribunal at Bradford Magistrates' Court on 26  October
    2015,  that the appellant had chosen to represent himself as he did not
    wish to spend money on representation if an adjournment was refused.  I
    also heard submissions from a Mr Ecehendu, although it was not entirely
    clear in what capacity he appeared.

 4. It was clear that Judge Birkby considered the  various  representations
    made by the appellant  at  the  hearing  [27]  to  be  "in  effect"  an
    application for an adjournment.  Thereafter, in his decision at [28] et
    seq Judge Birkby considered in detail the question of an adjournment:

         "I  considered  all  the  circumstances,  the  background  and  the
         submissions made with regard to the application for an adjournment.
          I noted that the Respondent was not challenging the fact that  the
         Appellant had a close relationship with  his  wife  and  his  young
         daughter and that they had been to visit him in prison.  I was  not
         given an explanation from Ms Krause, the Appellant's current  legal
         representative,  as  to  why  there  was  no  statement  from   the
         Appellant's wife, bearing in mind what she had said in  the  letter
         to the Tribunal to which  I  have  referred.   There  was  also  no
         clarity from Ms Krause as to why she did  not  attend,  bearing  in
         mind what had been said previously, save for the statement  to  the
         court clerk over the telephone that she had been told not to attend
         and that she was reluctant to do so.  It was not  clear  why  there
         was not a psychologist's report bearing in mind what Ms Krause  had
         said.  It was not clear as to what the psychologist's report  would
         concern itself with.  I also note that the Appellant had until very
         recently  been  represented  by  his  earlier  solicitors  who  had
         prepared bundles on his behalf, which  were  substantive  and  full
         with regard to his case.  The Appellant  seemed  to  imply  at  one
         point  that  he  would  still  have  to  pay  Ms  Krause  for   her
         representation.  The full bundles  from  the  Appellant's  previous
         solicitors had been submitted to the Tribunal in November 2014  and
         the decision clearly went back as far as 26th August 2014.  In  all
         the circumstances I considered that the Appellant had  had  a  full
         opportunity to provide evidence and to obtain legal representation.
          I was not satisfied that it would be in the interests  of  justice
         in all the circumstances that this appeal should be  adjourned.   I
         therefore refused the Appellant's application."

 5. I have a copy of the psychologist's report of Dr Saima Latif  which  is
    dated 3 October 2015.  Having read the report, I am not satisfied  that
    there is anything at all in it which, had the report been available  to
    Judge Birkby, would have led to a different outcome of this appeal.  Dr
    Latif takes issue with the OASys Report of October 2014  in  which  the
    appellant was found to be  at  high  risk  of  reoffending.   Dr  Latif
    observed that this assessment could not be "valid at the present moment
    in time due to changes in Mr Igie's thinking  processes  and  behaviour
    due to interventions undertaken in prison".  The "moment in  time"  is,
    of course, 3 October 2015,  some  eight  months  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  Judge Birkby clearly did not err in  law  by  basing
    his analysis upon the OASys Report of October 2014.  Further, Dr  Latif
    observes that the removal of the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
    "will impact upon his daughter's upbringing and  development  and  upon
    balance may affect her education social and  psychological  wellbeing".
    With respect to Dr Latif, that  is  little  more  than  an  unsupported
    assertion which makes no  specific  reference  to  any  evidence.   The
    assertion is of such a general nature as to be of little assistance  to
    the Tribunal.  Judge Birkby's observation at [28] that "it is not clear
    as to what the psychologist's report would  concern  itself"  has  been
    shown, in the circumstances, to be entirely reasonable.

 6. As regards updated evidence from the  appellant's  wife,  Judge  Birkby
    noted that she had not attended before the First-tier Tribunal and  had
    not produced  a  written  statement.   In  evidence  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the appellant told me that he was aware that his wife  wanted
    to separate from him at the date of the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
    He said that he had hoped to persuade her not to do so.  Ms Krause told
    me that she had seen the appellant's wife on 19 January  2015  and  had
    been told by her that she intended to separate from the appellant.   At
    [73 and 74], Judge Birkby wrote:

         "It was also considered that a level of contact could be maintained
         between the Appellant's daughter in the UK through modern forms  of
         communication and visits to Nigeria.  As such it was not considered
         that paragraph 339(a) would have availed the Appellant  if  it  had
         applied in his case, which it did not.   Therefore  there  were  no
         compelling  circumstances  over  and   above   the   exception   to
         deportation outlined in paragraph 339(a).

         The Respondent went on to state that  as  the  Appellant  had  been
         convicted  and  sentenced  to  a  period  of   over   four   years'
         imprisonment, the factors  outlined  in  paragraph  339(b)  of  the
         Immigration Rules in relation to  family  life  with  a  spouse  or
         partner did not apply in the Appellant's case.  The requirements of
         the exception to deportation on the basis of  family  life  with  a
         partner were set out at paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration  Rules,
         which the Respondent cited at paragraph 95 of the decision notice."

 7. At [122] Judge Birkby went on to consider Article 8  ECHR  outside  the
    Immigration Rules:

         "For the sake of completion I have  considered  Article  8  of  the
         Human Rights Convention as it applies to the Appellant outside  the
         Immigration  Rules  and  outside  the  assertions  stated  by   the
         Respondent, which I have adopted.  In considering Article 8 of  the
         Human Rights Convention I accept that the  best  interests  of  the
         Appellant's child is a primary consideration.  It is clear in  this
         case that Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention is engaged.  The
         decision of the Respondent to deport the Appellant interferes  with
         the Appellant's right to respect for his private and  family  life.
         However, I find  that  the  decision  is  lawful  and  pursues  the
         legitimate aim of  immigration  control.   I  also  find  that  the
         decision  is  proportionate  and  reasonable.   Clearly  the   best
         interests of the Appellant's child are that she is  brought  up  by
         her  mother  and  if  possible  by  the  Appellant.   However,  the
         Appellant has been convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  offence
         which I find has the potential for doing serious damage to  members
         of UK society.  The Appellant is a Nigerian national and  has  only
         lived in the UK since 2008.  His wife is Zimbabwean, but I  am  not
         satisfied that she would not be able to move with her daughter with
         the Appellant to Nigeria for the reasons stated by  the  Respondent
         in the decision letter.  Even if the Appellant and his wife decided
         that the Appellant's wife would not either seek to or would not  be
         able to move  to  Nigeria,  I  still  find  that  the  decision  is
         proportionate and reasonable, and  that  the  Appellant  would  and
         should go to Nigeria alone and maintain  contact  with  his  family
         through modern means of communication.  As  I  have  indicated  the
         Appellant's conviction in the United Kingdom is so serious that  in
         my judgment it outweighs the  Appellant's  right  and  his  child's
         right to have an immediate family life that  the  Appellant  seeks.
         In any event, I do not accept that the Appellant's wife  and  child
         would not be able to live in Nigeria with the Appellant.  I believe
         that it would be safe for them to do so  and  I  believe  that  the
         Appellant would be able to re-establish a life in  Nigeria  himself
         and would be able to settle there  with  his  wife  and  child.   I
         accept that his child was born in the United Kingdom,  but  she  is
         very young and would be able to re-adapt to life in Nigeria.  As  I
         apprehend the whole of the family speaks English which  they  would
         be able to speak in Nigeria.  I have carefully considered  all  the
         effects of Section 117 as amended of the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 in coming to my conclusions.  I adopt as I have
         indicated already the assertions of the Respondent in that  regard,
         as also I adopt all  the  assertions  of  the  Respondent  and  the
         Respondent's analysis of the Appellant's Article 8 claims under the
         Rules, case  law  and  legislation  as  stated  in  the  letter  of
         refusal."

 8. The scenario whereby the appellant's wife and child might join  him  in
    Nigeria upon his return does not  appear  to  be  realistic  given  the
    wife's stated intention that she wishes to separate from the appellant.
     This appellant was sentenced to six years'  imprisonment  for  a  very
    serious drug offence.  The public interest concerned with  the  removal
    of such an individual is  very  considerable,  as  the  judge  properly
    observed.  The judge's conclusion that the appellant's  conviction  was
    "so serious" that it "outweighs the appellant's right and  his  child's
    right to have an immediate family life that the  appellant  seeks"  was
    plainly available to him on the facts.  The  judge  was  right  not  to
    adjourn the hearing to obtain  a  psychologist's  report  which,  as  I
    observed, adds  virtually  nothing  to  the  appellant's  side  of  the
    argument. In any event, the judge  carefully  considered  all  relevant
    matters before  rejecting  the  arguments  in  favour  of  adjournment.
    Further, the assertion made by the appellant that  he  was  seeking  to
    overturn his criminal conviction also amounts to  nothing.   Ms  Krause
    told me at the Upper Tribunal hearing that she had no evidence  at  all
    that either the appellant in person or solicitors instructed by him had
    sought to make an application to appeal his conviction.   I  find  that
    the appellant has not been a victim of any procedural unfairness  as  a
    consequence of the judge's refusal to grant  an  adjournment.   I  find
    that Judge Birkby  has  written  an  extremely  detailed  and  thorough
    decision and that he has given this appellant, who appeared  in  person
    before him, every opportunity to make submissions.  In the light of the
    wife's decision not to remain with the appellant, it seems very  likely
    that, following the appellant's removal to Nigeria,  he  will  have  to
    maintain any relationship with his child indirectly  by  correspondence
    and electronic means.  There was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that that outcome would so seriously affect the  child's  best
    interests that it would be unreasonable or that any other  circumstance
    which might favour  the  appellant  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom
    outweighed the very considerable public  interest  concerned  with  the
    removal of a serious drug offender.  In my judgment, Judge  Birkby  did
    not err in law for the reasons asserted in the grounds of appeal or  at
    all.  Finally, I can state that, even if I were re-making the  decision
    in the light of the psychologist's report and the  other  evidence  now
    available,  I  would  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal   against   the
    immigration decision.

Notice of Decision

 9. This appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 20 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
