
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01142/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 June 2013                                 |On 24 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          MIHILAN KATHIRGAMANATHAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Hayes, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Physsas, Counsel instructed by Vasuki,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Mihilan Kathirgamanathan, was born on 2 August 1984 and
    is a male citizen of Sri Lanka.  The respondent  had  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Easterman and Mrs J Holt) against a decision
    of the appellant dated 30 November 2012 to  make  a  deportation  order
    under the UK Borders Act 2007.  The Tribunal, in a determination  which
    was promulgated on 12 April 2013, dismissed the  certification  of  the
    respondent's asylum appeal under  Section  73(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  dismissed  the  respondent's  asylum
    appeal and allowed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraph
    399A).  The appellant,  the  Secretary  of  State,  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At [71] the Tribunal found that the respondent was entitled to a period
    of 30 months' leave under paragraph 399A as he had proved that he was a
    person who had "lived continuously in the United Kingdom for  at  least
    twenty years immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
    discounting any periods of imprisonment and he has no  ties  (including
    social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would have  to
    do [Sri Lanka] if he was required to leave the United Kingdom."

 3. I was assisted at the Upper Tribunal initial hearing by Mr  Hayes,  for
    the appellant, who told me that, by his calculation and by reference to
    a letter now adduced by the respondent dated 6 June  2013  from  Surrey
    and Sussex Probation Trust, it  was  clear  that  (discounting  periods
    during which he had been serving custodial  sentences)  the  respondent
    had enjoyed a continuous period of residence in the United  Kingdom  of
    at least twenty years and four months.

 4. As to ties with Sri Lanka, Miss Physsas, for the  respondent,  told  me
    that the Presenting Officer at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  had
    conceded that, given that his family were living with him in the United
    Kingdom and that the respondent himself had been in  this  country  for
    more than twenty years, he had no ties of a social, cultural or  family
    nature with Sri Lanka.   The  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings  is  not
    entirely clear on that point but Mr Hayes did not seek to pursue it.

 5. In the light of my discussions with the representatives of both parties
    at the hearing, and having considered the  determination  and  evidence
    (including  the  letter  from  Surrey  and  Sussex   Probation   Trust)
    carefully, I can identify no error of law in  the  application  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal of paragraph 399A of the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Tribunal was right to conclude that the respondent satisfied  the  Rule
    and should, as a consequence, be granted 30 months' leave to remain.

 6. The grounds also submit that the Tribunal gave insufficient reasons for
    concluding that the appellant had rebutted Section 72  presumption.   I
    do not find that this ground has any merit.  The Tribunal dismissed the
    respondent's asylum appeal and gave, in my  opinion,  adequate  reasons
    for not upholding the certification under Section 72.  Given  that  the
    asylum appeal failed, it cannot be  said  that  the  certification  was
    material in any event.

 7. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.





DECISION

 8. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 24 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
