

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01000/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2013                             |On 30 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     DS

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Grubb instructed by Hoole & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).


Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  who  was  born  in  1965.   He
      entered the United Kingdom on 29 April 2002 with entry clearance as  a
      visitor.  The appellant overstayed.  On 4  July  2011,  the  appellant
      applied for further leave to remain on the basis of  his  relationship
      with ("KJF"), with whom he had begun a relationship in 2005, and their
      child ("JLSF") who was born in 2008.  That application was refused  on
      17 August 2011 without any right of appeal.

   3. On 26 May 2012, the appellant was convicted, following  guilty  pleas,
      at the Bristol Crown Court of two offences of possession  with  intent
      to supply Class A drugs, namely cocaine and heroine.  On 21 June 2012,
      he  was  sentenced  to  two  concurrent  periods  of  eighteen  months
      imprisonment.  On 7 December 2012, the Secretary of State wrote to the
      appellant seeking reasons why he should not be deported following  his
      conviction and sentence.  The appellant responded on 6 February  2013.
      On 26 April 2013, the Secretary of State  made  a  decision  that  the
      automatic deportation provisions in s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007
      applied.  The appellant is now subject to a  deportation  order  as  a
      result of that decision.

   4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   He  relied  upon
      Article 8 of the ECHR and claimed that  his  deportation  would  be  a
      disproportionate interference with his  "family  life"  with  KJF  and
      their son JLSF.  In a determination dated 9 July 2013  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  (Judge  Whiting  and  Ms  V  S  Street  JP)  dismissed   the
      appellant's appeal.  On 2 August 2013, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
      Plumptre) granted the appellant permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

   5. Ms Grubb, who represented the appellant, relied upon  her  grounds  of
      appeal and written skeleton argument which she amplified in  her  oral
      submissions.

      Adjournment Decision

   6. Ms Grubb submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law as it
      had failed to deal with one basis upon which the appellant had  sought
      an adjournment of the  hearing.   Ms  Grubb  submitted  that,  at  the
      hearing, she had sought an adjournment on three  grounds.   First,  in
      order that important documents could be obtained from the  appellant's
      instructing solicitors but which had not been submitted in the appeal.
       Secondly, in order that KJF could attend the  Tribunal  in  order  to
      give oral evidence.  Thirdly, in order, in effect, for  the  appellant
      to make an asylum claim.   Ms  Grubb  did  not  take  issue  with  the
      Tribunal's  reasoning  in  paras  4-6  which  led  it  to  refuse  the
      adjournment on the first and third bases upon  which  the  adjournment
      was sought, however, she submitted that the Tribunal  had  simply  not
      dealt with the application on basis two.

   7. Ms Grubb relied upon rule 21  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure
      Rules (SI 2005/230) which in rule 21(2) states that the Tribunal "must
      not" adjourn a hearing:  "unless  satisfied  that  the  appeal  cannot
      otherwise be justly determined."  She referred me to rule 21(3)  which
      states that in relation to an application "in order to allow [a] party
      more time to produce evidence", the  Tribunal  "must  not"  adjourn  a
      hearing unless satisfied that: (1) the evidence relates to a matter in
      dispute in the appeal; and (2) it would be  unjust  to  determine  the
      appeal without permitting the party a further opportunity  to  produce
      evidence; and (3) where the non-production of the evidence arises  out
      of a failure to comply with directions, that the party has provided  a
      "satisfactory explanation" for that failure.

   8. Ms Grubb submitted that the Tribunal had not properly dealt  with  the
      adjournment on the basis of KJF's non-attendance  in  accordance  with
      rule 21.

   9. I do not accept Ms Grubb's submissions on this issue.  It is clear  in
      paras 4-6 of its determination that the  Tribunal  did  not  expressly
      deal with any application to adjourn the hearing on the basis that KJF
      wished to attend and give oral evidence.   Although Ms Grubb  did  not
      challenge the Tribunal's reasoning in para 4 in relation to the  first
      basis upon which an adjournment was sought, there is some overlap,  as
      will  shortly  become  clear,  therefore  I  set  out  the  Tribunal's
      reasoning as follows:

           "4.   Prior to the commencement of the hearing  the  appellant's
                 representative requested an adjournment,  the  reasons  for
                 which were twofold.  Firstly that representative  had  been
                 told by the appellant on the morning of  the  hearing  that
                 there were important documents in  the  possession  of  the
                 appellant's instructing solicitors from his former  partner
                 in relation to his Article  8  claim  which  had  not  been
                 submitted and secondly that the  appellant  had  sought  to
                 make a claim for asylum.  In respect of the first matter  a
                 short adjournment was granted  to  enable  the  appellant's
                 representative to contact instructing solicitors to arrange
                 for the transmission by fax to the court  of  any  relevant
                 documents in their possession.  It  transpired  that  those
                 solicitors had no such documents.  We  were  informed  that
                 the  appellant  made  a  telephone  call   to   a   private
                 individual; that individual had  subsequently  spoken  with
                 the appellant's representative, and a hand-written document
                 was subsequently faxed to the appellant's representative at
                 court by that individual, the contents  of  which  we  note
                 below.  That being the only document [the contents of which
                 had  been  said  to  have  been  sent  to  the  appellant's
                 instructing solicitors] we were satisfied that refusing the
                 adjournment request would not prevent the just disposal  of
                 the appeal in conformity with paragraph  21  of  the  First
                 Tier Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005
                 upon such ground."

  10. As can be seen, the Tribunal (following a short adjournment)  received
      by facsimile one document.  That document is contained in  the  appeal
      file and consists of two copied pages (four pages in the original) and
      purports to be a letter from KJF in support of the appellant's appeal.
       There would appear to have been no other  documents  which,  although
      initially said to exist, were in fact not in  the  possession  of  the
      appellant's solicitors.   Ms Grubb  did,  in  her  skeleton  argument,
      repeat the allegation that the Tribunal  had  "wrongly  assumed"  that
      there were no more documents.  At  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  she
      invited me to delete that part of her skeleton argument as it was  not
      supportable  by  her  present  instructions.   As  I  have  said,  the
      Tribunal's reasoning in relation to the  first  basis  upon  which  an
      adjournment was sought is now not challenged.

  11. However, the Tribunal did have before it, as a  result  of  the  short
      adjournment, a letter  on  its  face  apparently  signed  by  KJF  and
      submitted in support of the appellant's appeal. Nothing in that letter
      suggests that KJF wished to give oral evidence at the hearing. Indeed,
      it was the appellant's own evidence that she did not wish  to  attend.
      In paragraph 28 of the determination, the Tribunal records some of the
      appellant's evidence given in cross-examination as follows:

           "28.  In cross-examination the appellant was asked when  Ms  KJF
                 came to know about the appeal hearing.  He  responded  that
                 she was  informed  about  two  weeks  previously  and  then
                 amended his answer that she came to know  within  the  past
                 month.  The appellant's Notice of Appeal is  dated  28  May
                 2013, at which time he was  legally  represented  when  the
                 significance of his Article 8 claim would have  been  fully
                 realised by those representatives.  The Notice  of  Hearing
                 is dated 10 June 2013, sufficient to enable evidence of the
                 extent of any family life existing between the  parties  to
                 be  gathered  and  presented.    The   appellant   had   no
                 photographs of him taken together with his son  to  submit,
                 stating there were some "on his phone" which had  not  been
                 accessed.  He stated  that  he  had  informed  Ms  KJF  how
                 important the appeal hearing was.  He said that she did not
                 really want to attend.  She had no money to buy petrol.  He
                 further stated that she owned a car and that  she  received
                 "her money" every Wednesday.  The appeal hearing took place
                 on a Friday.  That evidence does not  demonstrate  that  Ms
                 KJF has any strong desire that the appellant should  remain
                 in the U.K. in consequence of any family life  relationship
                 between him  and  JLSF  which  would  be  breached  by  his
                 deportation or any support which  she  may  consequentially
                 receive from the appellant's presence in the U.K."

  12. On the basis of this evidence, and  there  was  no  contrary  evidence
      before the Tribunal, it is difficult, if not impossible, to  see  upon
      what evidential basis the Tribunal was  being  asked  to  adjourn  the
      hearing in order for KJF to attend.

  13. At para 50 the Tribunal again returned to  the  letter  purporting  to
      come from KJF and what had transpired at the hearing  and  led  to  it
      being faxed to the Tribunal as follows:

           "50.  As above noted, an adjournment had been requested  on  the
                 basis that important documents relating to the  appellant's
                 family life  had  failed  to  be  submitted  by  his  legal
                 representatives.  Enquiries prior to  the  commencement  of
                 the hearing revealed  that  those  representatives  had  no
                 knowledge  of  any  such  documentation.    The   appellant
                 consequently made a telephone  call  which  resulted  in  a
                 faxed letter being sent to  the  appeal  centre  under  the
                 signature of KF.  It was explained that the  appellant  had
                 spoken to the individual who had  written  and  faxed  such
                 document.  The appellant's  representative  indicated  that
                 she had spoken with the person with whom the appellant  had
                 communicated by telephone.  The faxed document  is  without
                 benefit of address.

  14. The Tribunal, then, in para 50 went on  to  determine  what,  if  any,
      weight it could give to this letter.  I will return to that shortly in
      relation to Ms Grubb's other submissions.

  15. In her oral submissions, Ms Grubb referred me to the evidence given by
      the appellant (and recorded  in  paras  38-40  of  the  determination)
      concerning a Ms W who attended the hearing  but,  at  the  appellant's
      request, was asked not  to  be  in  the  hearing  room  when  he  gave
      evidence.  That was because the appellant did not want Ms  W  to  know
      that he no longer wished her to be his partner and that he wished "KJF
      back in his life".  Whilst it may  well  have  been  that  there  were
      difficulties in both Ms W and KJF attending the hearing  at  the  same
      time, it does not appear that it was expressly  put  to  the  Tribunal
      that this could, in any way, explain KJF's absence.  As I have already
      said, KJF herself did not indicate in the faxed letter that she wished
      to attend.   The appellant's own evidence was that she "did not really
      want to attend".  His evidence was that she could not afford to do so.
       Even assuming that this was an explanation for  her  absence,  it  is
      difficult to see how it could have led the  Tribunal  to  adjourn  the
      hearing until a time when she had sufficient funds  to  attend.   That
      was a matter for the appellant and KJF and, despite his evidence  that
      he had told her how important it was to attend, KJF did not wish to do
      so.

  16. I am left in no doubt that this ground is without  merit.   There  was
      simply no basis upon which  the  Tribunal  could  have  adjourned  the
      hearing on the basis that it was unfair or unjust to continue  in  the
      absence of KJF attending to give evidence.  The appellant has now,  in
      a bundle of documents submitted for the hearing before me, included  a
      statement from KJF dated 24 August 2013.  That such a statement exists
      now, but did not at the time of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, cannot cast any doubt upon the First-tier Tribunal's hearing
      conducted on the basis of the evidence before it.  Even, therefore, if
      the Tribunal failed to consider this  basis  for  an  adjournment  (as
      opposed to failing to record its reasons in its  determination  having
      done so), it would, in my judgment, have  been  bound  to  refuse  the
      application on  the  evidence  before  it.   No  unfairness  or  other
      material error of law is established.

      Other Grounds

  17. Ms Grubb also made a number of submissions concerning  the  Tribunal's
      assessment of the evidence and its findings, including its failure  to
      make certain findings.  Before turning to  those  submissions,  it  is
      helpful to set out the Tribunal's ultimate findings and conclusions.

  18. The appellant relied upon his relationship with KJF and his son  JLSF.
      In para 58 the Tribunal  found  that  they  were  not  satisfied  that
      "family life" existed between the appellant  and  KJF.   However,  the
      Tribunal concluded that "family life" did exist between the  appellant
      and his son, JLSF but was:  "not  one  which  could  be  described  as
      particularly strong."  The Tribunal noted that the appellant had never
      lived with KJF and JLSF in a family unit and: "we do not  accept  that
      the appellant has played an important role in the  upbringing  of  his
      son.  He is essentially an absent father." At para  57,  the  Tribunal
      noted that JLSF's best interests were  served  by:  "remaining  living
      with his mother who has cared for him since birth in the  family  unit
      and in the surroundings which are familiar to and secure for him."

  19. Having noted the nature of the appellant's offending involving, as  it
      did, the supply of Class A drugs, at para 58, the Tribunal noted  that
      "the removal of the appellant would effectively bring to  an  end  any
      meaningful family life with his son" and at para  69  found  that  the
      appellant's deportation would interfere with  the  appellant's  family
      life with his son. Nevertheless, bearing in mind the legitimate aim of
      the prevention of disorder or crime and, noting the Judge's sentencing
      remarks at para 63, the Tribunal took into  account  at  para  69  the
      importance of "general deterrent" and concluded at  para  71,  "having
      placed  the  best  interests  of  the  child  involved  as  a  primary
      consideration", that the public interest outweighed  any  interference
      with the appellant or his son's Article 8 rights.

  20. Ms Grubb submitted that in reaching its  findings,  the  Tribunal  was
      wrong to place weight upon the non-attendance of KJF and the fact that
      the appellant was not cohabiting with her or her son.   She  submitted
      that there was evidence before the Tribunal, upon which it  failed  to
      make findings, that supported the role played by the appellant in  his
      son's life, namely a pre-school letter; that the appellant had visited
      his son in prison; that the appellant had visited his  son  since  his
      release from prison; and the faxed letter from  KJF.   Ms  Grubb  also
      relied upon an error of fact made by the Tribunal in para 41  when  it
      stated that the appellant was residing with Ms W and  her  family.  In
      fact, the appellant was not residing with Ms W.

  21. Mr Richards, on behalf of the respondent, submitted that the  Tribunal
      had considered all the available evidence including  the  last  minute
      letter faxed on the morning of the  hearing.   Mr  Richards  submitted
      that the Tribunal was entitled to conclude that there was no   "family
      life" between the appellant and KJF and also to  conclude  that  there
      was "family life" between the appellant and his son but  that  he  had
      not played an important role in his sons' life.  Mr Richards submitted
      that the Tribunal had fully considered the  "best  interests"  of  the
      appellant's son and had acknowledged that the removal would  have  the
      effect of ending any  "meaningful"  family  life  with  his  son.   Mr
      Richards submitted that the Tribunal had correctly directed itself  in
      carrying out the balancing exercise  as  to  the  seriousness  of  the
      offending and the importance of deterrence.    He submitted that there
      had been a "painstaking" review of the evidence and the balancing  act
      had been carried out properly and the Tribunal's  conclusion  was  not
      unreasonable or otherwise unlawful.

  22. Having carefully considered Ms Grubb's submissions  and  those  of  Mr
      Richards, I am unable  to  accept  Ms  Grubb's  submissions  that  the
      Tribunal was not entitled, for the reasons it  gave,  to  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal on the  basis  that  his  deportation  would  be  a
      proportionate interference under Article 8.2.

  23. In my judgment, the Tribunal was entitled to take the view that it did
      as to the weight to be given to KJF's evidence.  She  did  not  attend
      the hearing and, as I have already pointed out, the appellant accepted
      that she did not wish  to  attend.   The  appellant  accepted  in  his
      evidence (see para 28 of the determination above) that she  had  known
      about the hearing for  some  weeks,  no  written  statement  had  been
      prepared by the appellant's solicitors in  respect  of  her  evidence.
      All that was before the Tribunal  was  the  handwritten  faxed  letter
      which was only obtained after the appellant, and it  would  appear  Ms
      Grubb, had spoken to KJF.  In para 50 the Tribunal said this:

           "50.  That document, seeking to record a positive  view  of  the
                 appellant's relationship with his son,  also  records  that
                 the author and the appellant have been together  for  eight
                 years.  The appellant's evidence is that he met Ms. KJF  in
                 2005 and left her in Marlow in 2009  to  live  in  Bristol.
                 Their relationship would thus  not  have  been  extant  for
                 eight  years  but  for  four  years.   The  above  recorded
                 factors,  and  a  the  absence  of  properly  prepared  and
                 important documentation from Ms KJF,  the  significance  of
                 which will not have been lost upon  the  appellant's  legal
                 representatives, undermines the reliability of the  content
                 of that faxed document."

  24. It was patently the appellant's own evidence that he  had  no  current
      relationship with KJF.  His own evidence  -  put  at  its  highest  if
      accepted - was that he had had a relationship  with  her  and  he  now
      wished her "back in his life" rather than Ms W with whom, it is  quite
      clear he had been in a relationship as it was that relationship  which
      was relied upon in the document submitted by the appellant in response
      to the Secretary of State's invitation  to  provide  a  basis  why  he
      should not be deported  (see  para  37  of  the  determination).   The
      appellant referred to KJF as his "ex-partner" in submissions  made  to
      the Secretary of State.

  25. As regards Ms Grubb's submission that the Judge had  wrongly  recorded
      at para 41 of the determination that the appellant was living with  Ms
      W, I do not see, however, how this can be said to  have  affected  the
      Judge's central  findings  on  the  appellant's  with  KJF  given  the
      appellant's own evidence on that issue.  He no longer  relied  upon  a
      relationship with Ms C in order to remain in the UK.

  26. The finding of the Tribunal that KJF and the appellant did not have  a
      relationship amounting to "family life", in my judgement, was not only
      properly open to it but was inevitable  on  the  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal.

  27. As regards the appellant's relationship with  his  son,  as  Ms  Grubb
      acknowledged in her submissions the Tribunal had accepted that "family
      life" existed but that it was not  "particularly  strong".    That  is
      plainly correct given the Tribunal's express finding to that effect in
      para  58.  Ms  Grubb's  challenge  to  that  finding  amounts,  in  my
      judgement, to no more than a disagreement with it; not disclosing  any
      error by the Tribunal.

  28. The Tribunal did take into account the evidence  from  the  pre-school
      dated 28 June 2013 and two other letters from Ms CM who claims to have
      known the appellant for thirty years and Mr S who says that he is  the
      appellant's nephew.  The Tribunal dealt with this evidence at paras 45-
      47 as follows:

           "45.  A letter from Ms CM  of  []  ,  is  to  be  found  in  the
                 appellant's bundle which records that the author has  known
                 the appellant for more that 30 years, having  grown  up  in
                 the  same  environment.   That  would  be  principally   in
                 Jamaica.   The  letter  recording  that  the  appellant  is
                 caring, trustworthy and totally committed to his family and
                 that he played a huge part in the upbringing  of  his  son.
                 It is further  recorded  that  the  appellant  is  "somehow
                 family" as he is related to the author's daughter.

             46. A letter from OS  of  []  within  the  appellant's  bundle,
                 records that the appellant  is  a  paternal  uncle  of  the
                 author who cares deeply for his family, especially his son.
                  That letter attributes the appellant's surname to his  son
                 rather than his mother's surname.  Whether that  record  is
                 an error or whether  the  author  resident  in  London  has
                 little knowledge of the appellant's son is unclear.

             47. That two such letters seeking to  support  the  appellant's
                 relationship with his  son,  in  very  similar  layout  and
                 identical typescript, had been obtained  and  submitted  to
                 the appellant's legal representatives for submission in the
                 appellant's bundle, taken together with a like letter  from
                 [] Pre-School, indicates a clear awareness on the  part  of
                 the appellant's  legal  representative's  of  the  need  to
                 supply supporting evidence in respect  of  the  appellant's
                 established family life in the UK."

  29. The Tribunal also referred to the evidence from the pre-school at para
      34 as follows:

           "34.  In the appellant's appeal bundle is to be found a copy  of
                 a document dated 28 June 2013 under the  signature  of  the
                 manager  of  {}  Pre-School,  operative  on  Tuesdays   and
                 Thursdays of each week.  That  document  records  that  the
                 appellant has played an active role in collecting  his  son
                 from  pre-school.   There  is  no  indication  as  to   the
                 frequency or over which period the appellant has  collected
                 his son from pre-school attendance."

  30. In my judgement, it was open to the Tribunal to give the  weight  that
      it did to this documentary evidence.

  31. That evidence has to be seen in the light of all the  evidence  before
      the Tribunal.  The appellant's own evidence about the contact with his
      son was not wholly satisfactory.  At paras  43-44  the  Tribunal  said
      this:

           "43.  The appellant has recorded in his  response  questionnaire
                 that he was visited every month whilst in  custody  by  his
                 son and Ms KJF.  The appellant's written statement  records
                 that he was visited in custody by his son brought by Ms KJF
                 on "a number of occasions".  That would have been during  a
                 period of eight months spent in custody.  In  evidence  the
                 appellant said that whilst in custody he was visited  on  a
                 monthly basis by his son; together with his  son's  mother,
                 grandfather and aunt.  There is no independent evidence  of
                 any such visits placed before us.  We take judicial  notice
                 that there would exist a formal record of such visits which
                 could have  been  placed  before  us  in  support  of  that
                 assertion.  No independent evidence  of  such  contact  has
                 been submitted.

           44.   We further note that in  the  response  questionnaire  the
                 appellant had inconsistently recorded that the  child  JLSF
                 had no grandparents or aunts residing in the UK."

  32. The evidence was, therefore,  that  the  appellant  lived  in  Bristol
      whilst his son lived with KJF in Marlow.   The  Tribunal  was  clearly
      mindful of the need to have regard to JLSF's "best  interests"  as  "a
      primary consideration".  The Tribunal expressly stated so at  para  24
      and again, correctly directed itself as to  the  importance  of  those
      interests at paras 55 and 60.   The  Tribunal  gave  its  reasons  and
      reached its finding  in  relation  to  the  relationship  between  the
      appellant and his son at paras 56-58 as follows:

           "56.  There is very little independent evidence placed before us
                 supporting the Article 8 rights asserted to  exist  by  the
                 appellant between his son and with his son's  mother.   The
                 appellant has been represented from a least 10 May 2013  by
                 Hoole & Co., solicitors of Bristol, which  firm  specialise
                 in immigration law.  The requirement for  and  significance
                 of probative evidence will have been fully  appreciated  by
                 those representatives.  Whilst the very fact  of  paternity
                 may give rise to de facto family life  and  to  exercisable
                 rights under Article 8 we record doubt that  the  appellant
                 has been exercising any significant or  important  parental
                 responsibility  giving  rise   to   any   relationship   of
                 meaningful depth in respect of his son.

             57. JLSF has, as above noted, commenced  pre-school  attendance
                 twice a week and will be starting to develop elements of  a
                 private life outside the  family  unit  comprising  of  his
                 mother.  There is no suggestion that he or Ms KJF could  or
                 would be required to accompany the appellant if returned to
                 Jamaica.  The appellant has never lived with those  parties
                 together as a family unit.  There  is  no  suggestion  that
                 those parties would travel to Jamaica to  reside  of  their
                 own free will.  The child's best interests  are  served  by
                 remaining living with his mother  who  has  cared  for  him
                 since birth in the family  unit  and  in  the  surroundings
                 which are familiar to and secure for him.  JLSF will remain
                 in education and develop and progress within the society in
                 which he has spent his early formative years.

             58. The removal of the appellant would effectively bring to  an
                 end any meaningful family life with his son.   We  are  not
                 persuaded that any elements of family life  exists  between
                 the appellant and Ms KJF and  find  that  the  relationship
                 demonstrated to exist between the appellant  and   JLSF  is
                 not one which could be described  as  particularly  strong.
                 The  appellant  accepted  in  cross-examination  that   the
                 parties had never lived together  as  a  family  unit.   He
                 accepted that JLSF had been cared for  since  birth  by  Ms
                 KJF.  We do not accept that the  appellant  has  played  an
                 important role  in  the  upbringing  of  his  son.   He  is
                 essentially an absent father.  We bear in mind that as JLSF
                 grows he might wish to develop family ties with his natural
                 father.  Such prospect of meaningful development  would  be
                 diminished by the appellant's deportation although there is
                 the prospect of future contact through the usual  means  of
                 international communication, both visual, oral and written,
                 and the prospect of international travel to Jamaica as JLSF
                 reaches adulthood."

  33. As Mr Richards submitted, the Tribunal did consider all the  available
      evidence including the faxed letter from KJF.  The  Tribunal  referred
      to the documentary evidence relied upon and  the  evidence  concerning
      visits by the appellant's son to him whilst in prison  and  subsequent
      visits by the  appellant  to  his  son  following  his  release.   The
      reasoning of the Tribunal is  clear.   It  did  not  accept  that  the
      evidence established a "particularly strong" relationship between  the
      appellant and his son.  Despite Ms Grubb's sustained attack  upon  the
      Tribunal's reasons and, she said, absence of  findings,  the  Tribunal
      has, in my judgement identified the relevant evidence;  given  reasons
      for accepting or not accepting parts of that evidence and has  arrived
      at clear findings on the  nature  of  the  relationships  between  the
      appellant and his son and KJF.

  34. For these reasons, I reject Ms Grubb's submissions that  the  Tribunal
      erred in law in reaching its finding in relation to the nature of  the
      relationship between the appellant and his son and KJF.

  35. Finally, Ms Grubb submitted that the Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  in
      finding  the  appellant's  deportation  to  be  proportionate.   As  I
      understood her submissions, she relied  upon  Sanade  [2012]  UKUT  48
      (IAC) and submitted that the Tribunal had failed to have proper regard
      to the fact that KJF and the appellant's son  were  British  citizens.
      Ms Grubb, in her skeleton argument, submitted that  the  Tribunal  had
      failed   to   "strike   the   appropriate   balance"   in    assessing
      proportionality "given the low risk of reoffending".  In addition, she
      submitted, that the Tribunal had failed to have regard  to  two  cases
      relied upon before it where individual's succeeded  in  their  appeals
      where the level of offending was "far less serious" than that  of  the
      appellant, namely Omotunde [2011] UKUT 00247 (IAC) and  Peart  v  SSHD
      [2012] EWCA Civ 568.

  36. This submission is doomed to failure.  The Tribunal correctly directed
      itself at paras 62, 65 and 67 in relation to the  public  interest  in
      play in a deportation appeal, in particular in one concerned with  the
      automatic deportation provisions in the  UK  Borders  Act  2007.   The
      Tribunal set out the headnote in Masih [2012] UKUT 0046 (IAC)  at  62;
      referred to the importance of the public interest in carrying out  the
      balancing exercise inherent in deportation proceedings set out in  the
      Court of Appeal's judgements in JO (Uganda) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ  10
      and KB (Trinidad and Tobago) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 11 at para  65  of
      its determination.  Then, at para 67, it referred to the  more  recent
      (and consistent) Court of Appeal authority in AM v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
      Civ 1634.

  37. At para 63 the Tribunal said this about the appellant's  two  offences
      in the light of the sentencing Judge's remarks:

           "63.  We have noted the learned  judges  sentencing  remarks  in
                 respect of the two offences relating to the supply of Class
                 A drugs and the reduction in the sentence  imposed  in  the
                 consequence of mitigation and guilty pleas.  Drugs offences
                 are considered to be particularly serious  offences  within
                 the European deportation case law."

  38. At para 68, the Tribunal added this  (entirely  correctly)  about  the
      public interest:

           "68.  We take judicial notice that the supply of Class  A  drugs
                 can have a deleterious  effect  upon  both  users  who  may
                 become addicted to such use and to society at large,  often
                 encouraging criminal activity to fund such  unlawful  habit
                 and use."

  39. At para 52, the  Tribunal quoted the Offender Manager Report dated  16
      June 2012 which stated that the future risk of the  appellant  causing
      serious harm to the public was "low".  Clearly the Tribunal  had  that
      in mind when assessing the weight  to  be  given  to  the  appellant's
      offending when weighed against the interference with the  family  life
      established with his son.  In  concluding  that  the  public  interest
      outweighed the interference with family life, the  Tribunal  expressly
      noted the "best interests" of the appellant's son and, as it stated in
      para 58, the  appellant's  deportation  would  effectively  bring  any
      "meaningful family life" to an end.

  40. The Tribunal correctly directed itself as to  the  balancing  exercise
      and the need to strike a fair balance between the public interest  and
      the individual's  rights.   It  set  out  at  length  (correctly)  the
      importance to be given to  the  public  interest  in  the  context  of
      deportation for foreign criminals falling within the  UK  Borders  Act
      2007.  The Tribunal fully took into account the appellant's offending,
      namely his conviction for two offences of possession  with  intent  to
      supply Class A drugs for which he received two concurrent sentences of
      eighteen months imprisonment.  That sentence  took  into  account  the
      circumstances of the appellant's  offending,  including  his  previous
      lack of  convictions.   The  Tribunal  properly  gave  weight  to  the
      sentencing remarks of the Crown Court Judge and the factors taken into
      account when imposing those sentences.  The appellant's offending  was
      undoubtedly serious.  In  my  judgement,  the  Tribunal  was  properly
      entitled to conclude that, even though deportation  would  effectively
      end any meaningful family life between the appellant and his son,  the
      public interest represented by the  appellant's  offending  outweighed
      that   interference   and   so   the   appellant's   deportation   was
      proportionate.

  41. Ms Grubb's reliance, by analogy, on the outcome in other cases  cannot
      establish an error of law in the Tribunal's approach.  It is axiomatic
      that each case, involving the balancing of the public interest against
      the Art 8 rights of an individual and others,  depends  upon  its  own
      facts.  Putting it at its highest, even if the  facts  were  identical
      (which they are not), reliance upon Omotunde and Peart amounts  to  no
      more than a submission that the Tribunal could have made  a  different
      decision.  All would  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  family  life
      established on the evidence in each case and the particular  offending
      of the deportee. In relation to Omotunde, it suffices to note what was
      pointed out by the Tribunal at [38] of its  determination  in  finding
      that deportation would not be proportionate.  There the  Tribunal,  in
      allowing the appeal, said:

           "We note that the appellant has not been convicted of an offence
           of serious intentional violence or  sexual  misconduct;  nor  is
           this an offence of importing or dealing  in  Class  A  drugs  or
           people trafficking where  deportation  as  a  measure  to  deter
           others may have particular efficacy".

      Of course, in this appeal the appellant  was  convicted  of  two  such
offences.

  42. Peart did involve a conviction for possession with  intent  to  supply
      Class A drugs for which that individual was sentenced to thirty months
      imprisonment following a plea of guilty.  However, the Court of Appeal
      did not  decide  that  the  public  interest  did  not  outweigh  that
      individual's Article 8 rights.  Rather, the Court of Appeal  concluded
      that the Judge, in concluding that it did outweigh his Art  8  rights,
      had failed properly to carry out the balancing  exercise  inherent  in
      proportionality.  The appeal was remitted to the Upper Tribunal for  a
      fresh determination of that issue.  Peart, therefore, tells us nothing
      about the correct outcome  on  the  facts.  The  eventual  outcome  is
      unknown.

  43. For these reasons, I reject Ms Grubb's submissions that the First-tier
      Tribunal was not entitled to find on all the evidence before  it  that
      the appellant's deportation was proportionate.

Decision

  44. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal under Article 8 did not involve the making of an error of  law.
      Its decision stands.

  45. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
