
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01870/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On  13 January 2016                  |On 5 February 2016                   |


                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           DWIGHT ST AUBURN PORTER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, HUMD sols
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, HOPO.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Mensah
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 14 July 2015. The appellant had
    been convicted of supplying a controlled Class A drug and sentenced  to
    2 years and 4 months imprisonment on 24 June 2014  following  which  he
    was served with a notice  of  liability  to  automatic  deportation.  A
    deportation order was signed on 23 September 2014.

 2. Judge Mensah dismissed his appeal.

 3. The appellant challenged her decision mainly on the  grounds  that  she
    had made a factual error in relation to the appellant's daughter.

 4. It is not disputed by the Secretary of State  that  the  appellant  has
    joint parental responsibility for his daughter with her aunt, since her
    mother is mentally ill and unable  to  care  for  her.  Two  grants  of
    discretionary leave have been made on that  basis.  The  judge  wrongly
    stated that, by the time that the child care proceedings were underway,
    the appellant was serving his sentence for drug offences which was  why
    she was placed in the care of her aunt. She then said that he only  had
    telephone contact with his daughter, and there had only been one visit.
    However the respondent accepts in the refusal letter that the appellant
    had cared for his daughter in her mother's absence and that contact had
    been maintained through visits and telephone calls.

 5. Mrs Pettersen accepted that the judge may have been misled by the  fact
    that at the hearing the appellant was still serving his  sentence,  and
    that she had misconstrued the evidence as to the  true  nature  of  the
    level of contact.

 6. She did not object to  the  case  being  remitted  to  the  First  tier
    Tribunal because she was without her file and unable  to  proceed  with
    the hearing today.

 7. Accordingly this appeal is to be listed before a judge  other  than  Ms
    Mensah at Bradford to be reheard with all issues at large.


Signed   [pic]    Date 4 February 2016


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
