
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA014112014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th May 2016                               |On 14th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                    [J K]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Mair of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant born on [ ] 1968 is a citizen of  Malawi.   She  came  to
    the United Kingdom in August 2015 as a student.  She  obtained  further
    leave to remain on that basis until 13th November 2012.

2.   In October 2012 she made a claim for asylum which was  refused  by  the
    respondent and further dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal,  following
    a hearing on 10th May 2013 before First-tier Tribunal Judge White.

3.   On 7th August 2013 she was convicted  in  the  magistrates'  court  for
    making false representations.  Subsequently she was  sentenced  at  the
    Liverpool Crown Court to fourteen months' imprisonment.  The respondent
    thereafter made a deportation order against the appellant which was the
    subject of appeal.  That appeal  came  for  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald on 17th November 2014.

4.   The matter now comes before me to determine whether or  not  the  Judge
    in that decision made a material error of law such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside in whole or in part.

5.   The detailed grounds seek to challenge the approach taken by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to the medical evidence as presented.  It was  also
    contended  that  the  consideration  of  human  rights   was   in   the
    circumstances inadequate.

6.   It is common  ground  that  the  appellant  has  a  number  of  medical
    problems.  She was diagnosed with diabetes in 2006 and HIV diagnosed in
    September 2013.  She was receiving a complex compliment  of  prescribed
    drugs which included darunavir, ritonavir and trovada.  In addition  to
    these physical problems the appellant also  has  a  number  of  medical
    difficulties.  It was argued before the Tribunal that those conditions,
    whether separately or in combination, served to make a return to Malawi
    untenable having regard to Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the 1950  Convention.
    The Judge did not agree with that submission and in a detailed decision
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all matters.

7.   Challenge is made to that decision essentially on the  basis  that  the
    Judge did not properly assess the medical evidence  nor  give  to  that
    medical evidence the weight which it deserved.

8.   There were a number of medical reports  presented,  in  particular  the
    report of Dr Michael Beadsworth of 14th July 2014 and  a  supplementary
    report 10th November 2014.  There was also  produced  a  report  of  Dr
    Ghosh of 10th October 2014 speaking as to the mental condition  of  the
    appellant.  In response to those documents the respondent  relied  upon
    country of origin information research with  such  reports  dated  29th
    January 2013, 16th June 2014, 21st November 2013, 8th November 2013 and
    20th February 2014.

9.    Dr  Beadsworth  described  in  his  report  his  experience  with  the
    condition of HIV.  The current role as at the time of the  hearing  was
    in the management of both inpatient and outpatient  HIV  patients.   Of
    particular relevance was that in his registrar training he had  studied
    HIV and  another  disease  in  Malawi  and  had  significant  practical
    experience in that country.

10.  He first had direct dealings  with  the  appellant  on  3rd  June  2014
    shortly after she had been released  from  prison  and  was  in  hostel
    accommodation in  Liverpool.   She  had  been  diagnosed  with  HIV  in
    September 2013 and put onto antiretroviral  therapy.   Her  lowest  CD4
    count had been 231 in September 2013 but at the time of the report  had
    increased to 499.  It is his view that her  CD4  count  was  still  not
    within normal range and would require close monitoring.

11.  At the time  of  the  examination  the  appellant  also  had  confirmed
    tuberculosis and was receiving a six months course of anti-tuberculosis
    therapy in the form of isoniazid.

12.  Further she had been diagnosed with type 2 insulin treated diabetes  in
    2006.  The diabetes remained  currently  poorly  controlled.   She  was
    referred to the Regional Diabetic Team within the Royal Liverpool.

13.  Finally she had depression which was associated with suicidal  ideation
    whilst in prison.  Again it was his view that that health has not  been
    stabilised although she was receiving  input  from  the  mental  health
    teams in Merseyside.

14.  Dr Beadsworth spoke of  the  management  of  these  problems  as  being
    problematic.  The HIV and the drugs used to control it  could  increase
    the risk of complications affecting her diabetes  including  ischaemic,
    cerebrovascular events and renal failure.  Though the HIV was  not  yet
    controlled there were clear signs that the  antiretroviral  regime  was
    working which had led to an improvement in her immune system.

15.  Although the doctor did not indicate when  he  had  last  had  dealings
    with Malawi, he did seek to express comments as to the availability  of
    medical and drug management for the appellant were she to return.   HIV
    drugs had been available since 2004/2005  but  the  first  line  regime
    available in Malawi would not be appropriate for  her  because  of  the
    inability to switch her over to nevirapine because of her CD4 count and
    the risk of hypersensitivity reaction.  It is  necessary  therefore  to
    maintain her on a protease inhibitor.  The  availability  of  darunavir
    remains problematic.  Kaletra  (another  protease  inhibitor)  is  more
    widely available but this is associated with a significant side effect.
     Reference was also made to there being large and expanding clinics for
    antiretrovirals in Malawi but that it was not possible to  monitor  CD4
    counts and viral loads within the public sector.

16.  As to diabetics clinics  in  Malawi  there  was  availability  of  oral
    agents and insulins.  It was his suggestion however that she should  be
    fully assessed, managed and stabilised by specialist teams  in  the  UK
    before any consideration of treatment elsewhere.

17.  Dr Beadsworth also ventured into the mental health area  and  concluded
    that essentially the appellant should have  further  treatment  in  the
    United Kingdom to stabilise her condition and that until such was done,
    deportation was inappropriate.

18.  The further  report  of  10th  November  2014  speaks  of  the  current
    instability of her diabetes, a number of complications  which  must  be
    monitored, otherwise blindness could  ensue.   He  said  that  although
    diabetic  services  are  available  in   Malawi   the   management   of
    complications  of  diabetes  such  as  described  were  not  available.
    Significantly the comment was made that the control of her diabetes had
    already been problematic in the United Kingdom and  that  she  now  has
    some stability at the Royal Liverpool University.

19.  The view of Dr Beadsworth is  if  she  were  deported  the  systems  of
    management will fall apart  and  complications  of  diabetes  including
    blindness, renal failure, vascular disease and nerve damage and  stroke
    could result.

20.  The Judge dealt with those reports in some detail at paragraphs  28  to
    38 of  the  determination.   The  Judge  correctly  identified  that  a
    significant  feature  of  the  report  was  in  connection   with   his
    experiences in Malawi.  It is  from  far  clear  to  what  extent  that
    knowledge was current and indeed on what basis the comments as  to  the
    current  availability  of  treatment  were  based.   It  was  noted  in
    particular that Dr Beadsworth had commented only on what was  available
    within the public sector in Malawi making no comment whatsoever as what
    might be available within the private sector.

21.  It is to be borne in mind of course that the comments about the  report
    are in the light of the evidence adduced on behalf of  the  respondent,
    that  antiretroviral  drugs  were  available  in  Malawi  and  of   the
    submissions made that treatment for  the  appellant  was  available  in
    Malawi albeit possibly not to the same extent.   The  Judge  felt  that
    greater weight could have been given to the report had  the  author  of
    the report attended or had there  been  a  little  more  basis  to  the
    comments that were made.

22.  Miss Mair, who represents the appellant, invites me  to  find  that  it
    was wholly inappropriate for the Judge to make the comments  that  were
    made particularly in discounting the evidence of the doctor  by  reason
    of the non-appearance of that doctor.  She submits that had  the  Judge
    been concerned about the non-appearance of Dr  Beadsworth,  and  indeed
    for that matter Dr Ghosh, there should have been an adjournment of  the
     matter in order that they appear to clarify the concerns that had been
    expressed.  She submits that it was fundamentally unfair of  the  Judge
    to make the comments which were made.

23.  It seems to me, however, that the comments of the Judge should be  seen
    in the overall context of the hearing, namely that it  was  clearly  on
    the basis of the complicated  physical  and  mental  condition  of  the
    appellant focused upon whether her return would infringe her Article 2,
    3 and 8 rights.  It seems to me that the burden does rest largely  upon
    those acting on behalf of the appellant  to  produce  the  evidence  to
    substantiate  that  proposition,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence  presented  by  the  respondent  that  treatment   for   those
    conditions was available in Malawi.  It was  fundamental  to  a  proper
    assessment of the weight to be given to an expert that the  expert  set
    out in clear terms the basis  of  his  or  her  current  knowledge  and
    experience.  It was far  from  clear  how  long  ago  it  was  that  Dr
    Beadsworth was in Malawi and indeed what enquiries  or  connections  he
    maintained with the systems there.

24.  Miss Mair invites  me  to  find  that  on  one  particular  aspect  the
    evidence of Dr Beadsworth was crucial and that related to  the  absence
    of the drug darunavir.  She invited my attention to the COI  Report  of
    20th February 2014 to be found at pages 38 to 39 of the  bundle.   That
    confirmed that truvada and ritonavir were available but not  darunavir.
    That was significant  in  the  overall  assessment  and  little  weight
    seemingly had been given to the absence of that drug by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It is indeed that very point which illustrates as I so
    find the difficulty in the evidence that was presented on behalf of the
    appellant because it was the evidence of Dr  Beadsworth  that  although
    that inhibitor was not available,  kaletra  was.   There  has  been  no
    analysis however as to whether or not that was a  drug  inhibitor  that
    could have been used.  Article 3 is not engaged simply by there being a
    less satisfactory system  of  welfare  in  the  country  to  which  the
    appellant is to be returned.  It is often the case that  certain  drugs
    that would be most desirable to use  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  not
    available elsewhere but other drugs are.  There  is  no  analysis  that
    kaletra would not have been a suitable drug and no indication as to the
    nature of the significant side effect which is spoken about.

25.  Dr Beadsworth has talked about the absence  of  any  monitoring  of  CD
    count of viral load, which is in the contrast to what is  contained  in
    the Country of Information Report that such count testing is  available
    and the viral load monitoring is also available but samples are sent to
    South  Africa  for  analysis.   Clearly  therefore  the  nature  of  Dr
    Beadsworth's experience is of importance in that context.

26.  Dr Beadsworth talks about the availability of psychiatric  services  in
    Malawi, indicating that there are some services available but they  are
    not comprehensive.  Once again there is no indication that that is  his
    field as an HIV specialist nor indeed what experience he has  in  order
    to justify those comments.  It seems to me  and  I  so  find  that  the
    comments made by the Judge were properly open to be  made  in  all  the
    circumstances.  The Judge was facing a difficult  task  of  determining
    how the combination of physical and mental illness  impacted  upon  the
    appellant in the United Kingdom and how that would be effected upon her
    return.  Essentially the comment by Dr Beadsworth was  that  with  some
    care her condition was improving, but gave  very  little  practical  or
    informative illustration as to the nature of the risk  that  she  would
    run without certain drugs in Malawi other than the  potential  loss  of
    her eyesight.  The  other  Judge  was  even  less  impressed  with  the
    evidence of Dr Ghosh describing the report as  "sloppy".   That  report
    can be seen at pages 52 to 60 of the appellant's report.  Much  of  the
    report is taken up with a  description  by  the  appellant  as  to  her
    experiences and her problems.  It sets out her history of diabetes  and
    it is clear that it is an illness suffered by many of her family.   She
    speaks of having been diagnosed with HIV in  September  2013  and  with
    tuberculosis while she was in prison.  She spoke of  her  release  from
    prison on 24th May 2004.  The first four pages of the  report  consists
    essentially of what the appellant had to say.

27.  It is not entirely clear when  she  was  seen  by  Dr  Ghosh,  as  that
    particular date is nowhere stated in the report, but clearly it was  of
    a time subsequent to her release from prison in 2014.  A description of
    the mental state is largely recorded through the words of the appellant
    who spoke of obtaining medication for her depression and  her  feelings
    of unworthiness because of the way that her two partners  had  "cheated
    on her".  She spoke of her helplessness and hopelessness  and  feelings
    of despair.  Significantly there was this passage:

         "She admitted to suicidal ruminations.  She told me, however,  that
         as long as she was seen  by  the  doctors  and  nurses,  she  would
         continue to cooperate with them fully.  She told me  with  a  great
         deal of pride that she had never missed a single appointment,  both
         in terms of a  need  for  her  physical  illness  or  in  terms  of
         psychological  therapy  including  counselling  sessions  with  the
         Probation Services.


         [JK]  told  me  that  she  does  have  suicidal  thoughts  and  she
         constantly ruminates about her life.  She  told  me  that  she  was
         aware that the Home Office had talked about her returning to Malawi
         to die with dignity and she told me that she did intend to die with
         dignity but in this country.


         She told me that she was aware that there was a choice,  either  of
         going back to Malawi or to kill herself while she was  in  the  UK.
         She told me that she did not feel that she would  be  able  to  die
         with dignity if she returned to Malawi after seeing  the  suffering
         that her father was put  through  because  they  could  not  access
         adequate medication for him."


28.  The diagnosis was  fairly  brief  in  its  terms,  that  the  appellant
    suffered from  a  major  depressive  disorder.   There  were  recurrent
    thoughts of death or suicidal ideation and plans as well  as  attempts.
    It is perhaps to somewhat exaggerate what had actually  been  recounted
    to  the  author  of  the  passage  to  which  I  have  made  reference.
    Thereafter there follows a more general discussion as to  what  may  be
    the symptoms or the consequences of having a major depressive disorder,
    the author commenting "frequently there are thoughts of death, suicidal
    ideations or suicidal attempts".  Again this  is  somewhat  generalised
    having regard to the situation of the appellant and what  was  said  to
    the doctor.  One comment is that the management of the general  medical
    condition is  complex  and  that  the  prognosis  of  major  depressive
    disorders are adversely affected by chronic medical conditions.

29.  Dr Ghosh concludes by the opinion  that  the  appellant  has  attempted
    suicide in the past, is generally recognised to be  a  serious  suicide
    risk by all professionals  and  remains  at  a  very  serious  risk  of
    committing suicide particularly if forced to  return  to  Malawi.   The
    Judge  deals  with  that  evidence  at  paragraphs  39  to  50  of  the
    determination,  in  which  passages  from  the  report  are  set   out,
    particularly those relating to his comments as to the likelihood of the
    appellant committing suicide.  The point is made that there  is  little
    indication as to when the expert saw the appellant and for how long  or
    indeed what documents were considered in the preparation of the report.
     The point was made again that the prognosis was based almost  entirely
    upon what was said to the  doctor.   The  Judge  noted  also  that  the
    psychiatrist seemed not to have practised for some five years according
    to her report.

30.  The psychiatrist had commented towards the end of the report  that  the
    appellant was likely to commit suicide if  she  is  informed  that  her
    asylum application has failed.  The Judge  points  out  that  that  had
    happened a long time ago with no attempt at her  life  at  that  stage.
    Once again Miss Mair invited to find that it was  fundamentally  unfair
    of the Judge to hold it against Dr Ghosh that he was not present at the
    hearing.  Again I find that it was  properly  open  for  the  Judge  to
    comment on that matter given the very little detailed analysis  in  the
    report which was simply generalised  comments  arising  from  what  the
    appellant had to say about her  condition  with  very  little  detailed
    analysis of the issues.  The Judge does not  discount  the  report  but
    understandably gives it less weight than might have otherwise been  the
    case.  Contained within the appellant's  original  bundle,  as  it  was
    before the Tribunal, are a  number  of  medical  reports.   I  note  in
    particular one dated 26th March 2014 from Dr Musgrove who was a general
    practitioner and  that  was  obviously  written  at  a  time  when  the
    appellant was in Styal Prison.  It was noted  her  HIV,  diabetes,  low
    mood and suicidal thoughts, latent TB and to some extent her  low  mood
    was as a result of being  bullied  by  other  residents  and  suffering
    racist comments.  The recommendation of the doctor was that she  should
    not be in custody.  There was comment from Vicky Corris of the  Greater
    Manchester West NHS that the appellant was establishing  a  therapeutic
    relationship with the mental health team  and  was  currently  able  to
    manage her thoughts around suicidal ideation  because  of  the  support
    which she received.   There  was  comment  from  Jill  Delaney  an  HIV
    specialist nurse of The Pennine Acute Hospitals NHS in a letter of 24th
    April 2014 speaking of previous mental health diagnosis  of  adjustment
    disorder with demoralisation and previous suicidal thoughts.   This  is
    particularly so when in custody and she was put on suicide watch by the
    prison staff.  She  had  access  to  mental  health  services  and  was
    undergoing counselling.

31.  What seems to be missing from the bundle are  more  up-to-date  medical
    reports as to what progress has been made.  The report of Dr Ghosh  was
    10th October 2014, the most recent report  of  Dr  Beadsworth  is  10th
    November 2014.

32.  It was clear from the generality of the reports that  progress,  albeit
    slow progress, was being made.

33.  No further reports, or up-to-date  reports,  have  been  submitted  and
    thus it is right that  I  judge  the  remarks  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Herwald in the context of the  reports  which  were  presented  at  the
    hearing.  The Judge was very much aware of the interaction between  the
    various conditions of the appellant and  understandably  did  not  find
    that much assistance had been given by the experts.  That seems  to  me
    to be an overall conclusion which the Judge was entitled to come to  in
    all the circumstances.

34.  The Judge directed consideration to the crucial issue at  paragraph  38
    of the determination in these terms:-

         "38. If the appellant were to succeed in respect  of  her  physical
             health  in  this  case,  then  it  would  be  because  of  the
             difficulty and complexity of the interaction between the  HIV,
             diabetes and other issues.  I am not persuaded  that  this  is
             the case.  She has had and been treated for diabetes for  many
             years.  The present treatment of HIV is  successful  and  can,
             insofar as I can tell from the information before me, continue
             in Malawi either publicly or privately.   Her  CD4  count  can
             indeed, I find, be monitored in her homeland.  I remind myself
             that on the information available to  Judge  White,  he  found
             that her physical medical condition fell well below  the  high
             threshold set out in the case N v UK.  I do not find there  to
             be such new circumstances put before me which  would  persuade
             me to depart from this finding.


         39.  I turn now to the worrying issue  of  the  appellant's  mental
             health.  The respondent dealt with this at paragraph  43  etc.
             of the  decision.   Firstly  it  reminds  me  that  there  are
             therapeutic drugs available  for  mental  health  problems  in
             Malawi  and  that  there   are   alternative   antidepressants
             available at a primary level.  The respondent  accepted  'that
             your mental health condition has been exacerbated in light  of
             your HIV diagnosis as well as duty or continued detention' but
             her case was said not to be exceptional.  The respondent  knew
             that the appellant had expressed suicidal  thoughts.   I  have
             given due regard to the case of Y (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA  Civ
             362.  The respondent was not  aware  that  the  appellant  had
             previously self-harmed, but  this  appears  to  have  been  an
             episode in 2010, according to the  appellant's  evidence  when
             she took an overdose.  No information was before me as to  how
             that came about or  how  she  was  presented  to  the  medical
             authorities, but she was treated without the need for any form
             of detention under the Mental Health Act and simply received a
             month's follow-up in  the  community,  according  to  her  own
             evidence."

    The Judge recognised it was a sad case but was not  persuaded,  looking
    at the conditions as a whole, that they were  so  exceptional  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 and Article 3 that the appeal  must  be  allowed.
    The Judge looked at the wider context for the purposes of Article 8.

35.  The reality in this case is that there was evidence  before  the  Judge
    that the appellant was responding to HIV treatment and her  viral  load
    for her CD count had improved.   There  were  drugs  available  to  the
    appellant, particularly two that she was currently using.  There was no
    indication in clear terms as to what was  the  consequence  to  her  if
    darunavir was not used.  He noted only one suicide attempt for whatever
    reason was not clear and found that the  psychiatrist  had  exaggerated
    that issue.  In any event he had considered the  leading  case  on  the
    subject.  There seemed to be some monitoring of her diabetes.

36.  As the Judge recognised, for matters to succeed in relation to  Article
    3 there has to be a really dire situation  facing  the  appellant  upon
    return as set out in the decision in  D.   The  Court  of  Appeal  have
    recently in the case of GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40
    considered with some care this very issue of return for those who  have
    serious conditions.  It considered the case of six individuals, most of
    whom were suffering from  major  kidney  diseases  and  one  from  HIV,
    looking at the treatment that  was  available  and  the  likelihood  of
    treatment in the country of removal.  The case of N was  considered  as
    also was the case of D.  Although it could be said  that  the  physical
    conditions of all those that came  before  the  Court  of  Appeal  were
    serious and likely to  deteriorate  without  further  treatment  or  if
    removed, it was not considered such as to meet the  high  threshold  of
    Article 3.  I find therefore that even if the medical reports had  been
    accepted at face value without criticism there  had  been  insufficient
    evidence to lead to the conclusion that removal to Malawi would in  the
    circumstances be an infringement of Article 3.

37.  I can find no material error of law in the approach taken by the  Judge
    and, in any event, on the quality of  the  evidence  as  presented  the
    appellant could not have succeeded under Article 3.  The assessment  of
    Article 8 is in the circumstances one which was properly conducted  and
    correctly decided upon.

38.  In the circumstances therefore  the  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Herwald is dismissed.  The  decision  therefore  stands  and  the
    appellant's appeal under Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR remains dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 14 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

