

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
DA/01068/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22 January 2018                        |  On 22 February 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                      S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C. Soltani, instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cope) promulgated on the 8th  June  2017  in
    which the Tribunal dismissed the appeal of S against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse to revoke a deportation order  against
    him under Section 32(5) (of the UK Borders Act 2007).

 2. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or indirectly affect him or members of
    his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 3. The background to  the  appeal  is  set  out  in  the  papers  and  the
    determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  also  in  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State dated 23rd May 2014.  The Appellant is
    a national of Gambia. He entered the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in
    2002.  He  subsequently  met  a  British  citizen  and  a  relationship
    developed between them. She had children from a previous  relationship.
    They married and he returned to Gambia to obtain entry clearance  as  a
    spouse in 2004.  They  had  a  child  in  2005.  Later  that  year  the
    relationship broke down but he was granted  leave  to  remain  until  3
    September 2006. He had a brief relationship with  another  woman  which
    led to the birth of their child in 2006. He then met had a relationship
    with another woman L, who had a child from a previous relationship.  He
    married her following his divorce and he was granted entry clearance in
    2007. Following this he was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2009.
    He subsequently separated from L.

 4. On 3 June 2010 he was arrested for being in possession of cocaine  with
    intent to supply and pleaded guilty to the offence. He was committed to
    the Crown Court sentence and on 22 July 2010 he was given a sentence of
    12 months imprisonment. The judge's sentencing remarks are set  out  in
    the determination of Mr Ockelton  VP  and  UT  Judge  Dawson  in  their
    decision of the 13th March 2012 exhibited in the Respondent's bundle at
    paragraph 5.

 5. There is a long history of litigation in respect of the Appellant.

 6.  The Respondent made a deportation order on 23 December  2010  pursuant
    to Section 32 (5) of UK Borders Act 2007 following his conviction.  The
    Appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by
    the First-tier Tribunal panel on 25 February 2011. The panel  dismissed
    his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 8 March 2011. There is a copy of that  decision  in  the
    Respondent's  bundle  and  is  a  matter   of   record.   The   factual
    circumstances in relation to his family life are not relevant  for  the
    purposes  of  these  current  proceedings  due  to  a  change  in   his
    circumstances and the nature of family life now advanced.

 7. In or about September 2011 the Appellant met W and began a relationship
    with her in November. She is a British citizen  who  has  two  children
    from a previous relationship.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal panel and the appeal was  heard  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    panel on 13 January 2012. In a determination promulgated  on  13  March
    2012 they dismissed his appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    make a deportation order. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal and this was refused. The Appellant remained in the
    United Kingdom and did not leave pursuant to the deportation order.

 9.  The Appellant was detained in 2013 and  further  representations  were
    made  on  his  behalf  from  two  firms   of   solicitors   and   those
    representations were treated by the Respondent  as  an  application  to
    revoke the deportation order. He was subsequently granted  bail  in  or
    about 2013 and went to live with his partner W.  They had a  child,  A,
    born in 2013.

10. An application to revoke the  deportation  order  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent in the decision of 23 May 2014. The Appellant appealed  that
    decision and it was heard by  another  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  who
    dismissed the appeal in a decision dated 2 September 2014.

11. Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  and  the
    substantive appeal was heard on 18 October  2016.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    found that there had been an error of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal who had applied  the  wrong  Rules  and  the  appeal  was
    allowed to the extent of it being remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to be heard again.

12. Thus the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal again on  28  April
    2017. In a determination promulgated on 8  June  2017,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

13.  The Appellant sought  to  appeal  that  decision  and  permission  was
    refused on the 4th July 2017 but on renewal was  granted  by  UT  Judge
    Perkins on the 15th September  2017 for the following reasons: -

    "There are so many statements of law and self  directions  of  arguable
    relevance in the  decision  and  reasons  that  it  needs  to  be  read
    carefully to  ensure  that  the  reader  has  not  been  distracted  by
    surplusage.

    The appeal concerns an attempt to resist deportation. The judge rightly
    recognised that the Appellant's criminal record, although by  no  means
    the  most  serious,  sufficiently   serious   to   attract   "automatic
    deportation" and considerable weight should be given to that.

    He also recognised that although he decided that it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the children for the Appellant to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom that  was  determinative  of  the  appeal.  However  I  do  not
    understand why, at paragraph 62 the decision,  he  was  concerned  with
    compassionate circumstances "over and above" as identified  in  section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Appellant
    had not been sentenced to 4 years or  more  imprisonment.  Arguably  he
    misdirected himself. I give permission on each ground."

14. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal I heard submissions from  each
    of the advocates and took into account the written grounds advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant but also  a  Rule  24  response  in  which  the
    Secretary of State responded to the  Appellant's  grounds.  It  is  not
    necessary to set out the submissions of each of the parties as they are
    set out in the record of proceedings and I will set  out  the  relevant
    aspects of those submissions when dealing with the grounds advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant and my consideration of those issues.

The legal framework

15. The relevant statutory background is set out as follows:

    Revocation of a deportation order

    The factors to be taken into account  by  the  Respondent  in  deciding
    whether or not a deportation order should be revoked  are  set  out  in
    Part 13 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395), the relevant parts of  which
    currently read:-


           A362. Where Article 8 is raised the context of deportation under
           Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only
           succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014
           are met....
           390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will
           be considered in the light of all the circumstances including
           the following:


                 (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
                 (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
                 (iii) the interests of the community, including the
                 maintenance of an effective immigration control;
                 (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any
                 compassionate circumstances.
           390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
           not, it will only be in Exceptional circumstances that the
           public interest in maintaining the deportation order will be
           outweighed by other factors.
           ...
           Deportation and Article 8
           A398. These rules apply where:
                 ...
                 (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
                 against him to be revoked.
           398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
           Rights Convention, and
           ...
           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because they have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months...
                       the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will
                       consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
                       if it does not, the public interest in deportation
                       will only be outweighed by other factors where there
                       are very compelling circumstances over and above
                       those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
           399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)
           applies if
           -
                 (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                 relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                 in the UK, and
                       (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                       (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for
                       at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date
                       of the immigration decision; and in either case
                       (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                       the country to which the person is to be deported;
                       and
                       (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                       in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                       or
                 (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship
                 with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or
                 settled in the UK, and
                       (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the
                       person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their
                       immigration status was not precarious; and
                       (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                       live in the country to which the person is to be
                       deported, because of compelling circumstances over
                       and above those described in paragraph EX.2. of
                       Appendix FM; and
                 (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
                 in the UK without the person who is to be deported."



16. On 28th July 2014 the Immigration Act 2014 ("the 2014 Act")  came  into
    force.  It inserted a new part 5A into the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  Sections 117A and 117D of  the  2002
    Act provide in relevant part:



17. Part 5A provides in relevant part as follows:
      "PART 5A
      ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS
      117A Application of this Part
      (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
      determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
      (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
      under Article 8, and
      (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
      Act 1998.
      (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
      must (in particular) have regard-
      (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
      (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
      considerations listed in section 117C.
      (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
      question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect
      for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).


      117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
      (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
      interest.
      (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
      of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
      seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak
      English, because persons who can speak English-
      (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.
      (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
      of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
      seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially
      independent, because such persons-
      (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
      (b) are better able to integrate into society.
      (4) Little weight should be given to-
      (a) a private life, or
      (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
      that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
      United Kingdom unlawfully.
      (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
      person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
      (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-
      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a qualifying child, and
      (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom.

    117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
           criminals

           (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                interest.

           (2)    The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation
                of the criminal.

           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the  public  interest  requires   C's   deportation   unless
                Exception E1 or Exception E2 applies.

           (4)    Exception 1 applies where -

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                    for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                    Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                    integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to
                    be deported.

           (5)    Exception E2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
                relationship with a qualifying partner,  or  a  genuine  and
                subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,
                and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child
                would be unduly harsh.

           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  four  years,  the
                public interest requires deportation unless there  are  very
                compelling circumstances, over and above those described  in
                Exceptions 1 and 2.

           (7)    The considerations in sub-Sections (1) to (6) are  to  be
                taken into account where a court or Tribunal is  considering
                a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to  the  extent
                that the reason for the decision was the offence or offences
                for which the criminal has been convicted.

    117D Interpretation of this part

           (1)    in this Part -

                "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
                Human Rights:

                "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18
                and who -

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                    period of seven years or more:

                "qualifying partner" means a partner who -

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  (within  the
                    meaning of the  Immigration  Act  1971 -  see  Sections
                    33(2A) of that Act).

           (2)    In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person -

                (a)    who is not a British citizen,

                (b)    who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                    offence, and

                (c)    who -

                    (i)    has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                        at least twelve months,

                    (ii)   has been convicted of an offence that has  caused
                        serious harm, or

                    (iii)  is a persistent offender.

18. In essence, the central issue determined by the First-tier Tribunal was
    whether or not it would be "unduly harsh" for the  Appellant's  partner
    and children to live in Gambia or whether or not it  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" for the children to remain in the UK without the person, S,  who
    is to be deported.  Thus the judge was required  to  consider  what  is
    meant by "unduly harsh" within the context of the law.

19. The correct approach relating to what is meant by "unduly harsh" within
    the context of the legislation is set out in the  following  paragraphs
    from the judgment of Laws LJ, with whom Vos and Hamblen LJ  agreed,  in
    MM (Uganda) v the SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450:

         "[22]    I turn to the interpretation of the phrase 'unduly harsh'.
              Plainly it means the same in Section 117C (5) as in Rule 399.
              'Unduly harsh' is an  ordinary  English  expression.   As  so
             often, its meaning is coloured by  its  context.   Authorities
             hardly  needed  for  such  a  proposition  but  it  is  anyway
             provided, for example by VIA  Rail  Calendar  [2000]  193  DLR
             (4th) 357 at paragraphs [35] to [37].

         [23]     The  context  in  these  cases  invites  emphasis  on  two
             factors, (1) the public interest in  the  removal  of  foreign
             criminals and (2) the need for a proportionate  assessment  of
             any interference with Article 8 rights.  In my judgment,  with
             respect, the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors.  The first of  them,  the  public
             interest in the removal of  foreign  criminals,  is  expressly
             vouched by parliament in Section 117C (1).  Section  117C  (2)
             then provides (I repeat the provision for convenience):

                  'The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.'

         [24]      This  steered  the  Tribunals  and  the   court   towards
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the public interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show  the  effect  on
             his child or partner will be unduly harsh.  Any other approach
             in my judgment dislocates the 'unduly harsh'  provisions  from
             their context.  It would  mean  that  the  question  of  undue
             hardship would be decided wholly without regard to  the  force
             of the public interest in deportation in the particular  case.
             But in that case the term 'unduly' is mistaken for 'excessive'
             which imports a different idea.  What is due or undue  depends
             on all the circumstances, not merely the impact on  the  child
             or partner in the given case.  In the present context relevant
             circumstances   could   certainly   include   the   criminal's
             immigration and criminal history."

20. This decision was followed by the Court of Appeal in R (MA  (Pakistan))
    v SSHD although Elias LJ with whom King LJ  and  Sir  Stephen  Richards
    agreed, express some  doubts  about  the  introduction  of  the  public
    interest into the test of undue harshness.

21. It is therefore clear from the decision in MM (Uganda) that it  is  not
    appropriate to consider the question of "unduly harsh" solely from  the
    perspective of the impact which deportation would  be  likely  to  have
    upon the children or partner involved.

Discussion

22. Miss Soltani on behalf of the Appellant submitted that  the  judge  had
    not applied the correct legal framework at paragraph [162] and that  he
    referred  himself  to  the  wrong  test  of  whether  there  are  "very
    compelling circumstances". She submitted this only  applied  where  the
    Appellant had been sentenced to 4 years or more and this did not  apply
    in the Appellant's case as he was someone who had received  a  sentence
    of 12 months  imprisonment.  Thus  she  submitted  the  test  of  "very
    compelling circumstances" was higher than that which  applied  to  this
    Appellant, namely whether the  separation  from  him  from  his  family
    (either by way of effect upon him or upon his family) would  be  unduly
    harsh. Thus the judge applied the wrong  test  or  at  best,  had  been
    confused about the test and the threshold that he was bound to apply.

23. I have considered that submission in the  light  of  the  determination
    when read as a whole. In my  judgement,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    apply the correct legal framework and did not apply a  threshold  which
    was higher than that which was relevant to this  particular  Appellant.
    It is plain from paragraph [162] that the judge was  dealing  with  the
    alternative test, that is, whether there were  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and  2.  On  the  facts  of  this
    appeal, it was  Exception  2  that  was  in  issue.  In  the  preceding
    paragraphs to [162] the judge had  dealt  with  the  central  issue  of
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the  country
    to which the person is to be deported and whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person who is to be
    deported. I can see no confusion as to what the  correct  test  was  as
    demonstrated in the determination when it is read as a whole.

24. It is right to observe that the decision is a  comprehensive  one.  The
    judge dealt with the law in a number of paragraphs. The legal framework
    to which I have already referred were set out at paragraphs 11 - 15. He
    set out the basis of  the  appeal  at  paragraphs  23  -  38  and  then
    proceeded  to  set  out  what  he  described  as  "legal  analysis"  at
    paragraphs 39 -  55  taking  into  account  relevant  case  authorities
    including the Supreme Court's decision in Hesham Ali v SSHD[2016]  UKSC
    60. It is also right to point out that he expressly gave  consideration
    at [51) to the decision in MM (Uganda (as cited).

25. Therefore within the decision, the judge set out in summary  terms  the
    issue that he had to decide; noting that the Appellant  was  a  foreign
    criminal who had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  twelve
    months and thus the issue was whether he fell within Exceptions 1 and 2
    (see Section 117C (5) and paragraph 399(a) or (b)) and if  so,  whether
    his Article 8 claim succeeded.  This is in line with  the  decision  of
    the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v the SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60  at
    [38] where Lord Reed said this:-

         "[38]    The implication of the new Rules is  Rules  399  and  399A
             identify particular categories of case in which the  Secretary
             of State accepts that the public interest in  the  deportation
             of  the  offender   is   outweighed   under   Article   8   by
             countervailing factors.  Cases  not  covered  by  those  Rules
             (that is to say, foreign offenders who have received sentences
             of at least four years, or  who  have  received  sentences  of
             between twelve months and four  years  but  whose  private  or
             family life does not meet the requirements of  Rules  399  and
             399A) will be dealt with on the basis that great weight should
             generally be given to the public interest in  the  deportation
             of such offenders, but that it can be outweighed,  applying  a
             proportionality test, by  very  compelling  circumstances;  in
             other words, by a very strong claim indeed, as Laws LJ put  it
             in SS (Nigeria).  The countervailing  considerations  must  be
             very compelling  in  order  to  outweigh  the  general  public
             interest in the deportation of such offenders, as assessed  by
             parliament  and  the  Secretary  of  State.   The   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence indicates  relevant  factors  to  consider,  and
             Rules 399 and 399A  provide  an  indication  of  the  sort  of
             matters  which  the  Secretary  of  State  regards   as   very
             compelling.  As explained at paragraph [26]  above,  they  can
             include factors bearing on the weight of the  public  interest
             in the deportation of the particular  offender,  such  as  his
             conduct since the offence was committed, as  well  as  factors
             relating to his private or family life.  ...".

26. As to the Appellant circumstances, he recognised that by reason of  his
    sentence of 12 months imprisonment he fell into the category  described
    as "medium offender" and properly identified that consideration  should
    be given as to whether he fell within Exception 1 or 2 of  S117(5)C  of
    the 2002 Act, and if he did, the appeal succeeded.  If  not,  the  next
    stage was to consider whether there were very compelling  circumstances
    over above those which are set out in Exceptions 1 and 2 (see [43]).

27. Contrary to the submission of Miss  Soltani,  it  is  plain  from  that
    paragraph in which he cited  the  decision  of  NA  that  he  correctly
    identified Exceptions 1 and 2 and the consequences  of  not  satisfying
    them. At [45]- [46] he then again correctly identified  the  test  that
    was in issue stating as follows:

    "45. In the case of a child the Respondent considers that it has to  be
    shown that it would be unduly harsh for the child to both live  in  the
    country that it is proposed to return the applicant  or  Appellant  to,
    and for it to be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without the applicant or Appellant.

    46. In relation to a partner the Respondent takes the view that it  has
    to be shown that the relationship was formed to time when the applicant
    or Appellant was in this country lawfully and  the  immigration  status
    was not precarious; that it would be unduly harsh that partner to  live
    in the country to which deportation is proposed because  of  compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph  EX  2  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules; and that it would be unduly harsh
    for that partner to remain in the United Kingdom without the  applicant
    or Appellant."

28. At [51] he made reference to the decision in MM  Uganda  and  what  was
    meant by "unduly   harsh" in section 117C (2).

29. At [52] he returned  to  the  importance  of  the  public  interest  in
    deportation and at [53] made reference to the jurisprudence of the ECHR
    reflected in  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  it  contemplates  the
    deportation of a non-citizen parent of  British  citizen  children  who
    remain in the United Kingdom and that it can be compatible with Article
    8. At [55] he reminded himself that this  was  an  appeal  against  the
    refusal of an application to revoke an automatic deportation order. The
    purpose of this must  be  clear;  the  Appellant  is  someone  who  has
    remained in the UK after the deportation order has been  made  and  the
    appeal dismissed and it is a matter that should  be  given  significant
    weight in favour of the public interest.

30. Within the determination the judge makes it plain that the earlier test
    that he referred to  at  paragraphs  45  and  51  (relating  to  unduly
    harshness) is the test that he had to apply and then proceeded  to  set
    out the agreed factual basis upon which he was to  make  his  decision.
    That can be summarised as follows; at [64] it  was  accepted  that  the
    basis for the deportation order was his sentence received in 2010 for a
    period of imprisonment of 12 months and his  plea  of  guilty  and  the
    sentencing remarks of the judge. At [65] -[66] he set out that  it  was
    accepted that the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with his partner and his daughter A and L (his stepdaughter). Both were
    British citizens and the family lived together.  At  [67]-[69]  it  was
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  no  longer  had  any  current  parental
    relationship with a previous child. At [70] he  observed  that  was  no
    suggestion on behalf of the Appellant that  any  of  the  relationships
    with the other three women or the other five children  or  stepchildren
    formed the basis of any Article 8 claim. Thus at [71] he  set  out  the
    ultimate issue to be decided.

31. He then turned to the factual basis at paragraph [72 - 78]  whereby  he
    summarised the basis of the family life that the Appellant had  in  the
    United Kingdom, namely that of a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with his partner W, that he had a child of that relationship and had  a
    genuine subsisting relationship with W's daughter L as her stepfather.

32. At [81 - 83] the judge considered the Appellants factual basis  of  his
    private life; he been resident in the UK since  2002  (save  for  short
    periods where he returned to Gambia) he  had  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in 2009 and thus as he had lived in the United  Kingdom
    for 15 years and that he developed a private life.

33. He then went on to undertake  an  assessment  following  the  statutory
    framework of section 117A-D at paragraphs [89 - 98]. He found that both
    parties spoke English but as to financial  independence,  he  concluded
    that he was not satisfied that it been shown that  the  Appellant  with
    the rest of the family were financially independent. He found that  the
    Appellant had been living lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom  until  the
    deportation order was made in 2010 but since then he had  no  leave  to
    enter or remain and had been in the  UK  unlawfully.  Applying  section
    117B (4) (a) the 2002 Act  he placed some weight on  the  private  life
    since August 2002. He also observed that he had not worked for a period
    of nearly 7 years and that whilst they had been a number of letters  in
    the bundle none of the authors had been called to give evidence.

34. He then turned to consider the Appellant's relationship with W and when
    the relationship began and the precariousness of the Appellants  status
    (see [101 - 102]).

35. He then turned to the provisions of  section  117C  and  addressed  the
    relevant issues in relation to the Appellants factual circumstances. He
    placed weight on section 117C (1) the deportation of foreign  criminals
    is in the public interest and that the  Appellant  was  not  a  British
    citizen, he been convicted of  an  offence  which  had  resulted  in  a
    sentence in prison for at least 12 months  and  thus  fell  within  the
    definition. At paragraphs [112  -  120]  the  judge  gave  reasons  why
    Exception 1 was not met by the  Appellant  (which  related  to  private
    life). Some of those findings were relevant to the  overall  assessment
    of the Appellant's circumstances and those of his partner when  looking
    at Exception 2, in particular, that the judge found there to be no very
    significant obstacles to the Appellants reintegration to the Gambia  on
    the basis that he had strong and continuing family link there  for  the
    reasons given at [119)].

36. The judge then went on to consider Exception 2 at [122] having  already
    made reference to this earlier at paragraphs 44 and 45.

37. The judge considered the best interests of the  children  and  properly
    identified that they were a primary consideration. In  the  case  of  A
    [127] he made an uncontroversial finding that he accepted that it would
    be in the best interests of A that she stay with both of  her  parents.
    Whilst it is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  this  is
    inconsistent with a later finding made at  [132]  in  which  the  judge
    stated that the Appellants deportation "would have a serious effect  on
    family life and  the  individual  relationships  involved",  I  do  not
    consider that that there is any lack of clarity or confusion  in  those
    two separate findings.

38. I also remind myself of what  was  said  in  the  decision  of  SSHD  v
    AJ(Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCACiv 1012 at [17] where it was stated:

    "17... In many, if not most cases where this Exception  is  potentially
    engaged there will be the normal relationship  of  love  and  affection
    between parent and child  and  it  is  virtually  always  in  the  best
    interests of the child that relationship  to  continue.  If  that  were
    enough to render deportation a disproportionate interference of  family
    life, it would drain the rule of any practical significance.  It  would
    mean the deportation would constitute a  disproportionate  interference
    with private life in the ordinary  run  of  cases  where  children  are
    adverse affected and the carefully framed  conditions  in  rule  399(a)
    would be largely otiose".

39. Whilst the court was dealing with the old rules, it seems  to  me  that
    those observations are still applicable.

40. As to the best interests of L, he set out his  conclusion  that  [128].
    Contrary to Counsel's submission, that the judge failed in the decision
    to appreciate the  complex  family  situation,  it  is  plain  that  he
    considered the best interests of L with care and that he  had  observed
    that they were "complex to identify". He identified that the  Appellant
    was not her natural parent and that he had not  been  involved  in  her
    life save for the last 5 � years and that she  did  have  some  contact
    with her father, albeit from her viewpoint it  was  unsatisfactory  and
    that she had expressed the view that the Appellant was a father  figure
    to her. At [129] he took into account her age and that she was  at  the
    "very upper limit of childhood" and gave  reasons  as  to  why  he  had
    reached the conclusion that  she  had  started  to  move  towards  more
    independent living taking into account the circumstances of having left
    education, being in employment and also taking into account  L's  older
    sibling who had been living independently for a  number  of  years.  At
    [130] the judge concluded that he  was  prepared  to  accept  the  best
    interests of L were that she was to continue to have contact  with  the
    Appellant but that this "need not necessarily by  living  in  the  same
    household as him."

41. At [131] he returned again to the guidance in MM(Uganda) and the  issue
    of undue harshness.

42. I can see no tension between the judge's findings at [127] and [132] as
    submitted on behalf of  the  Appellant.  It  is  said  that  those  two
    paragraphs make the determination unclear as  to  whether  he  properly
    considered  their  best  interests.  However,  the  judge  was   simply
    observing at [132] that in most, if not all cases based on family life,
    and in view of the genuine and subsisting family life with partners and
    children, that a person's deportation would have a  serious  effect  on
    the family life and the individual relationships involved.

43. It was also submitted on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the  judges'
    assessment of undue harshness  and  the  findings  that  he  made  were
    "muddled" and that he failed to properly assess the effect upon  W  and
    the children and failed to take  into  account  a  number  of  relevant
    considerations.  I  invited  Counsel   to   identify   those   relevant
    considerations and she referred me to the grounds at paragraph 4 (e) in
    which they were summarised. For avoidance of doubt she  submitted  they
    were as follows;

               1) low risk of offending

               2) not committed further offences

               3) length of time since last offence

               4) sentencing judge's remarks

               5) the circumstances of W's other child

               6) L had no meaningful relationship with her father

               7) the judge had not considered the effect upon W's mother.

44. Mr McVeety submitted that those factors had been considered by the  FTT
    when reaching his overall conclusions and there was  no  error  of  law
    identifiable.

45.  I have considered the determination in the light  of  the  submissions
    made but I do not consider that the criticism advanced by Miss  Soltani
    is borne out by the judges' assessment of the issues.

46. The judge had earlier properly directed himself as to the  law  and  in
    accordance with the decision of MM (Uganda) and was well aware  of  the
    test that he was  to  apply.  He  then  set  out  the  children's  best
    interests and made specific findings relating to A in the light of  her
    age (nearly 4) and it was  open  to  the  judge  to  take  a  different
    approach to the best interests of L, whose needs he observed were  more
    complex given different parentage, age ( nearly 18)  and  circumstances
    (see [129]). He then set out to balance  the  relevant  considerations.
    Looking at the  factors  identified,  he  plainly  had  regard  to  the
    Appellant's offending history and the matters outlined by Counsel [133]
    including the low risk  of  reoffending  at  [133[,  that  he  had  not
    committed any further offences and the length of time that had  elapsed
    [see134]. He was entitled to balance those factors in the light of  the
    sentencing remarks of the  judge  at  [135]  and  the  public  interest
    identified. In this case it was a pre- deportation  revocation  whereby
    the Appellant had not left the United Kingdom after  dismissal  of  his
    appeal in 2011. However the judge took into account  that  his  offence
    was at the lower end of the provisions (at 135]. Thus I am satisfied at
    the judge place those factors into the balance.

47. Contrary to the submissions, the judge did consider whether it would be
    unduly harsh for the children to live  in  the  country  to  which  the
    Appellant was to be deported.  At  paragraphs  [136  -  139],  he  gave
    reasons why A would not be at risk of  harm  from  FGM.  He  took  into
    account the relationship between the half siblings L and A at [141] and
    that if A went to live with her father, L would  be  very  upset  about
    being separated from A. He found at [142] that A was a  young  age  and
    thus would be able to adapt to different culture with both parents  and
    at [143] placed weight upon her family and cultural heritage  which  he
    considered was arguably in her best interests also. At [145]  he  found
    that there was no evidence to show that A had any health or educational
    difficulties which needed to be addressed,  either  in  the  UK  or  in
    Gambia.

48. As regards L, it was accepted by the Respondent that it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her to relocate  in view of  her relationship with
    her natural father  and her length of residence in the  UK  [146]  thus
    the Respondent's case contemplated a different outcome for A and L.

49. The judge therefore considered again the circumstances having regard to
    the best interests at [128 - 130] and that the best interests of L were
    that she should continue to have contact with the  Appellant  but  that
    did not mean necessarily living in the same  household  and  thus  same
    country.

50. The judge was not immune to the difficulties of this and  at  [147]  he
    observed that L would find it emotionally difficult  if  the  Appellant
    were to leave the United Kingdom and she were to remain and  that  this
    would be "intensified" if her mother were to leave with A.  However  he
    balanced this against L's particular circumstances and  her  age.  Miss
    Soltani submitted that  the  judge  had  not  properly  considered  L's
    circumstances in accordance with the evidence. However I  do  not  find
    that is borne out by the judge's careful  assessment.  He  was  plainly
    aware of L's age and that she was in employment and the  form  of  that
    (see [148] which underpinned his finding that she had taken  her  first
    steps to independence. It was also open to him  to  find  that  in  the
    light of her  circumstances  that  any  dependency  (whether  emotional
    financial) upon the Appellant and her mother  was  likely  to  decrease
    bearing in mind his finding at [129] in which he made reference to  L's
    sibling who had been living independently for number of years and  that
    this is not a family where it could be said  that  the  children  would
    necessarily  continue  to  stay  within  the  household.  He  therefore
    concluded whilst accepted it would be unduly harsh for L to live  there
    "it is a different matter though when considering whether  it  will  be
    unduly harsh for her to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    Appellant - for  the  reasons  that  I  have  given  above  about  best
    interests, in my judgement it would not." (See [150]).

51. The judge returned to the issue of undue harshness by  considering  the
    position of W. He did not find that it would be unduly harsh for her to
    live in Gambia as he found that there would  not  be  very  significant
    difficulties faced by the couple in continuing family life  outside  of
    the UK. He noted that it  was  a  matter  of  choice  whether  W  would
    accompany her spouse abroad and made it plain that  she  would  not  be
    required to leave the United Kingdom because she was a British citizen.
    Whilst Miss Soltani submitted in reliance on ground 5  that  Parliament
    did not intend the undue harshness test to apply to the relocation of a
    British child, as Mr Mc Veety pointed out there was no  compulsion  for
    either W or their child a to leave the United Kingdom and that this was
    a matter of choice.

52. The judge found at [158] that this  choice  "may  not  be  particularly
    palatable "for W to make and would involve "considerable disruption  to
    her  established  life"  which  was  identified  at   [158]   including
    separation from members of her family.

53. Miss Soltani submitted the judge did not consider the effect  on  other
    family members however the judge gave express  consideration  to  those
    other family members within  the  determination.  At  [158]  the  judge
    considered that there would be separation from W's older  child  L.  At
    [159] the judge considered the point raised concerning W's  mother  and
    dependency advanced. It was open to the judge to find that there was no
    independent evidence adduced to establish whether and  to  what  extent
    there was a continuing difficulty for W's mother and as  a  result  how
    much support she actually received from her daughter. Furthermore,  the
    judge found that it had not been explained why  other  members  of  the
    wider family would not be up to  provide  appropriate  support  to  W's
    mother if W chose to leave the UK with the Appellant.

54. The judge had considered W's eldest child at [129] who had been  living
    independently for some time. The judge was aware of  the  past  history
    which had been referred to in the previous determinations and  that  he
    had been described as having mild learning difficulties.

55. Contrary to  the  submissions  made,  the  judge  also  considered  the
    circumstances of the family as remaining in the United Kingdom with the
    Appellant being deported to Gambia and that he was unable  to  conclude
    that the refusal to revoke the deportation order would have the  effect
    of being unduly harsh upon them. He considered  the  arguments  that  W
    would have to give up her work at [156] and the effect of this  but  at
    [157] the judge rejected this for the reasons given. He also considered
    L's circumstances at [146 - 148] and A's circumstances at [141 -  145].
    In reaching his conclusion, the judge factored into the balance that  W
    had entered into the relationship with the Appellant  knowing  that  he
    was someone who had committed a serious offence and that a  deportation
    order been made against him and that there was an expectation from  the
    outset that he might have to leave the United  Kingdom  for  a  lengthy
    period before any return. The judge's overall conclusion was set out at
    paragraphs [165 - 167]. It is plain from reading  paragraph  [165]  the
    judge did not seek to minimise any upset which would be caused  to  the
    family or to the Appellant but  that  he  had  reached  the  conclusion
    overall that it had not been demonstrated that  the  deportation  order
    should be revoked.

56. Consequently I have reached the conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal
    did properly take into account the public interest and the  Appellant's
    circumstances and immigration history  when  reaching  the  conclusions
    overall when assessing whether the Exceptions in Section 117C(5) of the
    2002 Act and been met and did so in accordance with the decision of  MM
    (Uganda).

57. It was against this background that the judge's conclusions in my view,
    were open to him to reach that the effect of relocation was  such  that
    it would not cross the threshold of being "unduly harsh".   It  is  not
    apparent that the judge left anything out of account and that it  is  a
    fact-based assessment that the judge was entitled to make.

58. It is plain that the decision was finely balanced as reflected  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and it may  be  said  that  a  different
    decision could have been made by the First-tier  Tribunal  however  the
    decision was made following consideration of the evidence  and  in  the
    context of the legislation.  It may well be that this was not the  only
    outcome possible on  the  facts  but  in  this  particular  case  I  am
    satisfied that the judge did take into account the correct  legislative
    background and that the conclusions that were reached by the First-tier
    Tribunal do not demonstrate any legal error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not demonstrate the  making  of
an error on a point of law.  Thus the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed  [pic]                           Date 16/2/2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
