
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
DA/01578/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th March, 2016                       | On 29th April 2016                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    x. c.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hannan, a Trainee Solicitor with Corbans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the
    appellant and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her  as  being,  "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Jamaica who  was  born  on  28th  March,
    1981.

3.   On 22nd April, 2009 at the High Court in Edinburgh the  respondent  was
    convicted of two offences of being concerned in the supply of  class  A
    drugs (heroin and cocaine) contrary to Section 4 of the Misuse of Drugs
    Act 1971, for which she received a sentence of six years' imprisonment.
      Following  the  respondent's  conviction,  the  claimant   signed   a
    deportation order against her on 19th  August,  2011.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal  dismissed  the  respondent's  appeal   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 17th October,  2011  and  although  the  Upper  Tribunal
    subsequently granted permission to appeal, it eventually dismissed  her
    appeal in a determination promulgated on 27th September, 2012.

4.   On 5th November, 2012 the respondent made  further  representations  to
    the Secretary of State shortly before she was due  to  be  removed  and
    claimed asylum on the basis that she faced persecution and/or  breaches
    of her Article 2 and 3 rights on her removal.  On  8th  November,  2012
    the claimant rejected the respondent's  representations  and  certified
    the asylum claim under Section 96 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2006.

5.   Removal directions which had been set for  8th  November,  2012,  could
    not  be  enforced  because  of  the  respondent's  behaviour.   Further
    representations were made but, were rejected by the  claimant  on  19th
    November, 2012.  On 26th November, 2012 the respondent made application
    for judicial review of the decision to refuse  the  asylum  application
    and pending its resolution the claimant lifted her  removal  directions
    set for 14th December, 2012.   On  13th  February,  2013  the  judicial
    review application was settled on the claimant agreeing  to  reconsider
    the respondent's case.  On 22nd  July,  2013  the  Secretary  of  State
    maintained her decision and refused to revoke the deportation order.

6.   The respondent appealed the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse to revoke the deportation order and her appeal was heard by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 6th March,  2015.   In  a  decision  dated  16th
    March,  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fitzgibbon  QC  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal.  The claimant sought and was granted permission to
    appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  three  grounds  of
    challenge.  During the course of the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Wilding
    indicated that he only relied on the first and last challenge.

7.   The respondent is a Jamaican national and the mother of  X,  a  British
    citizen who was 13 years of age at the date of the hearing before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbon QC.  The grounds allege that  the  judge
    materially erred by impermissibly conflating the EEA  Regulations  with
    rights under Article 8 of the European Convention for the Protection of
    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.  The judge  purported  to  allow
    the appeal under the EEA  Regulations.   The  judge  further  erred  by
    failing to consider Regulation 21A of the EEA Regulations which permits
    the removal of a person notwithstanding that they  have  established  a
    derivative right of residence.

8.    The  judge  has  considered  and  purported  to   apply   Essa   (EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 316 (IAC).  The  grounds  point
    out the respondent is not an EEA citizen and suggests  that  the  judge
    materially erred in giving weight to findings based upon  consideration
    of Essa.

9.   The grounds also suggest that the judge materially  erred  in  applying
    Sanade and Others (British children - Zambrano -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT
    00048 (IAC).  He treated the decision of Sanade as if it  were  binding
    on the issue and failed to have  regard  to  the  earlier  decision  of
    Omotunde (best interests - Zambrano applied -  Razgar)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00247 (IAC) and also failed to  have  regard  to  the  opinion  of
    Advocate General Sharpston in Zambrano in that derogations are possible
    depending on compliance with the EU principle of proportionality.   The
    grounds go on to suggest that the judge erred by having failed to  give
    adequate regard to the judgment of SS (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  550  where  Laws  LJ  said  at
    paragraph 38:-

         "With respect there is [in Sanade] no acknowledgment of  the  free-
         standing importance of the legislative source of the  policy  as  a
         driver of  the  decision-maker's  margin  of  discretion  when  the
         proportionality of its application in a particular  case  is  being
         considered."

     Nothing in the Advocate General's opinion or the determination of  CJEU
    suggests that  Zambrano  is  a  complete  bar  to  deportation  in  any
    circumstances and for this reason the Secretary of State legislated  in
    the 2006 Regulations to allow the non-recognition of the Zambrano right
    of residence where recognition would not be  conducive  to  the  public
    good.

10.  Ground 3 was simply that the judge failed to  give  appropriate  weight
    to the seriousness of the respondent's offending as  reflected  in  the
    sentence of six years' imprisonment particularly where,  as  here,  the
    appellant continues to deny factual guilt for the index offence.

The Hearing

11.  Mr Wilding explained that the matter had previously come before  me  in
    January when it was adjourned, because at that stage the  Tribunal  had
    before it  a  supplemental  bundle  and  letter  which,  unfortunately,
    neither representative had.  He confirmed that  a  supplemental  letter
    was written as a result of which he no  longer  relied  on  the  second
    challenge.

12.  In relation to ground 1 the decision in Essa and the  question  of  the
    respondent's rehabilitation are only relevant where a respondent  is  a
    European national with a permanent  right  of  residence  and  here  he
    relied on the decision of Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
    Dumliauskas and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 145 at  paragraphs  43  and  44.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbon QC was clearly wrong at  paragraph
    31 in considering  the  case  of  Essa  and  at  paragraph  32  of  the
    determination.

13.  An acceptance that the respondent is the primary carer  for  her  minor
    child was taken by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  as  determinative  of
    the appeal.  At paragraph 35 the judge said:-
         "35. I also take account of the UT's reeling in Sanade that  'Where
             a child ... is a British citizen and therefore  a  citizen  of
             the European Union, it is not  possible  to  require  them  to
             locate outside the European Union or to submit that  it  would
             be reasonable for them to do  so.'   The  deportation  of  the
             appellant will have the effect of separating X from her mother
             for many years with no alternative carer available in the  UK.
             That is impermissible."

14.  Mr Wilding pointed out that Regulation 15A has  now  been  incorporated
    within the Regulations and at Regulation 21A the Secretary of State  is
    permitted, in principle, to deport the primary carer of an EEA national
    child, on policy grounds.  The judge did not consider this.

15.  The judge has given no consideration of  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation.  The judge is impressed by  evidence  in  the  form  of  a
    letter from the respondent's offender manager but there clearly  was  a
    lack of findings.

16.  Finally Mr Wilding told me  that  the  European  Court  of  Justice  is
    currently considering a reference on the very point in the  case  of  S
    (Morocco) DA/00146/2013.  This  is  likely  to  be  heard  in  May,  he
    believed, and as a result in the event that I find an error of  law  he
    invited me to ensure that the matter is not listed  for  hearing  until
    the decision of the European Court in S (Morocco) is known.

17.  I invited the respondent's representative to address me.  She  told  me
    that if I was satisfied that Essa  had  been  wrongly  applied  then  I
    should allow the appeal.  I suggested that she might find it helpful to
    have a copy of the decision in Essa  before  her  and  I  adjourned  to
    enable her to obtain a copy.  On resuming the hearing I  again  invited
    her to address me.  She told me that the respondent was not prepared to
    agree that the judge erred by applying Essa because, there  is  nothing
    in Essa which indicates that it is a decision which does not  apply  to
    an EEA national.  I pointed out to her that her  submissions  were  not
    helpful and asked whether there was any other reason why  she  believed
    that the judge had not erred  by  applying  a  decision  which  clearly
    related to EEA nationals.  She told me it was a matter for me and  that
    if I thought there was  an  error  I  should  allow  the  appeal.   She
    maintained that the decision could be applied because the decision  did
    not say that it was not applicable to people other than EEA  nationals.
    She suggested that the appeal had been allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

18.  Ms Hannan did not address me on any other matter despite  the  repeated
    invitations to her to do so.

19.  Responding briefly on behalf of  the  claimant,  Mr  Wilding  suggested
    that there was nothing in the decision of the Upper Tribunal which lent
    support for the concept in question applying to anyone  other  than  an
    EEA national.  Rehabilitation stems from the concept of integration  of
    EEA nationals.  The appeal needs to be  considered  again  because  the
    respondent needs to be considered through the prism  of  Regulation  21
    because she is the sole carer of her daughter a  British  subject,  but
    the concept of rehabilitation considered in Essa  is  the  question  of
    integration.  The derivative rights under Zambrano have nothing at  all
    to do with it.  The  judge  has  clearly  conflated  the  rights  under
    Article 8 and the rights under Regulation  21A.   The  appeal  was  not
    allowed under Article 8.

My Consideration of the Issues

20.  It is clear  to  me  from  the  headnote,  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in Essa applies only to EEA nationals and since the respondent
    is not an EEA national the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  wrong  in
    considering it and the question of rehabilitation.  I accept  that  the
    judge has materially erred by giving weight to the findings based  upon
    his consideration of Essa.  I also find that the  judge  has  erred  by
    holding that there can be no derogation from the principle in  Zambrano
    and by  treating  Sanade  as  binding  authority  on  this  point.   At
    paragraph 121 of the opinion in Zambrano the Advocate General said:-

         "I therefore conclude that Articles  20  and  21  TFEU  are  to  be
         interpreted as conferring a right of residence in the territory  of
         the member states, based on  citizenship  of  the  Union,  that  is
         independent of the right to  move  between  member  states.   Those
         provisions do not preclude a member state from refusing to grant  a
         derivative right of residence to an ascendant relative of a citizen
         of the Union who is a national of the member  state  concerned  and
         who has not yet exercised rights of free  movement,  provided  that
         the decision complies with the  principle  of  proportionality.   I
         believe that  the  use  of  the  conduciveness  test  in  the  2006
         Regulations is compatible with that approach."

21.  So far as the third challenge is  concerned,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did record the fact that at her  criminal  trial  the  respondent
    gave evidence which the jury disbelieved and  despite  that,  that  the
    respondent maintains the same account and  insists  that  she  was  not
    actually guilty of the drug dealing  charges.   Given  this  denial  of
    factual guilt it is difficult to appreciate  the  basis  on  which  the
    judge found that the appellant had taken her rehabilitation  seriously.
    I do not believe that the judge erred in failing  to  give  appropriate
    weight to the seriousness of the appellant's offending; this  challenge
    appears to me to be a simple disagreement with the decision.  The judge
    recognised that the respondent had committed very serious offences (see
    paragraph 32 of the determination) he was aware  of  the  offences  for
    which the claimant was sent to prison.

22.  Nonetheless I am satisfied  that  the  first  challenge  does  disclose
    material errors of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and
    I have concluded that given the need for clear  and  detailed  findings
    that it is appropriate that I  should  remit  the  appeal  for  hearing
    afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.  In doing so I direct that it should
    be heard by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbon QC,
    or First-tier Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald and the decision should  not
    be listed until the CJEU has published  its  decision  in  S  (Morocco)
    DA/00146/2013 which is expected in May 2016.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


