
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01579/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2015                             |On 11th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                           DESMOND LEROY TOMLINSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant appeared in person and unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal panel (Judge P Rowlands and Ms V S  Street)  (hereinafter
    referred to as "the panel") who, in a determination promulgated on 20th
    February 2014 dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision to make a deportation order by virtue of Section 32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The Appellant appeared unrepresented before the  Tribunal  and  I  note
    from the file that the appeal had previously been listed for hearing on
    26th  January  2015.   At  that  hearing  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Eshun
    adjourned the appeal to provide  further  time  for  the  Appellant  to
    obtain legal representation.  It was noted on the Record of Proceedings
    for that date that the Appellant had been  informed  that  the  hearing
    would proceed on the next hearing date in the event  that  he  did  not
    obtain legal representation.

 3. Mr Tomlinson confirmed that he  had  not  been  able  to  secure  legal
    representation  therefore  for  the  purposes  of  the  proceedings,  I
    explained the procedure that the Tribunal would adopt and gave him  the
    opportunity to ask any questions.  The Appellant had  been  represented
    at the time when grounds for permission to appeal had been  issued  and
    drafted by Counsel and therefore those grounds were relied upon by  the
    Appellant.

 4. The background to the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant entered  the
    United Kingdom on 13th July 2001 and was granted leave to  enter  as  a
    visitor for two weeks.  On 14th February  2003  he  married  a  British
    citizen, Samantha Massey and on 12th June 2003 submitted an application
    for leave to remain as a spouse of  a  settled  person  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  On the basis of that application on 7th January 2006  he  was
    granted discretionary leave for three years.  That leave expired on 7th
    January 2009 but the Appellant made no further attempts to  extend  his
    leave and remained in the United Kingdom.

 5. Since he has been in the  United  Kingdom  he  has  been  convicted  of
    criminal offences.  On 11th February 2009 for an offence of  theft,  he
    was sentenced to one day in prison and on 30th September  2011  he  was
    convicted of a  further  offence  of  theft  and  was  sentenced  to  a
    community order of 40 hours' unpaid work.   On  25th  January  2012  at
    Central Criminal Crown Court he was convicted of an offence of  robbery
    for which he was sentenced to a period of  three  years'  imprisonment.
    He was convicted of a breach of the community order  and  a  breach  of
    bail for which the community service order  was  revoked,  no  separate
    penalty for breach of bail was imposed.

 6.  As a result of that conviction, on 19th July 2012 he was served with a
    liability to deportation letter and  a  questionnaire.   A  letter  was
    received on behalf of the Appellant on 8th  August  2012  in  which  he
    claimed asylum and in respect of that  application  the  Appellant  was
    interviewed.  Following this, he became the subject  of  a  deportation
    order as a result of his conviction on 25th January  2012,  such  order
    being dated 23rd July 2013.

 7. In response to this, the Appellant relied  upon  the  exception  to  be
    found in Section 33 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  that  his  removal
    pursuant to deportation would  breach  his  rights  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and also under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 8. The Appellant appealed the decision and it came before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel (Judge Rowlands and Ms V S Street) (hereinafter referred
    to as "the panel") who in a determination promulgated on 20th  February
    2014 dismissed his appeal.

 9.  The Appellant sought permission out of time to  appeal  that  decision
    with grounds submitted on 27th August 2014.  Permission to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 3rd September  2014.   I
    shall deal with the issue of  the  timeliness  of  the  appeal  in  due
    course.

10. The appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 26th January  2015
    and  it  appears  that  at  that   hearing   the   Appellant   appeared
    unrepresented but further time was provided  to  him  to  obtain  legal
    representation in accordance with the documentation in the bundle.

11. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on 5th March  2015.   As
    noted earlier in the determination, the Appellant did not  appear  with
    representation but in any event, there was already before the  Tribunal
    substantive grounds for permission to appeal that had been  settled  by
    Counsel in August 2014 and thus reliance  was  placed  by  him  on  the
    matters set out in that document.

12.   In summary, the grounds advanced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  dealt
    with the issue of extension of time at paragraph 2 and his  immigration
    history since the decision of 20th February 2014 was also  set  out  at
    paragraph 4.  The first ground relates to the panel's failure to  apply
    the correct statutory provisions in force at the time of  the  hearing.
    The grounds set out that the  panel  at  paragraph  11  considered  the
    appeal on the basis that this was a revocation of a  deportation  order
    and went on to set out paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules  in  that
    respect.  However, it was plain that this was not a  revocation  appeal
    but  an  appeal  against  the  making  of  a  deportation  order.   The
    determination did not set out or apply the statutory framework that was
    in place for the appeal.  It was further asserted that the panel  erred
    in law by failing to make clear findings on the  core  aspects  of  his
    asylum claim for the reasons set out at paragraphs 11-17 of the grounds
    noting that the Appellant's claim had been dismissed in  one  paragraph
    but as the grounds submit at [13] there were no  clear  findings  on  a
    number of aspects of his  account.   As  to  the  background  evidence,
    whilst the panel does not appear to accept his claim to be at  risk  of
    harm at the hands of a particular  gang,  the  grounds  annexed  to  it
    objective material relating to the Andem Gang,  although  it  is  noted
    that that material had not been placed before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The last ground argues that the panel erred  in  law  without  properly
    determining the appellant's  request  to  adjourn  the  proceedings  to
    obtain legal representation and those issues are set out at  paragraphs
    18 to 22.

13. Ms Holmes on behalf of the Secretary of State had provided  a  copy  of
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in BO and Others (Extension of  time
    for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00035.  She  also  had  a  copy  of
    Samir (FtT permission to appeal: time)  [2013]  UKUT  00003  (IAC).  In
    respect of the preliminary issue relating to timeliness,  she  referred
    the Tribunal to paragraph 1 of Samir in which the  Tribunal  posed  the
    question "Suppose further that the First-tier Tribunal, considering the
    application, fails to notice that the application was out of time,  and
    so  makes  no  decision  on  whether  to  extend  time,  but  issues  a
    determination granting permission to appeal." However she observed that
    this was not a case where the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to
    notice that this application was out  of  time  and  therefore  it  was
    questionable as to whether this was a conditional grant as referred  to
    in Samir at paragraph [17] and in relation to the case  of  Boktor  and
    Wanis [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC).  She referred the Tribunal also  to  the
    lack of explanation as to why the application was out of time.

14. As to the errors of law, she readily conceded that there were a  number
    of errors of law in the determination of the panel.   Those  identified
    in the grounds related to the failure to apply and analyse  the  appeal
    on the basis of the correct legal framework.  Whilst at [1]  the  panel
    appear to consider the correct approach, she observed at [11] that  the
    panel went on to consider the principles applicable to a revocation  of
    a deportation order.  She submitted that the panel did  not  apply  the
    correct framework but had covered the substance.  She made reference to
    paragraph [18] and at [19] the best interests of the children which she
    said was just  about  adequate.   Thus  she  submitted  that  they  had
    considered matters relevant to Article 8, albeit not properly.

15. As to Section 72 of the 2002 Act, she noted that it was an issue raised
    in  the  refusal  letter  at  page  10  where  Section  72(2)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was referred  to  and  the
    consequences of applying Section 72 to a person was  that  their  claim
    for asylum would be refused if the appellant had failed  to  rebut  the
    presumption that  the  crime  was  particularly  serious  or  that  his
    continued presence in the United Kingdom constituted a  danger  to  the
    community.  The issue was set out plainly within the refusal letter and
    the Secretary of State had certified that the  presumption  under  sub-
    Section 2 applied to him in accordance with  Section  79(9)(b)  of  the
    2002 Act.  The panel wholly ignored that issue  which  was  the  matter
    that they had to deal with first before dealing with the asylum  claim.



16. As to the grounds  relating  to  the  failure  of  the  panel  to  deal
    adequately with the issue of asylum and making clear findings  of  fact
    on the core elements of his claim, she submitted that the determination
    at [11] was unclear and it was difficult to ascertain  whether  or  not
    they believed the factual  elements  of  the  appellant's  account  and
    referred to certain sentences at [11]  that  suggested  that  they  had
    doubted his credibility but did not overtly  say  so.   Ms  Holmes  had
    provided  a  copy  of  AB  (Protection  -  criminal  gangs  -  internal
    relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 00018.  She submitted that  at  the
    time of the hearing this was the country guidance decision relevant  to
    the Appellant's claim.  The panel did  not  refer  themselves  to  this
    country guidance case but she submitted that in the light of that  case
    the Appellant could not show that  he  fell  within  the  circumstances
    referred to in that case and thus any errors in relation to the  asylum
    claim were not material.   However  she  recognised  that  within  that
    determination there  were  a  number  of  references  to  the  Tribunal
    determining the case on the facts of each individual case.

17. After hearing submissions, I adjourned to consider the submissions that
    I had heard in the light of the documents before me.  On  resuming  the
    hearing, I indicated to the parties by way of a brief  summary  that  I
    had reached the conclusion that  the  determination  was  fundamentally
    flawed and as a result it could not stand.  I  therefore  now  give  my
    written reasons for reaching that decision.

18. Dealing with the first issue, I have taken into account the decision of
    AK and Others (Tribunal appeal - out of time)  Bulgaria*  [2004]  UKAIT
    00201 and Boktor and Wanis  (Late  application  for  permission)  Egypt
    [2011] UKUT 00422 and have had regard to the decision of BO and  Others
    (Extension of time for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00035  and  that
    of Samir (as set out earlier).  I begin by considering whether  or  not
    this was a conditional grant of permission (see AK at paragraph 23  and
    Samir  at  18-21).   Having  considered  the  grant  of  permission  in
    accordance with those decisions, I have  reached  the  conclusion  that
    this was not a conditional grant of permission  because  it  cannot  be
    said that the judge failed to notice that the application  was  out  of
    time.  At paragraph 1 of her reasons, Judge Andrew  expressly  referred
    to the application being "out of time".  Thus in those circumstances it
    could not  properly  be  said  that  she  failed  to  notice  that  the
    application was out of time.  I am satisfied that it is implicit within
    that grant of permission that Judge Andrew  did  extend  time  for  two
    reasons; firstly, because she expressly noted that this was  an  appeal
    out of time and secondly, had she not extended time she would not  have
    admitted the appeal and would have given reasons as to why she was  not
    extending time.  In those circumstances, whilst she did not  explicitly
    state she was extending time, I find  that  it  is  implicit  from  the
    decision as a whole and in particular that she went on to  set  out  in
    that decision why she considered that the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal panel was a decision in which arguable errors of law  had
    been demonstrated.  Whilst Ms Holmes refers to there being insufficient
    reasons  given  for  the  lateness,  those   matters   were   set   out
    comprehensively within the grounds at [2] at (a)-[h] but in any  event,
    having reached the conclusion that the  judge  did   extend  time,  the
    permission to appeal which was granted, now brings the appeal  properly
    before the Upper Tribunal.

19. I therefore now deal with the merits of the appeal.  The  determination
    of the panel demonstrates there are a number of errors of  law  as  set
    out in the grounds advanced on behalf  of  the  Appellant.   The  first
    error relates to the basis upon which the appeal had  come  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal panel.  It is plain from the  refusal  letter,  and
    the deportation order that this was not  a  revocation  appeal  but  an
    appeal against the making of a deportation order and that the  relevant
    statutory framework to be applied by the panel was A398 to 399A of  the
    Immigration Rules and the considerations in a revocation case which the
    panel purported to apply at paragraph  [11]  are  wholly  different  to
    those as set out in paragraphs 398 to 399A.  Ms Holmes however conceded
    that the wrong statutory framework  had  been  applied  by  the  panel.
    Whilst they began at [1] by making a reference to the deportation order
    and paragraphs 399 and 399A, and appeared to note  at  [10]  the  basis
    upon which the appeal was advanced on behalf of the Appellant,  in  the
    section entitled "Finding and Reasons" the  panel  set  out  what  they
    considered to be "the statutory  basis  for  the  consideration  of   a
    revocation of a deportation order" and set out  paragraph  391  and  at
    [12] made a legal  direction  to  themselves  in  the  following  terms
    "having set out the main Rules in relation to revocation we now set out
    the factual findings."  Thus it is plain from reading the determination
    that the panel clearly  erred  in  its  understanding  of  the  correct
    statutory framework and the application  of  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules.  The panel made reference to  MF  (Nigeria)  [2012]  UKUT  00393
    however they have failed to take into account that since  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal, that case had come before the  Court  of  Appeal
    having been reported in  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  and  therefore  would
    properly have been before the panel at the time of  their  decision  in
    January 2014.  Nowhere within the determination do  they  set  out  the
    correct statutory framework or apply the factual circumstances to  that
    framework in deciding the relevant matters of this appeal.

20. It is further plain from the reasons for deportation letter dated  23rd
    July 2013 that the Secretary of State relied upon  Section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Reading that letter,  it
    is also plain that the Secretary of State considered that the  evidence
    in the form of the representations were not  sufficient  to  rebut  the
    presumption that he was convicted  of  a  serious  crime  or  that  his
    continued presence in the United Kingdom  would  be  a  danger  to  the
    United Kingdom community.  Thus the Secretary of State  considered,  in
    the light of the failure to rebut the presumption, in  accordance  with
    Section 72(9)(b) of the 2002 Act (as amended) the  Secretary  of  State
    had certified the presumption under Section  72.   The  effect  of  the
    certificate was that any appeal under Section 82(1) of  the  2002  Act,
    the judge must consider certification first and if the judge upheld the
    certificate then the asylum aspect of the  appeal  would  be  dismissed
    without consideration of the asylum claim.  Whether the  appellant  had
    rebutted the presumption in Section 72(2) required an assessment of all
    the circumstances, including the circumstances of the offence and  also
    the Appellant's history of offending (see SB (Cessation  of  exclusion)
    Haiti [2005] UKIAT 00036).  It is right also to observe that the effect
    of upholding a certificate under Section 72(9)(b) of the 2002 Act would
    affect the Appellant's asylum  claim  as  it  requires  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on asylum  grounds  without  determining
    the merits  of  those  grounds  but  would  have  no  affect  upon  the
    Appellant's claim under Article 3 based on his  risk  of  serious  harm
    upon return to Jamaica.  Nonetheless, that  issue  was  wholly  ignored
    within the determination and no consideration was given to the  Section
    72 certification process.

21. That may not be material as they went  on  to  dismiss  the  claim  for
    asylum.  However, in relation to those findings, I  am  satisfied  that
    the panel erred in law in the consideration of his claim.  The  Grounds
    of Appeal set out the factual basis upon which the  Appellant  advanced
    his asylum or Article 3 claim which  was  premised  upon  his  fear  of
    serious harm at the hands of a named gang, namely the  Andem  Gang,  in
    Jamaica and that he had been approached by that gang, had been asked to
    carry drugs by them in 2001 and that he had been the subject of serious
    physical harm and physical injury at their hands and that the  risk  of
    return would have to be considered in the light of the circumstances of
    that gang, their reach and the threat  posed  to  the  Appellant.   The
    consideration of sufficiency of protection was required and  also  that
    of internal relocation.  Such matters to  be  determined  having  first
    made findings of fact on the basis of the  factual  claim  advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  The panel dealt with the claim at  [21].   Ms
    Holmes observed that it was not clear to her what findings were made as
    to whether the panel accepted any of the factual basis of the claim.  I
    consider that that is right.  The panel noted his claim that if he were
    to be removed he would be at risk from gangs in Jamaica,  however  they
    observed "this is pure speculation on the Appellant's behalf, there  is
    no evidence whatsoever to back up any claim  that  he  would  be  under
    threat from gangs" and went on to state "no  evidence  to  support  his
    contention that he personally would be at risk."  However that  ignores
    the factual basis upon which the Appellant advanced his case as to  the
    nature of the threat, the identity of the gang and the fact that he had
    been the subject of physical harm which had resulted in injury  to  him
    having been stabbed, beaten, had lost two  teeth  and  had  broken  two
    fingers.  He had submitted that the gang were still active and  were  a
    well-known gang and that he could not return in safety to Jamaica.  The
    panel did not appear to make any  findings  on  those  factual  issues.
    There was a country guidance decision relevant to this appeal to  which
    the panel should have had regard to and that decision  makes  it  plain
    that it is incumbent upon the Tribunal to make factual findings  as  to
    the particular circumstances of the Appellant concerned, the nature  of
    the gang, sufficiency of protection and whether, in the  light  of  the
    findings of fact, the Appellant could  safely  relocate.   Thus  it  is
    plain that the starting  point  to  determine  is  the  facts  of  each
    individual case.  I am satisfied that paragraph [21] did not  determine
    the facts of this Appellant's case nor did it apply the legal tasks  of
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation to those facts.

22. Whilst Ms Holmes readily accepted there were a number of errors of  law
    in the determination but that in Article 8 terms, the  panel  had  made
    findings on the substance of  some  of  the  relevant  issues,  I  have
    reached the conclusion that the decision is so fatally flawed  that  it
    undermines the determination as a whole and makes it an unsafe one.

23. Section 12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit  the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with directions or to re-make it.  After discussion
    and agreement with the parties, and in  accordance  with  the  Practice
    Statement dated 25th September 2012, I remit this appeal  to  be  heard
    before the First-tier Tribunal, as I consider  that  the  findings  and
    conclusions that have to be made on a re-making of the decision require
    primary fact-finding.  It also provides the Appellant with further time
    to obtain legal representation.  He informed the Tribunal that  he  had
    practical difficulties in advancing his appeal and the decision that  I
    have made to remit to the First-tier Tribunal would  provide  time  for
    him to obtain the assistance that he stated he required.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the  decision.   I  remit
the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh

Consequential Directions

 1) The matter should be listed before the First-tier Tribunal on a date to
    be fixed at Hatton Cross (not before Judge Rowlands or non-legal member
    Ms V S Street).

 2) The Secretary of State shall provide to  the  Tribunal  from  documents
    within its bundle a copy of the report referred to  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel at [13] of its decision.   The  Respondent  should  also
    provide copies of any pre-sentence report or OASys Report  in  relation
    to the Appellant as previously directed by the Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   There  was  no
request for anonymity and I do not consider such an order is required.






Signed                              Date 6/3/2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 6/3/2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

