
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01309/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 January 2015                            |On 11 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                               MR AQIB HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bali, DRB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Clough dismissing an appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.  The appeal was made to the First-tier Tribunal against
    a decision dated 3 July 2014 by the respondent to the effect  that  the
    appellant would be subject to deportation as a foreign  criminal  under
    section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2) The appellant was born on 7 January 1988 and is a national of Pakistan.
     He arrived in the UK in August 2012 as a student.  In October 2013  he
    was sentenced to imprisonment for a period of 12 months for  possession
    of criminal property.  This conviction led the respondent to  institute
    proceedings for the appellant's deportation.

 3) In December 2013  in  response  to  the  prospect  of  deportation  the
    appellant stated that he was in "a civil partnership" with a Mr  Ghulam
    Farid.  He claimed that he would face a real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm in Pakistan as a homosexual and  thereby  a  member  of  a
    particular social group.  He also feared  harm  at  the  hands  of  his
    brother and at the hands of the Taliban.

 4) It is clear from the determination  of  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the appellant has never been in a  civil  partnership  in
    the UK.  He claims to have had homosexual relationships with two men in
    the UK - the first was Mr Ghulam Farid and the second was Mr  Alexander
    Greensmith.  According to the evidence the appellant  gave  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, he did not tell Mr Greensmith  of  his  sentencing
    and subsequent detention.  The appellant had a  brother  in  Manchester
    and he told his brother  not  to  tell  Mr  Greensmith  where  he  was.
    Eventually his brother did tell Mr Greensmith  what  had  befallen  the
    appellant.

 5) The judge heard oral evidence both  from  the  appellant  and  from  Mr
    Greensmith.  The judge found neither the appellant nor Mr Greensmith to
    be credible witnesses.  The judge was not satisfied that the  appellant
    is homosexual and would be at risk in Pakistan on this account.

 6) The appellant applied for permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had  applied  an  incomplete  test  in
    terms of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  In the  leading  judgment  of  Lord
    Rodger, at paragraph 82, the first question for  the  Tribunal  to  ask
    itself when a person applies for asylum on the  ground  of  a  fear  of
    persecution because he is gay, is  "whether  it  is  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that he is gay,  or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
    potential persecutors in his country of nationality."  The  application
    for permission to appeal contended that the  judge  had  asked  herself
    whether the appellant was gay but had not  asked  herself  whether  the
    appellant was  someone  who  would  be  treated  as  gay  by  potential
    persecutors in Pakistan.  The appellant's argument seemed to be that as
    he had declared himself gay, whether he was or not, he would be treated
    as gay in Pakistan and he had thus put himself at risk.

 7) Permission was granted on this basis.

 8) A rule 24 notice dated 17 October 2014 was submitted on behalf  of  the
    respondent.  This contended that the appellant had failed to  establish
    a credible claim for asylum and the second  part  of  the  test  in  HJ
    (Iran) disclosed no arguable  error  of  law  that  would  have  had  a
    material impact upon the outcome of the appeal.

 9) I was address by Mr Bali on behalf of the appellant.  He said that  the
    appellant had pronounced himself in open court "loud  and  proud".   He
    would be treated as gay on his return  to  Pakistan  in  terms  of  the
    second branch of the test in HJ (Iran).

10) For the respondent, Mr Matthews acknowledged that the test set  by  the
    Supreme Court in HJ (Iran), at paragraph 82,  envisaged  two  different
    classes of case.  The first was where the appellant was gay.  The other
    was where the appellant was perceived as gay even if not gay.  In  this
    appeal the appellant had tried to show that he was gay but he  was  not
    found to be gay by the Tribunal and there was an absence of evidence to
    show that he was.  The Supreme Court referred to whether  the  Tribunal
    was "satisfied on the evidence"  that  a  particular  person  would  be
    treated as gay.  Mr Matthews continued that in this appeal there was an
    absence of evidence  that  showed  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    appellant would be  treated  as  gay.   Because  of  this  it  was  not
    incumbent on the Tribunal to answer the second part  of  the  question.
    There was no evidence whatsoever which would require  the  Tribunal  to
    answer this question.  The appellant had claimed to be gay and  he  had
    been found after a fair hearing  not  to  be  gay.   His  evidence  was
    rejected.  This was the end of the case on asylum grounds.

11) Reference was made to an  affidavit  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This purported to have been sworn by the appellant's older  brother  in
    Pakistan.  This affidavit was found by the judge not to be  a  reliable
    document.  In the view of Mr Matthews the judge had not  even  accepted
    that the appellant had told his own family he was gay.

12) For the appellant Mr Bali sought at this point to question the  reasons
    given by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal for  not  accepting  this
    affidavit as reliable.  It was pointed out, however, that the judge had
    comprehensively  rejected  the  evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of   the
    appellant.

13) Mr Bali then submitted that the case for the appellant was that  either
    he was gay or, even if he was not, he had said he was gay and  had  had
    two sexual partners.  Mr Bali described the appellant as being "between
    a rock and a hard place" and submitted that if people saw the affidavit
    the appellant would be at risk.

14) Mr Bali  was  asked  if  there  was  any  evidence  to  show  that  the
    authorities in Pakistan or the intelligence agencies  of  that  country
    had any involvement in the appellant's case.  Mr  Bali's  response  was
    that there was no evidence that they did not.

Discussion

15) The finding of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was in effect  that
    the appellant  had  falsely  claimed  to  be  gay  in  order  to  avoid
    deportation to Pakistan.  The judge heard evidence from Mr  Greensmith,
    with whom the appellant had claimed to be in a  relationship,  but  did
    not believe that the appellant and Mr Greensmith had been involved in a
    relationship in the manner  which  was  alleged.   This  was  primarily
    because of disparities found by  the  judge  in  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and Mr Greensmith.  The  appellant  claimed  to  have  had  a
    relationship with another man, Mr Ghulam Farid, but  this  relationship
    had ended prior to the hearing of the appeal.

16) Essentially Mr Bali's argument before me was that as the appellant  had
    declared himself to  be  gay  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, this would come to the attention of people  in  Pakistan  and
    the appellant would be perceived by the authorities in Pakistan as gay.
     Mr Bali's secondary argument, which he had some  difficulty  pursuing,
    was that the judge was wrong to reject the affidavit  purportedly  from
    the appellant's brother in Pakistan.  The difficulty  Mr  Bali  had  in
    relation to this was that the judge's  credibility  findings  were  not
    being challenged directly in this appeal.

17) Mr Bali had little to say as to how the authorities in  Pakistan  would
    become aware of the basis of the appellant's claim for  asylum  in  the
    UK.  It seems that Mr Bali assumed that the appellant's brother in  the
    UK was aware from contact with Mr Greensmith that the appellant claimed
    to be gay; that the brother had, or would  have,  told  the  family  in
    Pakistan; that as a result the appellant had  been  ostracised  by  his
    family in Pakistan and his position would have  been  reported  to  the
    authorities.  The facts as found by the First-tier  Tribunal,  however,
    do not support these suppositions.   The judge did not accept that  the
    appellant and Mr Greensmith had  been  in  a  homosexual  relationship.
    Part of their evidence was that the appellant's brother  in  Manchester
    would either have deduced the nature of their relationship or been told
    of it, but there was no evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  from
    the appellant's brother in the UK (or from  his  sister  whom  he  also
    claimed was living in the UK)  stating  that  the  appellant  had  told
    either of them that he was gay.  The only evidence from the appellant's
    family was the purported affidavit from the appellant's  older  brother
    in Pakistan, which the judge rejected.

18) It is significant that there was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal from either of the  appellant's  family  members  said  to  be
    residing in the UK stating that their brother was gay.  Putting on  one
    side the affidavit, which the judge did not accept as  reliable,  there
    was no evidence that the appellant's family in  Pakistan  knew  of  his
    claim that he was gay.

19) Mr Bali appeared to suggest that the authorities in Pakistan  would  be
    aware from the appellant's evidence at the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal of  his  claim  to  be  gay.   When  asked  for  evidence
    suggesting to support this assertion, Mr Bali's response was that there
    was no evidence that the authorities did not know  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  Such an explanation will hardly assist the appellant,  on  whom
    rests the burden of proof.  Furthermore, even were I  to  suppose  that
    the authorities in Pakistan knew that the appellant's asylum claim  was
    based on an attempt to show he was gay, this attempt failed.  The judge
    did not believe the appellant is gay.  Were the authorities in Pakistan
    aware of the asylum claim, therefore, why would they see it as anything
    other than a fabricated attempt by the appellant to avoid  deportation?
    They would have no reason to suppose that the  appellant  was  in  fact
    gay, even though he had pretended to be before the Tribunal.

20) I accept the submission on behalf of the respondent that,  even  though
    the judge did not consider the second limb of the first question to  be
    addressed in terms of HJ (Iran), as there was no evidence to show  that
    the authorities in Pakistan were aware of the appellant's claim that he
    was gay or, indeed, would have any reason to believe  his  claim,  then
    the judge's failure to address this question  had  no  bearing  on  the
    outcome of the appeal.   As  Mr  Matthews  pointed  out,  in  terms  of
    paragraph 82 of HJ (Iran) it was for the Tribunal to be  "satisfied  on
    the evidence" that the appellant would be perceived as gay.  There  was
    no credible evidence on which the appellant would  have  been  able  to
    show to the satisfaction of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  that
    he would be perceived by the authorities in Pakistan as  a  homosexual.
    There was a lack of evidence in this  appeal  to  show  any  reasonable
    likelihood that he would be treated as gay and accordingly it  was  not
    incumbent upon the Tribunal to address this question.  On  this  basis,
    the decision of the judge shall stand.

Conclusions

21) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

22) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

23) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I do not consider  that  there
    is any material reason for doing so.



Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
