
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01443/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 15 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   P.D.C.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIon MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant (the present respondent). This direction applies  to,
    amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction
    could give rise to contempt of court  proceedings.  I  make  this  order
    because the case turns on the welfare of the respondent's minor children
    and they are entitled to privacy.

 2. It is right to record that the respondent  played  little  part  in  the
    proceedings before me.   This  is  unsurprising.   He  was  required  to
    address the Upper Tribunal in a case of great importance to him and  his
    family about a point of law in a matter where the law is in a  state  of
    flux. He conducted himself calmly and politely and made it plain that he
    really wanted to remain with his children. I accept that and have  given
    his submissions appropriate weight. My decision  in  this  case  can  be
    expected to impact significantly on the lives of three  young  children.
    Ms Fijiwala presented the Secretary of State's case fairly but I find it
    regrettable that I have had to make this decision without the assistance
    of professional representation from both parties.

 3. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the  respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  on  10
    July 2014 to make him the subject of a deportation order because he is a
    foreign criminal.  The appeal was  expressed  to  be  allowed  on  human
    rights  grounds.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes who (if I may say so) gave insightful and  concise
    reasons. She found it arguable, firstly, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had had insufficient regard for the public  interest  in  a  deportation
    case and, secondly, that it had  been  too  easily  persuaded  that  the
    consequences of deportation would be "unduly harsh".

 4. The claimant is a citizen of Grenada who was born in March 1971.  He has
    lived in the United Kingdom since July  2007.   He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom with entry clearance as a husband and his leave was extended  by
    stages. He was  refused  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  possibly  as  a
    consequence of having been cautioned and convicted of summary  offences,
    but he had discretionary leave which was due to expire in November 2014.

 5. In July 2013 at the Crown Court sitting at Isleworth  he  was  convicted
    after a trial of  an  offence  of  violent  disorder  and  sentenced  to
    eighteen months' imprisonment.

 6. Lest there be any  doubt  that  I  appreciate  the  seriousness  of  his
    criminal offending I explain in outline at the outset of  this  Decision
    the conduct that got him into trouble.  The claimant joined  in  with  a
    group of men who burst into the home of a neighbour who  had  protested,
    perhaps in an inappropriate way, against the noise made at  an  informal
    party.  The main protagonist wielded a  machete  and  was  sentenced  to
    seven years' imprisonment. The claimant had relied on  self-defence  but
    his defence  was  rejected  by  the  jury  and  he  was  convicted.  The
    sentencing judge distinguished the claimant from  the  main  protagonist
    but he has clearly committed a serious crime.

 7. The decision was explained in a Notice of Decision dated  10  July  2014
    and I begin by looking carefully at the decision itself.

 8. Little was said about the rights  of  the  claimant's  wife.  She  is  a
    British citizen but the claimant's leave has  always  been  "precarious"
    (that is to say of limited duration without a  guarantee  of  extension)
    and for this reason,  if  for  no  other,  she  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 399(b)(i) of HC 395.

 9. The decision shows that the Secretary of State  considered  the  "family
    life  with  children  that  the  claimant   enjoyed"   and   said   this
    consideration was a reference to paragraph 399(a) of HC 395.

10. Importantly, the Secretary of State noted that the  claimant  had  three
    children in the United Kingdom with his wife.  D(1) was born  in  August
    2008; D(2) was born in May 2010 and D(3) was born in  April  2013.   The
    children were described as being "in the care of their mother"  and  are
    British citizens.  The Secretary of State purported to consider the best
    interests of the children without actually  saying  what  she  considers
    them to be. The Secretary of State did  say  that  in  her  opinion  the
    seriousness of the offences outweighed the claimant's desire  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom because of the  children  having  regard  to  "the
    strength of your relationship with your children and nature  of  contact
    and your ability to maintain similar contact from Grenada".

11. The letter continues:

         "Whilst it is considered that your removal from the United  Kingdom
         may have an impact on the children's emotional welfare  we  are  in
         the view this would be minimal".

12. It then states that there was no evidence from  professional  bodies  to
    indicate that there were concerns about the behaviour of the children or
    their psychological wellbeing since the  claimant's  imprisonment.   The
    letter says:

         "There is nothing to suggest that your children's welfare would  be
         compromised if you were deported"

13. The letter then purports to  consider  each  of  the  children's  rights
    individually.   In each case the Secretary of State recognised that  the
    British citizen children should not be expected to  go  to  Grenada  and
    conceded expressly that it was "not considered reasonable" to expect the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

14. The Secretary of State has never suggested that  family  life  could  be
    continued by the children removing to Grenada.

15. In considering  D(1)  the  Secretary  of  State  simply  says  that  the
    claimant "could maintain contact with your daughter through modern means
    of communication and family visits".

16. The same comment is made in respect of the claimant's son D(2).

17. In the case of D(3) the Secretary of State says  that  she  was  only  3
    months old when the claimant was sent  to  prison.  The  child  had  not
    visited the claimant when he was in prison and  the  Secretary  of  Sate
    again said that he could  maintain  contact  "through  modern  means  of
    communication and family visits".

18. The letter then considered the claimant's relationship  with  his  wife.
    She is a British national but the Secretary  of  State  noted  that  "we
    received no representations from Mrs C--- and she had  not  visited  you
    while you were in prison".

19. The Secretary of State took the view that  the  claimant's  relationship
    with his wife was not subsisting but she expressly recognised that there
    was still a relationship between the claimant and his wife  (see  Notice
    of Decision under the heading "Family life with Partner").

20. Much space is then devoted to consideration of paragraph  399A  although
    it does not seem to me that anybody thought that the claimant  would  be
    entitled to remain by reason of that Rule. He is not.

21.  The  refusal   letter   then   went   on   to   consider   "exceptional
    circumstances".

22. The Secretary of State noted that the  probation  service  had  assessed
    the claimant as a "MAPPA Level 1 offender who poses  a  medium  risk  of
    harm  to  the  public  with  risk  factors  being  "physical  harm   and
    intimidation". This is true but diverts  attention  from  the  probation
    officer's opinion that the risk of reoffending is low.

23. The claimant responded to a letter dated 9 September 2013  inviting  him
    to raise an exception under Section 33 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  so
    that deportation could be avoided. He said that immediately before going
    to prison he had lived with his wife and children as  a  nuclear  family
    and that his children had not visited him in prison because  he  thought
    that the old children would find it too traumatising  and  the  youngest
    was too young.

24. The Secretary of State accepted that the claimant  had  lived  with  his
    children and wife as a nuclear family before  he  went  to  prison.  The
    Secretary of State also accepted that the claimant has asserted that  he
    was trying to rebuild his family life.

25. I turn now to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain and Mr M E Olszewski, non-legal member).

26. Before them the claimant was represented by counsel.

27. The claimant and his wife gave evidence and were  found  to  be  honest.
    The claimant was candid about his own criminal behaviour and did nothing
    to minimise the wrong that he had done. Similar Mrs C--- was "open about
    her anger with the [claimant] for the circumstances of his  imprisonment
    and  did  not   attempt   to   hide   her   understandable   anger   and
    disappointment".

28. The Tribunal noted that the claimant had behaved well in prison and  was
    given "red band" status in both prisons where he was  kept.   He  had  a
    supporting letter from his probation officer confirming that he had  not
    misbehaved during his time on licence and noting that although the OASys
    assessment put him at a "medium risk of harm" there was a "low  risk  of
    reoffending".  The Tribunal  found  it  significant  that  the  risk  of
    reoffending was low.

29. The Tribunal accepted that the claimant and his family were  now  living
    together in the same family  home.  There  has  been  no  prison  visits
    because the parents thought that they would be harmful to  the  children
    and  Mrs  C---  was  angry  with  the  claimant.   They  had   telephone
    conversations almost every day.

30. Significantly, at paragraph 20 of its Decision, the First-tier  Tribunal
    said:

         "We do not find that the  failure  of  [the  claimant's]  wife  and
         children to visit him when he was in prison  affects  our  findings
         that he is in a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
         them".

31.  When  the  claimant  was  released  from  custody  he  did  not  return
    immediately to the  family  home.   He  stayed  with  friends  who  were
    sureties for the purpose of  admitting  him  to  bail.  There  had  been
    frequent contact between the claimant and his family in that time and on
    3 December 2014 (the appeal was heard  on  13  January  2015)  with  the
    approval of the probation officer  the  claimant  had  returned  to  the
    family home.

32. Mrs C--- is a nurse.  She continues to work when  the  claimant  was  in
    prison.  During the time of her husband's imprisonment she worked  three
    twelve hour shifts every week to reduce child care charges. The evidence
    was "she had coped with great difficulty and had had to get a  nanny  to
    compensate for the time that [the claimant] is not around  and  able  to
    look after the children". She had run into financial difficulties  while
    the claimant was in prison. She is now working to pay off the debts.

33. At paragraph 23, the Tribunal found the claimant to be  the  main  carer
    of the children.   The children have  a  good  relationship  with  their
    father.

34. At paragraph 24 the First-tier Tribunal dealt with the  consequences  of
    the appellant being deported.  It said:

         "We find that, were the appellant  to  be  returned,  the  children
         would be deprived of this care. We find Mrs C--- would be placed in
         the same position as she was when the  [claimant]  was  imprisoned,
         only this time the situation would be permanent.  We find that  she
         would have  to  reduce  her  working  hours,  thereby  causing  her
         financial  difficulty  which  would  impact  negatively  upon   her
         children.  Given that the situation would  be  permanent,  we  find
         that although Mrs C--- does not currently rely on public funds,  it
         is likely that she would be forced to rely on  public  funds  as  a
         single mother of the children.  Mrs C---  gave  evidence  that  she
         does not want to become a single mother, and given  the  fact  that
         she is responsible for three young children with  employment  as  a
         nurse, this is understandable.  We do not find that  Mrs  C---  and
         the children coped when the appellant was  incarcerated.   We  find
         that his incarceration had a negative effect, both financially  and
         psychologically."

35. The Tribunal found that they couple would not be able to  afford  visits
    to Grenada for some time.

36. At paragraph 26 the Tribunal  found  that  the  claimant's  absence  had
    affected the children psychologically.  It accepted the evidence of  Mrs
    C--- that they were tearful when he  was  imprisoned.   They  have  been
    living as a family unit. The children had only  known  life  with  their
    father.  The Tribunal accepted Mrs C---'s  evidence  that  the  children
    would not be able to  cope  with  the  absence  of  their  father.   The
    Tribunal then went on to say that found it "unduly harsh on the children
    to be deprived of their father, and we find that this would  not  be  in
    their best interests".

37. The Tribunal then found that the claimant also has a fourth  child  from
    another relationship.  He has some contact with that child who sometimes
    stayed with his nuclear family.  She was born  in  2006.   The  Tribunal
    accepted that she enjoyed and benefitted from her relationship with  her
    father.

38. At  paragraphs  13-15  the  Tribunal  set  out  the  relevant  parts  of
    paragraphs  399  of  HC  395  and  Section  117C  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

39. The key paragraph is probably at [29] where the Tribunal said:

         "We find that the effect of the  [claimant's]  deportation  on  his
         children would be unduly harsh.  We find that  their  contact  with
         him would be restricted to telephone  contact.   We  find  that  it
         would not be possible for them to visit him in Grenada owing to the
         costs. We find that they would be deprived of physical contact with
         their father.  We find that D(1), D(2) D(3) would  be  deprived  of
         the care that they currently  receive  from  him.   They  would  be
         deprived of their primary  carer.   We  find  that  they  would  be
         affected psychologically by the absence of a father figure who  has
         lived  with  them  all  of  their  lives,  bar  the  time  he   was
         incarcerated.  We find that it  is likely that  Mrs  C---  and  the
         children would  be  forced  to  rely  on  public  funds   were  the
         appellant to be deported, given that  Mrs  C---  would  then  be  a
         single mother of three children on a nurse's income. We  find  that
         to split the family and to cause reliance on public funds  in  this
         way is not in the public interest."

40. The Secretary of State's grounds extend to  some  seventeen  paragraphs.
    Some of them are formal and need no particular comment.  The rest are of
    variable quality.

41. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the grounds seek to challenge the finding that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to remain without  their  father.
    The Tribunal's findings are  described  as  "wholly  inadequate".    The
    grounds then assert that the appellant is only the main carer because he
    is not employed and if he took a job he would no  longer  have  such  an
    involvement in their care.  They complain that there is  "absolutely  no
    independent evidence" to support the findings  that  the  children  have
    been unable to cope without him or would suffer in  his  absence.   They
    complain there is "absolutely no evidence of any  psychological  effects
    on the children and the Tribunal's findings are simply not supported  by
    any independent evidence."

42. The paragraph continues in this ilk, asserting the  writer's  view  that
    it would not be unduly harsh to expect the wife to  change  her  job  or
    reduce her hours or to carry on as she did whilst the  claimant  was  in
    prison.  Paragraph 3 complains that there is "absolutely no  independent
    evidence" about the relationship with the fourth child.

43. There is, to adopt a phrase that features in  the  grounds,  "absolutely
    no" reason why there should, as a matter of law, be independent evidence
    on any of these points.   The evidence came  from  the  mother,  who  is
    possibly the very best person to know, and the father. Both  were  found
    to be credible.  It is not an error of law to believe a witness.

44. I also find  it  disturbing  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  be
    surprised that there was no evidence that removing a child from a family
    disturbs the children.  The case was not presented on the basis that the
    children will suffer severe psychological trauma  needing  support  from
    health professionals. Once the fact of a nuclear family was established,
    as it clearly was before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  only  remarkable
    thing about the findings about the effect of the claimant's removal upon
    the children is that anybody finds them in the slightest bit surprising.
    The grounds do not challenge the finding that the claimant  lived  in  a
    nuclear family when the First-tier Tribunal decided the  appeal.  Common
    humanity should have informed the Secretary of  State  that  removing  a
    father from a nuclear family where  there  were  small  children  is  an
    appalling thing to do and can be expected to be harmful and damaging  to
    the children. Rather than commenting, perhaps rather smugly, that  there
    was no expert evidence to support the First-tier Tribunal's findings,  a
    person of ordinary education and experience of life could be expected to
    find it truly remarkable if removing the father  in  such  circumstances
    was not a disruptive and harmful and generally undesirable thing  to  do
    even if it was necessary to secure the public interest.

45. Paragraph 3 of the grounds is a complete blind  alley.   The  claimant's
    relationship with his fourth child was not  pivotal  to  the  reasoning.
    Although the ground repeats the assertion that there was no  independent
    evidence about the relationship between the claimant and that  child  it
    falls short of asserting that the Tribunal acted perversely in believing
    it.   It does not identify an error of law and Miss Fijiwala wisely  did
    not rely on it before me.

46. The comment that "he may be caring for the children currently,  this  is
    only because he is not currently in employment and  should  this  change
    then he may no longer have such an involvement in their care" is  trite,
    speculative and falls short of suggesting  that  the  Tribunal  was  not
    entitled to find that when it decided the appeal the  claimant  was  the
    primary carer of three small children.

47. Paragraph 4 of the grounds is more troublesome  for  the  claimant.   It
    particularly relies on the decision of the Court of Appeal in "A D  Lee"
    although it does not trouble to give the correct citation.  In the  case
    of A D Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 Sedley LJ said:

         "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it  has
         been, will be broken up forever  because  of  the  appellant's  bad
         behaviour. That is what deportation does."

48. Paragraphs 5 and 6 do not assist.  They are reminders of the  importance
    of applying the Rules.  It does  not  appear  to  be  the  Secretary  of
    State's case that the First-tier Tribunal did not apply the  Rules.   It
    is the Secretary of State's case that the Tribunal did  not  apply  them
    properly.

49. Paragraph 7 argues that the Tribunal  failed  to  recognise  the  scales
    were  "very  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of  deportation".   That  is
    (broadly) a correct statement of the law but  I  do  not  find  it  adds
    anything of significance to  paragraph  4  and,  for  reasons  explained
    below, the contention that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  understand
    this is not made out.

50. Paragraph 9 is a mixture of criticisms. It is now  trite  law  that  the
    law relating to deportation is essentially codified in the Rules.  I see
    absolutely no need for a self direction that the scales  are  tipped  in
    favour of deportation. The Tribunal is seized of the case  because,  and
    only because, the claimant has done something  sufficiently  serious  to
    require his deportation unless an exception under the rules or  the  Act
    applies. The First-tier Tribunal copied out the words of Section 117C at
    paragraph 15. I see no basis for deciding that it failed  to  appreciate
    the significance of the words it wrote down.

51. The ground then moves on apparently seamlessly to  at  least  implicitly
    criticise the finding that the claimant was  remorseful.   According  to
    the ground the Tribunal failed to "take into account,  or  mention  that
    [the claimant's] claim at the hearing to be acting  in  self-defence  to
    protect himself from a dog,  which  was  not  previously  mentioned  and
    suggests that he has not taken full responsibility for his actions."   I
    find that to be close to unarguable. It is quite clear that the claimant
    did argue self-defence before the jury.   That  was  the  issue  in  the
    criminal trial.  The circumstances that he advanced as self-defence  are
    not set out anywhere.  I see no justification for the assertion that  he
    claimed before the Tribunal for the first time that he had  been  acting
    to protect himself from a dog.  Without a great deal more being said  it
    is impossible to make any sense of the criticism. It  may  be  that  the
    claimant had invented a dog and was telling lies.  It may be that a  dog
    was involved and the claimant was acting to  protect  himself  but,  the
    jury found, did more than was reasonably necessary.  It may be that  the
    dog added to the general m�l�e.  The fact (if it  is  a  fact)  that  he
    explained the outline of his defence before the Tribunal  in  answer  to
    some undisclosed question is not, without more, evidence that he claimed
    to have been convicted wrongly or that the rest of  his  evidence  ought
    not to have been believed.

52.  The  remaining  grounds  that  have  any   substance   emphasise   that
    deportation is not just about protecting the public  from  the  risk  of
    reoffending.  That again is an assertion of trite law but  it  is  trite
    law that can sometimes be forgotten.

53. The relevant parts of paragraph 399 of  Section  117C  are  incorporated
    into the Decision. It is plain that the  Tribunal  understood  that  the
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest but where the
    sentence is less than four years' imprisonment, as was the case here, an
    exception exists  when  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and the effect  of  deportation  on
    the child would be unduly harsh.

54. At paragraph 15 of its Decision the tribunal set out most of Section  19
    of the Immigration Act 2014 and thereby expressly reminded  itself  that
    "the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public  interest",  that
    "the more serious the offence  committed  by  a  foreign  criminal,  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal  and  that
    "the public interest requires C's deportation unless...".

55. I do not accept that the Tribunal lost sight of  the  uneven  nature  of
    the balancing exercise it had to conduct although I am persuaded that it
    did not carry out that exercise properly.

56. Although I have considered each of the Secretary of State's  grounds  of
    appeal, before me Miss Fijiwala mainly put the case on  the  basis  that
    the finding that removal would be unduly harsh for the children was  not
    sustainable.   She relied particularly on the decision of  KMO  (Section
    117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC) which knowingly  and
    deliberately differs from  the  reported  decision  of  MAB  (Para  399;
    "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC).

57. The fundamental difference between these cases concerns the  extent,  if
    at all,  that  the  seriousness  of  the  offence  is  relevant  to  the
    assessment of whether the consequence of removal is unduly harsh.   This
    may well make  a  very  important  difference  in  certain  cases.   For
    example, it is conceivable that a very  serious  crime,  such  as  rape,
    could be punished with less than four years' imprisonment in  particular
    circumstances and it may well be open to the Tribunal, or even  required
    of the Tribunal, to recognise that the public  interest  in  removing  a
    rapist is greater than, say, an offender such as  the  instant  offender
    who may have attracted a sentence of  about  twelve  months  if  he  had
    pleaded guilty. Conversely there may be cases  (such  as,  for  example,
    where a child has a particular need for a parent to  remain)  where  the
    effect of removal will be unduly harsh no matter how strong  the  public
    interest in removal. It is a distinction in approach which in some cases
    will be of fundamental importance  but  I  do  not  consider  it  to  be
    important here.

58. This is a case where the criminal sentence is towards the lower  end  of
    the range of sentences that required deportation subject to a  statutory
    exception applying. I do not consider the public interest in deportation
    to be particularly sharpened by the circumstances of the  offence.   The
    public interest in the claimant's deportation is established  by  reason
    of the conviction  and  the  sentence  and  by  the  operation  of  law.
    Further, like the First-tier Tribunal, I remind  myself  expressly  that
    the public interest requires deportation unless  an  exception  applies.
    Although the claimant's record  is  not  unblemished,  he  is  hardly  a
    persistent offender and has not been in serious trouble apart  from  the
    offence that resulted in his being sent to prison. It may well  be  that
    the public interest in removing him is lower than in some cases  but  it
    is still there and is the reason for the decision that is the subject of
    the appeal.

59. It is now absolutely clear that the Tribunal is required  to  apply  the
    law set out in the Rules and the Act.  There is no space for independent
    consideration on Article 8 grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal should  not
    have allowed the appeal on human rights grounds and to  that  extent  it
    erred.

60. However at paragraph 26 the Tribunal found unequivocally that "it  would
    be unduly harsh on the children to be deprived of their father,  and  we
    find that would not be in their best interests."

61. The reference to "their best interests"  is  an  acknowledgment  of  the
    statutory obligation under Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration  Act  2009  which  makes  their  bests  interest  a  primary
    consideration. Children cannot always have their best interests  met.  I
    do not doubt that the best interests of  these  children  lie  in  their
    father remaining with them and their mother in their home in the  United
    Kingdom.

62. The reference to "unduly  harsh"  is  clearly  a  reference  to  Section
    117C(5) of the 2002 Act and to paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b),  each  of  which
    the Tribunal set out in its decision.

63. It is perfectly clear to  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  very
    concerned about the impact on this family of deporting the claimant, and
    those are concerns I wholly understand and share. I  am  also  satisfied
    that, in the context of recognising that it was in the  public  interest
    to remove the claimant, the Tribunal was satisfied that  the  effect  of
    deportation would be "unduly harsh".

64. As was correctly identified by Judge Landes when  she  gave  permission,
    and by Ms Fijiwala in her submissions, the real point of  contention  in
    this appeal is whether the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find  the
    "unduly harsh" test satisfied in this case for the reasons it gave.

65. I must direct myself carefully about the meaning of "unduly  harsh"  and
    then see if the First-tier Tribunal's findings support its conclusion.

66. The phrase  "unduly  harsh"  is  a  troubling  phrase.  In  a  sense  no
    harshness is due to a child.  I  struggle  to  think  of  a  case  where
    removing a person in a subsisting parental  relationship  would  not  be
    "harsh" for the child but I do not think that Parliament  intended  that
    no person in a subsisting parental relationship could  be  deported.  As
    far as I am aware the phrase has not been defined authoritatively.

67. In MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435  (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Phillips) suggested the following in the judicial head note:

         2. Whether the consequences of deportation will be "unduly harsh"
         for an individual involves more than "uncomfortable, inconvenient,
         undesirable, unwelcome or merely difficult and challenging"
         consequences and imposes a considerably more elevated or higher
         threshold.

         3. The consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if they are
         "severe" or "bleak" and they will be "unduly" so if they are
         'inordinately' or 'excessively' harsh taking into account of all
         the circumstances of the individual.

68. In KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT  543  (IAC)  the
    judicial head note said:

         The  Immigration  Rules,  when  applied  in  the  context  of   the
         deportation of a foreign criminal, are a complete  code.  Where  an
         assessment is required to be made as to whether a person meets  the
         requirements  of  para  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  that
         comprises an assessment of that person's claim under article  8  of
         the  ECHR,  it  is  necessary  to  have  regard,  in  making   that
         assessment, to the matters to which the Tribunal must  have  regard
         as a consequence of the provisions of s117C. In  particular,  those
         include that the more serious the offence committed, the greater is
         the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  a   foreign   criminal.
         Therefore, the word "unduly" in the phrase "unduly harsh"  requires
         consideration of whether, in the light of the  seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the foreign criminal and the public  interest
         considerations that come  into  play,  the  impact  on  the  child,
         children or partner of  the  foreign  criminal  being  deported  is
         inordinately or excessively harsh.

69. I do not have to decide here if  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    offence increase the degree of harshness that is due to  the  claimant's
    children. As explained  above,  although  the  public  interest  clearly
    requires the claimant's deportation, unless an  exception  applies,  the
    punishment was at the lower  end  of  the  qualifying  bracket  and  the
    offence,  although  plainly  serious,  did  not  have  any  particularly
    aggravating  features  such  as  sexual  violence   against   women   or
    molestation of children that provoke public outrage.

70.  I  do,  however,  find  that  each  of  the  above  cases  supports  an
    interpretation of the phrase that makes it a hard test to satisfy and to
    that extent I follow both of them in the way  that  they  interpret  the
    word "harsh". Whatever the consequence of  the  adjective  "unduly"  the
    noun "harsh"  clearly  means  more  than  "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
    undesirable, unwelcome or merely difficult and challenging".

71. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  allow  the  appeal  because  of  the
    claimant's relationship with  his  fourth  child.  Clearly  she  can  be
    expected to miss direct contact with her father but  she  only  saw  him
    occasionally.  The  disruption  to  that  relationship   consequent   on
    deportation could not be described properly as "unduly harsh" within the
    rules.

72. At paragraph 29 of its Decision the Tribunal  found  that  removing  the
    claimant would deprive the children  "of  physical  contact  with  their
    father". They would  be  "deprived  of  the  care  that  they  currently
    receive" and they "would be deprived of their main carer". The  Tribunal
    also considered how Mrs C--- would cope in the  claimant's  absence.  It
    had accepted evidence that in the nine months that he had been away  Mrs
    C--- had run into debt despite her impressive efforts to  keep  her  job
    and her family. It clearly anticipated further problems for the children
    as the family descended from self  sufficiency  to  welfare  dependency.
    Although she had tried hard she had not really coped in the nine  months
    that the claimant was away. The Tribunal clearly found  the  predictable
    future consequences, taken with the  established  existing  consequences
    for the three children to be too much, or "unduly harsh".

73. Section 117B explains  the  application  of  the  public  interest  when
    considering article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  in
    cases of foreign national parents who have no other right to be  in  the
    United Kingdom but who have a "genuine  parental  relationship"  with  a
    "qualifying" (for present purposes "British citizen)  child.  There  the
    public interest does not require that person's removal. There  the  mere
    fact of a "genuine parental relationship" is enough  to  extinguish  the
    requirement for removal.

74.  Section  117C  guides  the  approach  to  article  8  when  considering
    deportation. In deportation case the existence  of  a  genuine  parental
    relationship is not enough to extinguish the  requirement  for  removal.
    Before that happens, (unless the parent was sentenced to 4 years or more
    imprisonment  when  are  still  more  stringent  regime   applies)   the
    consequences of the parents removal must  be  unduly  harsh.  Read  with
    Section 117B,  Section  117C  requires  something  more  than  the  mere
    disruption of a genuine parental relationship. It defines the additional
    requirement as "undue harshness".

75. I cannot agree with the First-tier Tribunal that anything that has  been
    established here can be described properly as "unduly  harsh".   All  of
    the pain and upset and potential  for  long  term  damage  and  economic
    dependency on the state is the ordinary consequence  and  unless  it  is
    Parliament's intention that parents cannot be deported (I do  not  think
    that is Parliament's intention) I can see  nothing  in  this  case  that
    justifies the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  My difficulty is  that  I
    do not see what the First-tier Tribunal has found that can be  described
    as "unduly harsh".  The harshness consequent on removal is  exactly  the
    harshness that is to be expected when a nuclear family is broken  up  by
    deportation.   It may even be a paradigm example of what  happens.   The
    case concerns an industrious mother  who  managed,  imperfectly  and  at
    great personal cost, when her husband was in prison but who  suffered  a
    decline in income as she adjusted her work so she could still  give  the
    children the care they needed. This is not a case where  the  unsettling
    effect on the children was exceptionally severe.   Neither  is  it  case
    where the children have exceptional needs such as might  arise  if,  for
    example, one of the children was gravely ill. It also seems likely  that
    the effects were minimised as the mother got on with her life. Indeed it
    is one of the ironies  of  this  case  that  claimant's  case  would  be
    stronger is his wife were not so competent. This does not  mean  that  I
    trivialise the demands made on her as she organised her working life  so
    that she could cram almost a full working week  into  three  long  days.
    Neither have I lost overlooked the evidence that she incurred and is now
    paying off debt but the fact is that she managed.

76. As indicated above, the grounds rely on the decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Lee. They also rely on HA Iraq v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1304
    (citation not given in the grounds). Lee emphasises the serious  adverse
    consequences that can be expected to  follow  deportation  and  HA  Iraq
    emphasises the heavy weighting in favour of deportation. The  cases  are
    not helpful to the Secretary of State as they might appear. In  Lee  the
    offender was sentenced to 7 years imprisonment and  in  HA  to  4  years
    imprisonment. The public interest in deportation was  stronger  than  in
    the  present  case  here.  Nevertheless,  they  make  the   point   that
    deportation is a serious matter but the public interest  often  requires
    it.

50.  I therefore have to rule that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was unsound in law.  Its clear findings did not support his conclusion.
    I must set aside its decision and substitute a decision dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal and this is what I do.



    Notice of Decision

53.  I therefore allow the Secretary of  State's  appeal.   I  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision. In my judgement the claimant must be deported.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 December 2015               |

