
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01675/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2015                |On 17th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     IH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Cheng, Solicitor instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal which involves a minor and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made an  anonymity  direction  for  the  purpose  of  safeguarding  her
    welfare.  For those reasons, the Upper Tribunal continues the anonymity
    order previously made by the First-tier Tribunal. I therefore  make  an
    anonymity  order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  court  orders
    otherwise, no report of any proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.   This
    prohibition  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties   and   their
    representatives.

 2. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State,  with  permission,
    to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Nightingale)
    who, in a determination promulgated on 5th June 2015 allowed the appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 6th August 2013, to make a
    deportation order against her.

 3. Whilst the appeal is brought by the Secretary of State, I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia who appealed the decision of  the
    Respondent, dated 6th August 2013 to make a deportation order by virtue
    of Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act  1971.   It  was  considered
    conducive  to  the  public  good  to  make  this  order  following  her
    conviction for robbery on 2nd December 2009 at Snaresbrook Crown Court.



 5. There is a considerable history to these proceedings I shall  therefore
    set out in brief terms the background to  the  appeal.   The  Appellant
    claimed that she arrived in the UK with the help of an  agent  on  22nd
    October 2001 when she was 9 years of age.  A claim for asylum was  made
    later which was refused on 5th December  2001.   The  Appellant  was  a
    minor at that time and was granted exceptional leave  to  remain  until
    4th December 2005 and following a further application she  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 6th March 2006.

 6. On 2nd December 2009 at Snaresbrook Crown Court, she was  convicted  of
    robbery and having an imitation firearm with intent.  On 20th  February
    2010 at the Juvenile Court she was convicted of a  further  offence  of
    robbery and was sentenced on 19th March 2010 at Snaresbrook Crown Court
    to a total period of 36 months' imprisonment.  She received a  sentence
    of 28 months for robbery and eight months for  the  imitation  firearm.
    On 31st March 2010 at the Juvenile Court she was  sentenced  to  a  ten
    month detention and training order.

 7. As a result of that conviction, she was sent a notice of her  liability
    to automatic deportation on  10th  May  2010  to  which  she  responded
    thereafter on 20th May.  Her custodial sentence was completed  on  22nd
    April 2011 and she was held in immigration detention.  A further notice
    about her liability to deportation  was  served  with  a  notice  of  a
    decision to remove on 10th May 2011 and on 2nd June 2011 she was served
    with a reasons for deportation letter but she did not lodge  an  appeal
    against this decision.  Subsequently she made  further  representations
    and made a claim for asylum.  In July 2012 judicial review  proceedings
    were issued as no decision had been made on her application  but  in  a
    decision letter dated 2nd July 2013, the Respondent explained  why  the
    asylum application was being refused  and  a  deportation  order  being
    made.

 8. On 6th August 2013 the formal decisions were made to refuse asylum  and
    to  make  a  deportation  order  by  virtue  of  Section  5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  The Respondent also issued a  certificate  under
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. The Appellant appealed against the decisions and her appeal  was  heard
    on 6th May 2014 by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  findings  of  the
    Tribunal were set out in a determination promulgated on 12th June  2014
    (the First-tier Tribunal Judge panel).  They had  to  consider  whether
    the certificate under Section 72 should be upheld and  in  this  regard
    they summarised her case and on the deportation  issue  it  was  argued
    that since  her  release  of  detention  in  October  2011,  there  was
    sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption  that  she  constituted  a
    danger to the community and to show that  she  had  matured  since  she
    committed her crimes, regretted her behaviour and was determined not to
    re-offend.  The panel found that the presumption under Section  72  had
    been rebutted.  In relation to the asylum  claim,  the  panel  did  not
    accept her claim for asylum and found that there was a real  likelihood
    that she had family members remaining in Somalia and that she was  from
    Mogadishu.  On the basis of the findings that they made her  claim  was
    dismissed on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.  However  when
    considering to make a decision on the deportation order and whether  it
    would breach her rights under Article 8, the panel reached a conclusion
    at [52] that the appeal should be allowed under Article 8.

10. As a result of that decision, an appeal was brought by the Secretary of
    State against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  panel  allowing
    her appeal under Article 8.  A Rule 24  notice  and  cross  appeal  was
    filed on behalf of the Appellant dated 30th July 2014, which  raised  a
    cross appeal against the refusal of  her  protection  claim  submitting
    that the Tribunal's assessment of credibility was flawed, that  it  had
    failed to apply the country guidance case in AMM and others  (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM)  [2011]  UKUT  91  by  failing  to
    assess the durability  of  any  improvements  in  Mogadishu  after  Al-
    Shabaab's withdrawal and erred in its assessment of Article 3.

11. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal (Judge Latter) on 28th August
    2014 and in a determination promulgated  on  10th  October  2014  Judge
    Latter found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law having  been
    satisfied that both the appeal and the  cross  appeal  should  succeed.
    His reasons for reaching that conclusion were set out at paragraphs [17-
    23] of his determination and consequently he set the decision aside and
    remitted the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision  to  be
    made afresh save that in respect of the  findings  on  the  Section  72
    certificate which were preserved.

12. Thus the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nightingale)
    on 2nd June 2015.  In a decision promulgated on 5th June of that  year,
    the judge allowed the appeal on both asylum and Article 8 grounds.

13. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision on six
    grounds and permission was granted on 7th July 2015.

14. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the written
    grounds and in view of their length, did not seek to make  any  further
    oral submissions.

15. Mr Cheng on behalf of the Appellant relied upon the  Rule  24  response
    that had been filed in these proceedings and also a  skeleton  argument
    that he had prepared on  her  behalf  dated  1st  September  2015.   In
    respect of Ground 1, he referred the Tribunal to the documents  in  the
    bundle that had been provided on behalf of the Appellant in 2001  which
    comprised of  an  undated,  unsigned  statement  (page  11)  which  the
    maternal aunt had signed for her in view of her young age.  The judge's
    findings took into account her age and that any inconsistencies  should
    be given limited weight in view of that.  Consequently he submitted the
    findings of the judge in this regard at paragraph [47] were open to the
    judge to make.

16. Whilst the Secretary of State raised the issue that the judge  appeared
    to find that the Respondent may have had clan protection in  the  past,
    it was submitted that this was a misreading of paragraph [53] and  that
    the issue was addressed in an "even  if"  manner  saying  that  if  the
    Respondent had protection between 1995 to 2001 it was not likely to  be
    in existence now. The judge had found that she had had no communication
    with any person in Somalia since her departure at the age of 9 and thus
    was not able in those circumstances to identify what clan she may be as
    she did not know, nor would she be able  to  identify  any  methods  of
    support.  The judge made proper findings as to whether or not  she  was
    able to access support on return to Mogadishu.

17. Mr Cheng referred to the Ground at 2 and 3  whereby  the  Secretary  of
    State asserted  that  the  error  rested  within  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
    partner.  He pointed out that at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Secretary of State did not accept that the Appellant  was
    in a subsisting relationship and that formed  the  basis  of  the  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Thus it was unclear how the First-tier
    Tribunal could have been said  to  have  been  illogical  in  making  a
    finding that the Appellant was not in a genuine relationship bearing in
    mind that was the way the case was advanced on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State.  Thus where the grounds dealt with  that  as  an  issue,  the
    findings of the judge were open to her to make.

18. As to Ground 3, it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider her as a lone woman as in the light of the  findings  made  by
    the judge, she would not have the support of her partner or any members
    of his family.  As regards FGM, he submitted that whilst  the  decision
    in AMM referred to potential victims of FGM being protected  from  harm
    if the parents disagree with the practice, this was a  case  where  the
    Appellant would be returning with no  familial  support  and  thus  the
    judge was entitled to find that the Appellant fell within the  category
    identified in AMM and was at risk of suffering FGM were she attempt  to
    integrate into any particular group, clan or society  or  Mogadishu  as
    she would not have any protection.

19. His submissions were that the determination  did  not  demonstrate  any
    arguable error of law and that the grounds were merely  a  disagreement
    with the findings reached by the judge having taken  into  account  the
    country guidance case of MOJ and  Others  (Return  to  Mogadishu)  (CG)
    [2014] UKUT 442 and on taking into account the particular circumstances
    of this Appellant.

20. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the Secretary of State  responded  by  stating
    that the consideration of clan membership was insufficient by the judge
    and that was a material error of law.  As to Ground  4,  the  Appellant
    was living with her child and her in-laws and even discounting  support
    from the father, that itself would provide some provision for  her  and
    whether remittances could be continued from those  relatives  were  not
    taken into account.  As to the issue of FGM, the case law  demonstrated
    there must be some form of pressure whether from in-laws or from family
    members but, as she was returning as a single lone woman,  there  would
    be no pressure coming from the in-laws or from any parents thus she had
    not demonstrated she would be at risk.

21. I reserved my determination.

Discussion:

22. The grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary of  State  assert  that
    the judge made material errors of  law  in  the  determination  and  in
    particular Ground 1 that the judge failed to make lawful findings.   In
    this context it was asserted that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    matters in the  refusal  letter,  in  which  it  was  stated  that  the
    Appellant had failed to provide a  coherent  account  of  her  personal
    circumstances in Somalia between the evidence in 2001 and that in  2011
    and as such, the judge had to resolve why she was able to give  details
    of her clan and city of residence as Mogadishu in 2001 and yet not know
    what her clan membership was in 2011.  It was also  asserted  that  the
    judge's lack of scrutiny concerning her clan membership  was  reflected
    in the judge's findings at paragraph [53].

23. Paragraphs [35-53] of the decision letter from 2013  is  replicated  in
    the Secretary of State's grounds.  As  set  out  above  it  raises  the
    following issues (also raised in the supplementary letter dated  2015),
    relevant to the previous evidence given by the  Appellant  relating  to
    her  clan  membership  in  Somalia  before  she  left  her  country  of
    residence.  It makes reference  to  her  claim  for  asylum  which  was
    refused in a refusal letter of 5th December 2001. It  was  stated  that
    when she claimed asylum she provided evidence that she was a member  of
    the Benadiri sub-clan Shanshiya.  However, when  questioned  about  her
    claim in an asylum interview in 2011 when asked specifically what  clan
    she  was  from  her  response  was  "I  do  not  know"  (question   9).
    Furthermore at question 15, in the interview  she  was  asked  "Do  you
    recall any lineage of your clan?" she responded "I really do not  know.
    I do not believe in anything like that."

24. The letter made reference to the recent version of events and that  the
    Appellant had resided in Somalia until she was 9 years of age (in 2001)
    and then lived with her aunt until 16 years of age and makes  reference
    to the witness statement and screening interview in 2001. It was stated
    that it would be highly unlikely that she would be unable  to  identify
    her clan lineage during the asylum  interview  if  she  was  a  genuine
    member of a minority clan as she had claimed  in  2001.   Thus  in  the
    refusal letter it was recorded at [44] that firstly she had displayed a
    lack of ignorance surrounding her  clan  membership,  the  Benadiri  in
    Mogadishu had their own dialect of the Somali language Af-Hama but  the
    Appellant only spoke Somali despite living there until she  was  9  and
    then living with her aunt and therefore she had  not  demonstrated  she
    was a member of the Benadiri clan.  Furthermore, it  was  not  accepted
    that her parents were killed by the majority clan and that she was able
    to reside in Mogadishu from 1995 until  2001  without  any  significant
    problems which showed that  she  was  not  a  member  of  the  Benadiri
    minority clan.

25. The judge's findings relating to those issues raised  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs [46-58] of the determination.  The judge gave  consideration
    to the factual circumstances surrounding the appeal and that  this  was
    not the "run of the mill" asylum claim and that there  were  particular
    factual matters raised from its history.  It was common ground that the
    Appellant arrived in the UK at the age of 9  years.   Contrary  to  the
    grounds, the  judge  properly  considered  the  issue  of  inconsistent
    evidence that is, in 2001 she could give her clan membership but  could
    not in 2011, by setting it against the Appellant's background  and  the
    circumstances in which that evidence and claim was made.   Having  done
    so, the judge found that her inability to provide  an  autobiographical
    account of her time in Somalia was entirely understandable as  she  had
    arrived at the age of 9 and the judge found that he  would  not  expect
    the  memories  to  be  detailed  and  necessarily  reliable  in   those
    circumstances (see [48]).

26. The Appellant left Somalia as a child and only had a  few  memories  of
    that time and place.  The judge recorded that she recalled  being  sent
    abroad but did not know her clan origins or those of her  parents.   At
    paragraphs [48] and [52] the judge plainly gave  consideration  to  the
    points raised by the Respondent in the refusal letter of 2013 [and that
    of the supplementary letter in 2015] that she had lived with  her  aunt
    previously and that in those circumstances that it was likely that  she
    would have had some information about her clan membership/upbringing.

27. In this context the judge  gave  a  description  of  the  Appellant  as
    presenting as a -

         "... westernised young woman  who  speaks  English  with  a  London
         accent, dresses in a smart and fashionable manner with no headscarf
         and other outward indication of any religious identity."

    The  judge  also  recorded  from  the  findings  that  she   was   "not
    particularly embedded in the Somali community in the  UK."   The  judge
    went on to state -

         "Given her age  of  the  Appellant  on  arrival  (age  9)  and  the
         description of her upbringing by her aunt and estrangement from her
         aunt as a child that 'I do not find it implausible that  she  would
         exhibit inconsistencies and indeed 'blanks' in her recollection  of
         events in Somalia.'"

28. In this context, the Appellant's evidence concerning  her  relationship
    with her aunt was that she had had a difficult  relationship  with  her
    aunt and they had fallen out over her  refusal  to  wear  a  headscarf,
    behave conservatively or agree to marriage  and  that  she  had  become
    estranged from her at the age of 15 when she was  still  a  child  (see
    [37] and judge's findings at [52]).  At [52] the judge found  that  the
    Appellant had rejected her cultural and  religious  aspects  of  Somali
    life that her aunt had wished her to adopt.  The  judge  was  satisfied
    that this led to a breakdown in their relationship.  Consequently,  the
    judge's findings when drawn together were as follows; the Appellant had
    a difficult relationship with her aunt and rejected  her  cultural  and
    religious aspects of Somali life.  This led to  the  breakdown  of  the
    relationship between them and the Appellant left her household when she
    was still a child.  The judge found she was not embedded in Somali life
    or culture demonstrated by her rejection of those issues  and  also  by
    her presentation as a westernised young woman who  spoke  English,  who
    dressed in a fashionable manner with no headscarf and gave  no  outward
    indicators of any religious identity.  The  judge  found  that  against
    that background that her lack of information about her clan  membership
    was not determinative of her overall credibility [52]  and  that  given
    her age on arrival and subsequent estrangement from her  aunt,  it  was
    not implausible that she would have "blanks" or inconsistencies  as  to
    her recollection of events in Somalia.

29. In my judgment when reading the determination as a whole it was open to
    the judge to reach the conclusion that it was not implausible that  she
    should exhibit inconsistencies  or  "blanks"  in  her  recollection  of
    events in Somalia.  In reaching those overall  conclusions,  the  judge
    plainly had regard to the argument set out in  the  refusal  letter  at
    2013 and the subsequent supplementary  letter  of  2015  (at  paragraph
    [48]) and the nature of the evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Respondent
    which had led to the decision in 2001.  This consisted of the  material
    set out at Annex J.  There was a witness statement that was unsigned by
    the Appellant and it was recorded  on  13th  November  2001  that  "the
    client too young to sign maternal aunt signed for her."   There  is  no
    record of any asylum interview carried out with the  Appellant  at  the
    age of 9 and consequently, it was open to the judge  to  attach  little
    weight to any inconsistencies between the account given  in  2001  when
    she was a minor and against that particular  background  and  the  fact
    that in 2011 she could provide no details.  I observe that  when  Judge
    Latter allowed the cross appeal (against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal which dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds) he said at  [21]
    that the Tribunal in considering that issue had failed to  give  proper
    account to the fact that reliance was placed  on  information  obtained
    from the initial asylum claim at a stage  where  the  Appellant  was  9
    years of age, the form being endorsed with the fact that  she  had  not
    signed the same in the light of her age.  Consequently, contrary to the
    grounds the judge properly made a lawful consideration of those issues.

30. The Respondent in the grounds also makes reference to  paragraphs  [51]
    and [53] of the determination and that  it  was  insufficient  for  the
    judge to speculate that those people formerly in Somalia may have moved
    about. It was incumbent on the judge to resolve whether  the  Appellant
    had been protected when she had formerly been living in Somalia on  the
    basis that she was either from a  majority  clan  or  a  minority  clan
    affiliated with the majority clan.  Thus it was submitted that this was
    the necessary finding to make.

31. The judge's findings at [51] and [53] must be read in  the  context  of
    the findings as a whole.  In particular, the earlier findings  relating
    to her historical problems of having no proper recollection of her life
    in Somalia before the age of 9.   The  judge  had  found  that  it  was
    entirely plausible that she had "blanks" in her recollection of  events
    (at [48]).  Similarly her relationship with her aunt was such that  she
    did not know of her background and  she  was  not  embedded  in  Somali
    culture or life; the inference being that she did not have  any  access
    to those pertaining to her own "clan".  At [47] the judge accepted  the
    Appellant's evidence that she had memories of her sister whose name she
    knows but whose face she could not remember.  At [51] the judge  refers
    to the submissions of the Respondent  that  she  "might  possibly  have
    family in Mogadishu" and at [53] and [54] reached the  conclusion  that
    whilst the Presenting Officer had stated that it  was  "possible"  that
    she "might" have some relations in Mogadishu, it was nothing more  than
    a possibility and  that  on  the  lower  standard,  the  Appellant  had
    established that it was not  reasonably  likely  that  she  had  family
    remaining in Mogadishu.

32. The judge reached that conclusion on the  basis  that  it  was  sixteen
    years since she was last in Somalia at the age of 9  and  that  in  the
    light of the country conditions and the upheaval during the period that
    had elapsed, many individuals had either left or relocated  internally.
    This was a finding open to the judge on the evidence and the history of
    Somalia and does not appear to be challenged by the Secretary of State.
      In  those  circumstances  it  could  not  properly  be  described  as
    speculative as the grounds assert.

33. Whilst the grounds at paragraph 4 assert that  the  judge  accepted  at
    [53] that the  Appellant's  family  had  clan  protection,  this  is  a
    misreading of paragraph [53].  What is plain from the determination  is
    that the Appellant herself did not know what  clan  she  was  from  nor
    could she give any indication of her circumstances  in  Somalia  before
    she left aged 9.  The judge accepted the reasons that  were  given  and
    that the account  in  2001  for  the  reasons  outlined  above  was  an
    unreliable one.  At [53] the judge at its highest was saying  that  the
    fact that she may have been able to  reside  in  Mogadishu  until  2001
    provided a suggestion that she was afforded some protection.   However,
    the judge properly took into account the position as it was at the time
    of the hearing and in the light of the passage of time,  sixteen  years
    having passed.  As the country guidance decision in  MOJ  makes  plain,
    the significance of clan membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.   The
    Tribunal found that the significance of  clan  membership  had  changed
    that clans now provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
    assist with access to livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a  protection
    function than previously.  The Tribunal also found that there  were  no
    clan militias  in  Mogadishu,  no  clan  violence  and  no  clan  based
    discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.

34. The country guidance case of MOJ also set out  the  position  of  those
    returning to Somalia after a period of absence and the judge considered
    the decision in his analysis. At [vii] the Tribunal made reference to a
    person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence who would -

         "... look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,
         for  assistance  in  re-establishing   himself   and   securing   a
         livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek assistance from  his
         clan members who are not close relatives, such help is only  likely
         to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may
         have little to offer."

35. At [i] and [x] the Tribunal stated -

         "If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all  the  circumstances.   These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to,  circumstances
         in Mogadishu before departure; length of  absence  from  Mogadishu,
         family or clan associations to call upon in  Mogadishu,  access  to
         financial resources, prospects of securing  a  livelihood,  whether
         that be employment or self-employment, availability of  remittances
         from abroad, means of support during the time spent in  the  United
         Kingdom, why his ability to funds from the west no  longer  enables
         an Appellant to secure financial support on return."

    At [x] the Tribunal stated -

         "It will be for the person facing return to explain  why  he  would
         not be able to access the economic  opportunities  that  have  been
         produced by the economic boom, especially if there is  evidence  to
         the effect that returnees are taking jobs at the expense  of  those
         who have never been away."

    And at [xi] -

         "It will therefore only be those with no clan or family support who
         will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and have no  real
         prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return who will face
         a prospect of living in circumstances falling below that  which  is
         acceptable in humanitarian protection terms."

    At [xi] the Tribunal also stated -

         "The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those  who
         originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live  in
         the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing
         a real risk of destitution.   On  the  other  hand,  relocation  in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no former links with
         the city, no access to funds and no other former of clan, family or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards."

36. Thus the judge applied the guidance given in  MOJ  to  the  Appellant's
    circumstances.  The judge finding that the Appellant left at the age of
    9 and had not returned, that there was  a  realistic  possibility  that
    none of her relatives are still in Mogadishu and that she  had  had  no
    contact with anyone with Mogadishu or Somalia since she was 9,  sixteen
    years ago [53].  The judge found that she would be returning to Somalia
    to a place where she knew no one and could not prevail  on  any  person
    for protection and that she had sought to  distance  herself  from  the
    Somali community both culturally and in a  religious  context  and  her
    memories of Somalia were fractured and poor.  The judge found that  she
    adopted a westernised attitude and had chosen not to follow the culture
    and religious norms of the Somali community.

37. The judge also found that she would be returning as a lone  woman  with
    no family connections or as a sole head of a  single  parent  household
    with a British citizen baby with no familial  links  in  Mogadishu  and
    that as her asserted partner had  not  even  attended  the  hearing  in
    London, the judge  found  that  it  was  "highly  unlikely  to  provide
    financial support for her in Mogadishu" [54].  At  [55]  there  was  no
    evidence that the father of the child  would  continue  supporting  her
    financially on return to Mogadishu and she had no access to any further
    remittances.  Consequently, taking into account all of  those  findings
    that were open to the judge to make on the  evidence  before  him,  the
    judge was entitled to reach the conclusions  by  applying  the  country
    guidance of MOJ as cited above.   In  those  circumstances,  the  judge
    properly considered the question of clan membership but was entitled to
    find on the evidence before him,  that  by  reason  of  her  particular
    circumstances and on the particular facts of this case  that  she  fell
    within those circumstances as outlined in MOJ.

38. The grounds at various paragraphs assert that the judge's finding  that
    she was a lone woman with no family connections was an  error  of  law.
    This was based on the fact that she was  residing  in  the  UK  with  a
    partner and his relatives and that the judge failed to make findings as
    to the support  from  her  partner.   Mr  Whitwell  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State recognised the illogical nature of those submissions
    given the position taken by the Secretary of  State  not  only  in  the
    refusal letter but at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    the refusal letter in 2015 the Secretary of State specifically referred
    to the Secretary of State's case at paragraphs 47 and 48  that  it  was
    not  considered  the  Appellant  was  in  a   genuine   or   subsisting
    relationship.  In the submissions before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    [29] the position of the Respondent was recorded as follows:-

         "It was not accepted that the Appellant was in a relationship  with
         her partner in the most recent refusal letter and the fact that  he
         had not signed his statement or attended the hearing to support the
         mother of his child was a  further  indication  that  this  was  no
         longer a genuine or subsisting relationship."

39. In those circumstances and  in  the  light  of  the  lack  of  evidence
    concerning the Appellant's partner and the findings made by  the  judge
    about his failure to attend, it was open to  the  judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion at [54] that in view of the lack of evidence it  was  highly
    unlikely that he would be financially supporting her in Mogadishu.   In
    those circumstances, the judge's findings at [55] were entirely open to
    him that there  was  nothing  to  demonstrate  that  the  family  would
    continue to support her financially if she were in Mogadishu  and  that
    there was a real risk that there would be no availability of  financial
    remittances from the UK or elsewhere and that she would have no  access
    to financial support for herself or her British citizenship child.

40. As to the other issue raised by MOJ, it was open to the judge  to  find
    at [55] that the Appellant did not fund her journey to the west  as  it
    was funded by her family at the time when she was 9 years of age.

41. It is further asserted in the grounds  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    approach to the risk of FGM on return to Somalia.  In particular it  is
    asserted that the conclusion that the Appellant herself (age 24)  would
    be at risk of being subjected to FGM, that the judge misunderstood  the
    findings in AMM and Others (Conflict; humanitarian  crisis,  returnees;
    FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445.  In this context it is  asserted  that
    the judge characterised the guidance as to applying  to  any  unmarried
    woman under the age of 39.

42. I do not consider that that ground is made out either.  The  judge  set
    out the evidence at paragraphs [49], [54] and [56].  The judge recorded
    at [49] that the Appellant  gave  evidence  in  a  "clear  and  largely
    straightforward manner".  The  judge  accepted  that  there  were  some
    matters of which she was not certain and that she -

         "...  frankly  admitted  that  she  had  been  told,  following   a
         miscarriage, that she might have been subjected to FGM in the past.
          However, she had no memory of any such events."

    The judge went on to state that she had no memory of FGM but was  frank
    in her admission that she had some gynaecological difficulties in  both
    the previous miscarriage and a caesarean delivery for her child and she
    was told that this may have happened.  The judge properly  applied  the
    lower standard to the fact-finding exercise and went on to state -

         "The fact  that  there  is  a  possibility  that  she  had  already
         undergone FGM does not preclude equally  a  real  risk  or  serious
         possibility that she has not, as yet, been subjected to FGM."

    The judge made the point at [49] that if the Appellant was  seeking  to
    mislead the Tribunal in claiming that she had not  undergone  FGM  when
    she knew that she had, then the judge could find no reason  as  to  why
    she would offer voluntarily in the course of her oral evidence the fact
    that she had been told following her miscarriage that  she  might  have
    been "cut".  The judge therefore reached the conclusion that he was -

         "... fully satisfied that she has no memory of having undergone FGM
         which is most commonly performed at the WHO stage iii  in  Somalia.
         The evidence creates a realistic possibility that she  has  not  as
         yet undergone FGM."

    At [54] the judge stated that she had established a real risk that  she
    has not at the present time undergone FGM and at  [56]  turned  to  the
    consideration of risk of FGM.  The judge found that  she  would  be  at
    risk of FGM on the basis that if the Appellant  tried  to  access  clan
    support or indeed join a particular community in  Mogadishu,  then  she
    would be subjected to strong pressures to undergo this mutilation.  The
    judge had regard to the objective material referred to in AMM that  the
    incident of FGM in Somalia was universally agreed to be over 90 percent
    and that the most extreme form "pharaonic" which is categorised by  the
    World Health Organisation as type iii that any uncircumcised, unmarried
    Somali woman up to the age of 39 would be at  real  risk  of  suffering
    FGM.  The judge found that the Appellant fell within that  category  on
    the lower standard and was at risk of suffering FGM were she to attempt
    to integrate into any particular group, clan or society  in  Mogadishu.
    The determination of AMM at paragraph 560 stated that -

         "560.    The prevalence of FGM in Somalia is,  we  find,  so  great
             that an uncircumcised, unmarried Somali woman, up to  age  39,
             will in general be at real risk of suffering  FGM.   The  risk
             will obviously be at its greatest where both  parents  are  in
             favour of FGM.  Conversely, where both parents are opposed  to
             it, the question of whether the risk will reach the  requisite
             level will need to be determined by reference to the extent to
             which the parents are likely to be able to withstand what are,
             as a general matter, strong societal pressures (from both  men
             and women) in Somalia for the procedure to be carried  out  on
             their daughter.  Unless the parents are from  a  socioeconomic
             background that is likely to  distance  them  from  mainstream
             social attitudes, or there is some other particular feature of
             their case (such as living in a place where - exceptionally  -
             an anti-FGM stance is taken as a whole) the fact  of  parental
             opposition may well  as  a  general  matter  be  incapable  of
             eliminating  the  real  risk  to  the  daughter  that   others
             (particularly relatives) will at some  point  inflict  FGM  on
             her."

43. Contrary to the grounds, I do not find that the judge misunderstood the
    decision in AMM.  The Upper Tribunal did not say that there would be no
    risk where there were no  parents  who  agreed  to  FGM;  the  Tribunal
    identified that the risk would be the greatest in  a  case  where  both
    parents were in favour of FGM.  However, the judge considered the  risk
    to this particular Appellant  emanating  from  the  fact  that  if  she
    returned to Somalia it would be necessary had to access clan support or
    join a particular community in Mogadishu and it  would  be  that  which
    would place her at a real risk of harm  in  the  light  of  the  strong
    pressure to undergo FGM in those circumstances.  In essence, the  judge
    was finding that in the place  of  parental  pressure,  any  return  to
    Mogadishu in the light of there being no  family  in  which  she  could
    return to, she would have to find assistance  and  support  from  other
    members of society and the community  who  were  reasonably  likely  to
    place pressure upon her to  undergo  FGM.   The  judge  considered  the
    objective material set out in AMM and that it was open to the judge  to
    find that she would be at a real risk of  suffering  FGM  were  she  to
    attempt to integrate into any particular  group,  clan  or  society  in
    Mogadishu given the prevalence of FGM in Somalia, given that she  would
    be an uncircumcised, unmarried Somali woman and that there were  strong
    societal pressures in Somalia for the procedure to be carried out.

44. Where the grounds assert that the judge failed to take into account the
    socioeconomic background of  the  in-laws  in  which  she  lived,  that
    submission fails to take into account the basis upon which the case was
    advanced by the Secretary of State that in fact the Appellant  was  not
    in a subsisting relationship with her  partner.   The  grounds  further
    assert  the  judge  misunderstood  AM  and  AM  (Armed  conflict;  risk
    categories) [2008] UKAIT 91 to find that being a single woman increased
    the risk of abduction, rape and harassment.  However the grounds failed
    to consider that the judge's findings in the context of the evidence as
    a whole.  The judge did not state that the  Appellant  succeeded  as  a
    lone female per se.  As recognised, being female on  its  own  did  not
    necessarily establish a need for international protection but that  the
    judge found that the  Appellant  would  be  returning  without  family,
    friends or clan support and without resources and thus the judge  found
    that in her particular circumstances, she fell  within  the  categories
    highlighted in MOJ and set out earlier  in  this  determination.   This
    also fails to engage with the basis of the refusal letter at [13]  that
    women in Somalia form a particular social group and that  at  [14]  the
    refusal letter stated "The above information indicate that  lone  women
    are at serious risk of mistreatment in Somalia as there is 'generalised
    and widespread discrimination towards women'".  Whilst  that  paragraph
    went on to state that as she claims to be  in  a  relationship  with  a
    British citizen the partner could return with her to Somalia to provide
    her with the support and therefore she would not be a lone woman,  that
    was not the way the case was advanced on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, nor does it take into account the finding made by the judge that
    the  relationship  was  not  subsisting  and  thus  contrary   to   the
    Respondent's case she would be a lone woman with no support.

45. In the light of the judge's findings which were open to  the  judge  to
    make on the evidence before him, the grounds  do  not  demonstrate  any
    error of law in the decision reached.  In those circumstances it is not
    necessary to consider Ground 6 which concern the Article 8 findings.  I
    am satisfied that the decision of the Tribunal  does  not  disclose  an
    error of law and therefore the decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of  law
and the decision shall stand.  The appeal of Secretary of State  is  thereby
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

