
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01021/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 July 2013                               |On 5 November 2013           |
|Prepared on 19 October 2013                   |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                           zecarius nerayo hadghu

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Shibli, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea who was born on 5 April 1967.  He
    appeals against a decision of a panel of the First-tier Tribunal (First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Myles and Dr T  Okitikpi,  Lay  Member)  which  had
    dismissed his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision,  made  on  6
    November  2012,  whereby  the  respondent  had  refused  to  revoke   a
    deportation order made against him on 3 February 2009.

 2. The factual background to the appeal is set out at paragraph 5  of  the
    panel's determination, and can be summarised as follows.  The appellant
    entered the UK on 3 September 2003, using  a  valid  Eritrean  passport
    endorsed with a student entry visa.  He claimed asylum on 30  September
    2003, which application was refused on 17  November  2003.   An  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed on 17 February 2004 and  permission
    to appeal against that decision was refused on 7  June  2004.   Further
    applications for asylum and human rights protection were  submitted  on
    27 August 2004 and 31 August 2005.

 3. On 16 December 2007, the appellant was  convicted  at  Sheffield  Crown
    Court of obtaining pecuniary advantage by  deception  and  of  using  a
    false instrument, for which he was  sentenced  on  9  January  2008  to
    twelve months' imprisonment on each count, to run concurrently.

 4. Following that conviction a notice  of  liability  to  deportation  was
    served on him and on 12 January 2008 he was served  with  a  notice  of
    decision to deport on conducive grounds under Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  The appellant appealed against that decision  on
    19 June 2008, and on 18 August  2008  his  asylum  claim  was  refused,
    following  which  his  appeal  against  the  deportation  decision  was
    dismissed on 11 November 2008.  A High Court review  of  that  decision
    was rejected on 27 November 2008 and his appeal rights became exhausted
    on 9 December 2008.

 5. A signed deportation order was obtained on 3 February 2009,  but  prior
    to the service of that order the appellant left the UK voluntarily on 9
    March 2009.  However, he returned to the UK via  Germany  on  23  April
    2009 and made a further claim for asylum on arrival.  That  application
    was treated as an application to revoke the deportation order, but  was
    refused and certified with no right of appeal on 13 April 2010.

 6. On 13 August 2010, the appellant submitted a further asylum  and  human
    rights claim dated 10 August 2010.  This was  followed  by  a  separate
    claim, again on asylum and human rights grounds, which was  made  on  1
    August  2011.   The  respondent  treated  these  applications   as   an
    application to revoke the deportation order, and this  was  refused  by
    the respondent on 6 November 2012.  The appellant appealed against that
    decision, and it is this appeal which was considered by the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel, sitting at Hatton Cross on 6 February 2013.

 7. In the course of his appeal, the appellant  submitted  expert  evidence
    from Dr Kibreab, who had given evidence in the country guidance case of
    MA (draft evaders - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007]  UKAIT
    00059.  In its determination, the panel noted (at  paragraph  14)  that
    the Tribunal in MA had stated that having regard  to  his  evidence  in
    general, the Tribunal had  developed  a  favourable  impression  of  Dr
    Kibreab, "for the most part, as a witness".   However,  the  panel  did
    note that that Tribunal in MA had also stated that "he was occasionally
    vague and speculative, also, separately prone to  exaggeration  on  the
    issue of exit visas, [and] on his view that all returning failed asylum
    seekers were as such at real risk".  However, the  panel  did  bear  in
    mind that that Tribunal in MA had concluded, considering  Dr  Kibreab's
    evidence in its totality, and subject to the  qualifications  which  it
    made, that considerable weight could be given to the opinion  expressed
    in his report in that case.

 8. In the course of an extremely thorough and detailed determination,  the
    panel  clearly  considered  the  appellant's  claim  with   care,   but
    nonetheless gave reasons why his appeal had to be dismissed both  under
    Article 3 and also Article 8.  The panel reached  this  finding  having
    considered Dr Kibreab's evidence in particular with great care.

 9. The appellant has appealed against this  decision,  but  permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan.  When
    setting out his reasons for refusing permission, Judge Chohan stated as
    follows:

         "...

         3.   Grounds seeking permission submit that the panel erred in  law
             by not adequately considering the report of Professor  Kibreab
             and failing to consider the case of MO (illegal risk - risk on
             return) Eritrea CG [2011]  UKUT  190  (IAC).   It  is  further
             submitted that the panel failed  to  consider  adequately  the
             findings in the case of MA (draft evaders - illegal departures
             - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059.  As such, it is  argued
             that the panel's findings are flawed.

         4.   The panel's determination is quite thorough in considering the
             facts and evidence.  The relevant findings are  at  paragraphs
             23 to 38.  The panel found that the  appellant  had  not  left
             Eritrea illegally but had left  legally  as  a  student.   The
             panel gives  adequate  consideration  to  Professor  Kibreab's
             report and that is  considered  in  light  of  the  Tribunal's
             decision in the case of MA.   Contrary  to  what  the  grounds
             submit, the panel did consider the case of MO at paragraph 32.
              Whilst I acknowledge that the Tribunal did not outline in any
             detail (which strictly is not a requirement) the case  of  MO,
             however, it is apparent that the panel gave due  consideration
             to it in reaching its findings.  The  Tribunal  further  found
             that the sur place activities of the appellant did not put him
             at risk on return.  The panel's findings in respect of Article
             8 have not been challenged in the  grounds.   Nevertheless,  I
             have considered the Article 8 findings and  I  see  no  error.
             The grounds  seeking  permission  fail  to  mention  that  the
             appellant has been found not to be credible  on  two  previous
             occasions...".

10. The appellant then appealed to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal, which was eventually granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor
    on 14 May 2011, who considered that "arguably, for the reasons given in
    paragraphs 9 to 24  of  the  grounds  of  application,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  erred  in  its  assessment,  and  the  reasons  given  as   a
    consequence of such assessment, of the expert evidence in  the  country
    guidance decisions of MA... and MO...".

The Hearing

11. The appellant did not attend, but his attendance was not necessary  and
    I  heard  submissions  on  behalf  of   both   parties.    I   made   a
    contemporaneous record of these submissions, in which I took a note  as
    well as I could of everything which was  said  to  me,  which  note  is
    contained in my Record of Proceedings.  Accordingly, I will not set out
    verbatim everything that was said  to  me  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing, but shall refer below only to such of the submissions  as  are
    necessary for the purposes of this  determination.   I  have,  however,
    taken into account everything which was said to me, as well as all  the
    documents contained within the file, whether or not specific  reference
    is made to any particular part of the submissions or evidence below.

12. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Shibli outlined  the  three  grounds  on
    which the appellant was appealing.  There had been two key  aspects  of
    his appeal at the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  first  was  his  illegal
    departure from Eritrea, without an exit visa (at this time I noted that
    this had not been accepted  previously).   The  second  aspect  of  his
    appeal was that he had departed  from  Eritrea  whilst  under  national
    service.  There were mixed, irreconcilable  findings  which  Mr  Shibli
    would come to.

13. Although the case had a long history of previous determinations,  there
    was new evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, in  the  form  of  the
    expert report from Dr  Kibreab.   In  this  case,  particular  emphasis
    needed to be put on his illegal departure.

14.  The  first  ground  was  contained  at  paragraphs   9-17.    In   its
    determination at paragraph 24, in four lines, the panel had found  that
    Dr Kibreab was exaggerating in his report when he said that "it can  be
    safely concluded that the overwhelming majority of  Eritrean  nationals
    who leave Eritrea to seek asylum in  the  UK  do  so  illegally".   The
    reason the panel gave for  saying  this  was  an  exaggeration  was  by
    comparing that statement with what Dr Kibreab had said in MA, which was
    that it was virtually impossible to obtain an exit visa if someone  was
    between 10 and 50.  At paragraph 24, the  panel  suggested  essentially
    that he had said a similar thing in this case.

15. However, looking at MO  at  paragraph  131,  it  had  been  found  that
    although failed asylum seekers are not per se at risk, they would be at
    risk if they had left illegally and the great  majority  had.   It  was
    submitted that Dr Kibreab's statement that "the  overwhelming  majority
    of Eritrean nationals who leave Eritrea to seek asylum in the UK do  so
    illegally" was in fact consistent with the findings of the Tribunal  at
    paragraph 131 of MO.

16. Developing that point, in its determination, the panel only referred to
    MO at one point, at  paragraph  32  in  its  first  sentence.   It  was
    referred to fleetingly in the context of the panel stating that  failed
    asylum seekers were not per se at risk.  There was no reference in  the
    determination to MO in terms of now many people left  Eritrea  legally.
    Accordingly, when put in context, although the appeal at the First-tier
    Tribunal was one where illegal departure  was  at  the  heart  of  that
    appeal, and MO was the most recent country guidance case  dealing  with
    that exact issue, in the determination it was referred to only once and
    then, in passing,  on  a  different  point.   Their  determination  was
    significantly weighted towards MA.

17. The second ground of appeal was contained at paragraphs 18 to  24.   At
    paragraph  357  of  MA,  a  distinction  is  made  between   government
    scholarship students, who were sent abroad by the  Eritrean  Government
    for further studies and on the  other  hand,  ordinary  students.   The
    former category of students may be granted exit visas, but  the  latter
    are people who  are  very  unlikely  to  be  granted  exit  visas.   At
    paragraph 26 of its determination, the panel found that  the  appellant
    had a degree, worked for the government in the  framework  of  national
    service, and concluded that therefore he was sent by the government for
    further studies in the UK.  This was on the basis of his degree and his
    working for the government within the framework of national service.

18. In answer to a question at this  point  in  his  submissions  from  the
    Tribunal as to what happened to his passport, Mr Jarvis, on  behalf  of
    the respondent reminded the Tribunal that in his  screening  interview,
    the appellant had claimed to have lost his passport in Middlesbrough in
    2004.

19. Continuing his  submissions,  Mr  Shibli  submitted  that  the  panel's
    finding that the appellant had been a government  scholarship  student,
    on the basis of an inference from the fact that he had a degree and had
    worked for the government, amounted to speculation.  In the grounds, at
    paragraph 22, there was reference to the relevant parts of Dr Kibreab's
    report and a reference (at paragraph 22(a)) to a section of his  report
    which says that even  of  those  highly  trusted  individuals  "only  a
    handful... could obtain exit visas".

20. There was nothing to suggest that the appellant was  a  highly  trusted
    member of the government.  He was head of administration of a  division
    working under  the  framework  of  national  service,  and  the  expert
    evidence from Dr Kibreab is that exit visas are very rare  indeed  even
    for those high  up  in  highly  trusted  positions.   Accordingly,  the
    finding at paragraph 26 was based on speculation.

21. Mr Shibli handed the Tribunal a copy of the decision  in  MA  (Somalia)
    [2010] UKSC 49, which dealt with the situation of people who tell  lies
    and the strength of objective  evidence.   In  his  submission,  in  MA
    (Somalia) the court was concerned with applicants who  put  forward  no
    truthful material concerning what they had been doing, in  other  words
    they had lied about almost everything.  However this  was  not  such  a
    case.  This appellant was believed with regard to some of his evidence,
    such as that he joined the EPLF in  1983.   In  terms  of  his  arrest,
    detention and illegal departure from Eritrea, Mr Shibli had  to  accept
    that his evidence was disbelieved.  However, it had been accepted  that
    from June 1998 he had been working  under  the  framework  of  national
    service as the head of administration for an army  division.   Although
    Judge Hemingway had rejected a large part of his evidence, at paragraph
    135 of Judge Hemingway's determination, there were various facts  which
    were set out as accepted.

22. As regards the panel having said that he was a  government  scholarship
    student, this had been based on an acceptance that he was  working  for
    the government under national service.  This was a key  aspect  of  his
    claim, that he was under national service at the time.  If he was  sent
    as a government scholarship student to the UK ten years before, and had
    not returned, but claimed asylum in the UK, it  was  highly  likely  he
    would be regarded as a deserter.  That point was not dealt with at  all
    in the panel's determination.

23. Referring to paragraph 22 of  MA  (Somalia)  it  was  clear  from  that
    decision that the facts in  each  individual  case  would  have  to  be
    assessed in light of the background evidence as  to  illegal  departure
    and what was probable or possible.  In this case, it was submitted that
    this was an appellant who had been believed with regard to some of  his
    evidence, such as  that  he  had  been  doing  national  service.   The
    evidence here also included an expert report specific to this appellant
    and his position as someone who had been doing national service and the
    prospect of being considered to have thereby exited illegally.

24. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as  to  whether  or  not  the
    passport which the appellant claimed to  have  lost  would  have  shown
    whether or not he had had an exit visa and whether this would have been
    relevant, Mr Shibli did not directly answer this question but submitted
    that as it was said that it was believed that he had left Eritrea as  a
    government sponsored student, it  would  seem  very  likely  ten  years
    later, that having claimed asylum he would be at risk.   This  was  not
    deal with in the determination.

25. The third ground, which was set out at  paragraphs  25  to  30  of  the
    grounds,  concerned  what  it  was   submitted   were   "irreconcilable
    findings".  At paragraph 28, the panel said that having found that  the
    appellant had had an exit visa, it  follows  that  the  panel  did  not
    accept that he was still subject to military service  (what  the  panel
    actually said was that the appellant had "also failed to establish  [to
    the standard of reasonable likelihood] that when he left Eritrea he was
    still subject to military service").  However, at paragraph 26, on  the
    previous page, the panel had suggested that he was engaged in  national
    service.

26. In answer to an observation from the Tribunal  that  it  appeared  that
    what the panel was saying at paragraph 26 was that  the  appellant  had
    obtained his degree within the framework of national service, Mr Shibli
    responded that he had first been studying, and had  then  been  working
    for the government, within the framework of national service,  and  had
    been sent abroad for further studies.

27. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to what  country  guidance
    had been give as to when these people were expected to  come  back,  Mr
    Shibli responded that there wasn't any.  What was material was what was
    in Dr Kibreab's report, which was that restrictions were  placed  later
    by the government.  It was only highly trusted people who would be sent
    abroad to study.

28. The Tribunal at this  point  noted  that  the  appellant  had  been  an
    administrator within a division of the army and  also  had  credibility
    problems, to which Mr Shibli said that his point  was  whether  or  not
    national service would end when the government sent someone abroad.  It
    was the appellant's submission that he would still need  to  be  within
    the framework of national service, so that was not consistent with  the
    finding that he was not then doing national service.

29. It was not just draft evaders who were at risk on return, but deserters
    as well.  As "national service" is wider than  "military  service",  if
    one looked at the expert report  and  the  categories  set  out  there,
    further studies would be within the remit  of  national  service.   One
    cannot just drop out of this.  So ultimately, a  finding  that  he  was
    sent abroad within the framework of national service (I note here  that
    this was not necessarily the panel's  finding)  and  that  he  was  not
    subject to national service were inconsistent.

30. At paragraph  28  of  the  determination,  there  was  a  reference  to
    "military service".  However, there should not be a distinction between
    "military service" and "national service".  If one deserted either, one
    would be at risk on return.

31. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the  panel's
    decision had been open to it.  It was clear that this  particular  case
    had a long history.  As already indicated above,  there  had  been  two
    judicial determinations relating to the appellant's claim  before  this
    panel presided over  by  Judge  Miles  had  considered  it,  and  these
    previous decisions (by an Adjudicator, Mr Trotter, following a  hearing
    at North Shields on 2 February 2004 and by a  panel  presided  over  by
    Immigration Judge Hemingway sitting at Bradford on 27 October 2008) are
    mentioned at paragraph 10.  It was  also  clear  that  this  panel  had
    endeavoured to bring together all of the findings in evidence, in order
    to do justice to the appellant's claim.  In paragraph 10, the panel had
    brought out in great detail all of the previous findings both  for  and
    against the appellant.

32. The thrust of the appellant's claim before this panel really centred on
    the expert report of Dr Kibreab, which is dealt with from paragraph  14
    onwards.

33. The appellant's first complaint concerned the reference to Dr Kibreab's
    evidence as having some quality  of  speculation.   The  appellant  has
    effectively said that MO [2011] shows  us  that  what  Dr  Kibreab  was
    saying in his report about  the  small  numbers  of  people  who  leave
    lawfully was borne out.  However, the important thing  to  note,  which
    was in the mind of the panel, is that this appellant's  case  was  only
    marginally affected by the decision of the Tribunal in MO.

34. Turning to MO, at paragraph 132, it is clear that  the  thrust  of  the
    Tribunal's consideration in this case was the change which had occurred
    since August/September 2008, when MA had been  determined.   There  was
    clear evidence that the authorities were taking a  stricter  line  with
    regard to people leaving.

35. This case was  a  pre-August/September  case  and  so  necessarily  the
    panel's attention focused on MA, which  was  the  older  case,  in  the
    context of whether he would have been allowed to leave.

36. Also, when considering the risk on return in MO, the Tribunal also said
    at paragraph 132 that the guidance in MA  remained  broadly  applicable
    and if an applicant had been found to  be  wholly  incredible,  he  was
    likely to be found not to have established a real risk of persecution.

37. So what is said in MO is that the authorities took  a  harder  line  in
    applications after 2008, with regard to people attempting to leave,  so
    it had been easier to get exit visas before.  So the language  that  Dr
    Kibreab used which is criticised related to evidence he gave in  MA  in
    relation to the numbers of people who would in fact have left lawfully.
     One example which had bee criticised was at paragraph 447  of  MA,  in
    respect of his evidence that all returning failed asylum  seekers  were
    at risk.

38. Although by the time MO was promulgated that  kind  of  commentary  was
    more in line with the evidence, because the position of the authorities
    in Eritrea had hardened, Dr Kibreab's report related to the period when
    the appellant had left (that is  pre  MO)  and  therefore  the  panel's
    comment at paragraph 24 (that "Dr Kibreab's expression that 'it can  be
    safely concluded that the overwhelming majority of  Eritrean  nationals
    who leave Eritrea to seek asylum in the UK do so illegally' comes close
    to repeating what he stated in MA") is justified.

39. The Tribunal in MO was dealing with a later period.  In that  case  the
    Tribunal were very careful to look at the question of risk relating  to
    the restricted period after  2008.   The  way  in  which  the  Eritrean
    authorities would view someone who had left after then  was  different.
    The effect of MO is that they say that MA is still good law, so clearly
    more people could have left before 2008  and  they  would  not  have  a
    problem on return if they fell into the categories of people who  could
    lawfully have left.

40. Effectively, both MA and MO say the same thing, which is  that  if  you
    had left illegally, you would be persecuted, but  otherwise  you  would
    not.

41. So the appellant has focused on paragraph 26 of  the  panel's  decision
    and had spent some time analysing the language used.  However,  it  was
    important  to  understand  where   this   paragraph   fits   into   the
    determination as a whole, because the appellant had asked the  Tribunal
    to compare paragraph 26 with paragraph 28, but that necessarily omitted
    paragraph 27.  When this determination was read as  a  whole,  what  is
    happening is that  in  paragraph  27,  the  panel  is  saying  that  Dr
    Kibreab's report does not address  relevant  accepted  facts.   So  the
    language at paragraph 26, the preceding paragraph, is couched in  terms
    of "it appears that".  In other words, in order to express its  finding
    that Dr Kibreab had not considered the facts of  the  appellant's  case
    properly, the Tribunal in the preceding paragraph in  effect  took  the
    appellant's  claim  at  its  highest  in   terms   of   his   professed
    military/national service background, before saying that Dr Kibreab had
    not dealt with this.  That was a weakness in his expert report.

42. This Tribunal has to recognise that Dr Kibreab's report  was  the  only
    weighty piece of evidence which was said to undermine the determination
    of Judge Hemingway's panel, made before this one, which would otherwise
    be the starting point on ordinary Devaseelan principles.

43. As the panel notes halfway through paragraph 27, Dr Kibreab appears not
    to have taken account of the fact this appellant had been found not  to
    be credible on two separate occasions, and  goes  on  to  say  that  in
    relation to the previous hearing before Judge Hemingway's panel, on the
    basis that the appellant had himself accepted that he had lied  in  his
    earlier hearing before Judge Trotter  in  his  evidence  regarding  the
    amount of time he spent in detention and also in relation to the manner
    in which he had entered into the UK, which the panel considered  "went,
    in our judgment, to the core of his claim",  the  appellant's  evidence
    must be treated with circumspection.

44. Then at paragraph  28,  the  panel  say  that  they  agree  with  Judge
    Hemingway's panel's conclusion that the appellant was  not  a  credible
    witness and that his assertion that he was still  subject  to  what  he
    says is the equivalent of military service, is of no weight.

45. The panel also says at the end of paragraph  28  that  Dr  Kibreab  had
    failed to consider whether or not the appellant may have qualified  for
    demobilisation as a male former combatant due to his  age.   They  note
    that there was some evidence to indicate that a group of  5,000  people
    had been demobilised in July 2002.

46. So, when read in context, the  panel  was  bringing  together  previous
    judicial findings of fact as well as making  lawful  criticism  of  the
    deficiencies in the major piece of evidence before  it,  which  was  Dr
    Kibreab's report.

47. There was no internal inconsistency in the panel's finding with  regard
    to the appellant's former  status  in  Eritrea  in  terms  of  national
    service.  The panel simply expressed the problem which  arose  when  an
    appellant had so clearly failed  to  make  out  his  case  on  material
    matters.

48. The approach which the panel had taken was in line with the decision of
    the Supreme Court in MA (Somalia).   It  had  been  suggested  that  MA
    (Somalia) may not apply because it is dealing with people who have been
    found to be wholly incredible, but that is not correct.  The respondent
    would refer to what was said by the Supreme Court at paragraphs 30  and
    31 of MA (Somalia).  Also, reliance was placed  on  what  was  said  at
    paragraph 32, which was that "where the appellant has given  a  totally
    incredible account of the relevant facts, the Tribunal must decide what
    weight to give to the lie, as well as to all the other evidence in  the
    case, including the general evidence".

49. Accordingly, it was not a question of someone's evidence  being  wholly
    rejected, but of the core of his account being rejected.  At  paragraph
    47 of MA (Somalia), the issue  boiled  down  to  whether  or  not  that
    applicant had made out his case that he did not have  connections  with
    influential actors within Mogadishu.  It was not a question of  whether
    that applicant's evidence was wholly  rejected,  because  it  had  been
    accepted that the applicant in that case was from Mogadishu.  What  was
    important to note is what was said in the third line down at  paragraph
    47 of MA (Somalia), that "in our view, all that the AIT were saying  at
    paragraph 109 was that, because MA had not told  the  truth  about  his
    links and circumstances in Mogadishu, the possibility  that  he  was  a
    person with connections in Mogadishu could not be excluded.   In  other
    words, he had not discharged the burden of  proof  which  the  AIT  had
    correctly said rested on him".  The Supreme Court at paragraphs 47  and
    48 were saying that because MA was lying, unless there  was  background
    evidence to show that he had to be at risk, he had not  discharged  the
    burden of showing that he would be.

50. In this case, and  in  Eritrean  cases  generally,  however  small  the
    numbers might be in terms of lawful exit, there is evidence  that  some
    people do leave lawfully.  When a person is wholly  incredible,  he/she
    has  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof  that  he  would  be
    persecuted.

51. The respondent would remind the  Tribunal  that  the  country  guidance
    given in MA (Eritrea) was the  country  guidance  which  really  bites,
    because MO reduces the categories of people who could have left legally
    after 2008, and does not address the situation pre-2008. If one  looked
    at paragraph 348 of MA (Eritrea), the various categories laid out by Dr
    Kibreab in that case were broader than stated in MO at  paragraph  106.
    So where the panel in this case was expressing difficulty in  accepting
    the appellant's claim of his material history of detention and  leaving
    illegally, it was saying that there was no evidence which  was  weighty
    enough for Dr Kibreab to be able to show that this appellant could  not
    have been in one of these older categories set out in paragraph 348.

52. As noted by the  Tribunal  in  this  hearing,  at  this  point  in  the
    submissions, it was also the case that some of the appellant's evidence
    with regard to his detention had been admitted to be untrue,  and  that
    his evidence had been completely rejected previously as well.

53. In a later part of MA (Eritrea), Dr Kibreab said (despite what  appears
    at paragraph 348) that virtually no one was getting out of Eritrea, and
    the Tribunal there rejected that part of his evidence, saying  that  it
    found it to be exaggerated and speculative.

54. Accordingly, there was nothing unsustainable in  the  panel's  findings
    which were MA (Eritrea) compliant, and there  was  no  evidence  strong
    enough to exclude the possibility that the appellant  fitted  into  the
    pre-2008 categories of people who could have left lawfully.  In  answer
    to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Jarvis confirmed that  it  was  the
    respondent's position that the effect  of  MA  (Somalia)  was  that  if
    someone was lying about his core account, then  unless  the  background
    evidence could exclude the possibility of his having left lawfully, the
    appellant would not have discharged the burden on him.

55. It had also been submitted on behalf of the appellant that even  if  he
    had left lawfully, he had been here ten years, and if he had come as  a
    student, he would not have complied with the  purpose  of  having  been
    sent out of the country.  In  other  words,  he  would  effectively  be
    presumed to be a deserter.  However, the respondent  would  invite  the
    Tribunal to bear in mind what was found by the Tribunal in MA (Eritrea)
    at paragraph 378, as follows:

         "A person who is permitted to leave  Eritrea  by  the  authorities,
         despite being of draft age and not medically unfit, may well not be
         at real risk on return even if he or she has made an  asylum  claim
         whilst abroad.  There are many reasons why this may be so including
         the wish on the part of the Eritrean authorities  to  embed  family
         members of their regime abroad in case trouble arises in Eritrea to
         infiltrate the Diaspora community or  as  a  means  of  encouraging
         foreign remittances to Eritrea from those who are in reality, well-
         disposed towards it."

56. Having  failed  to  establish  that  he  left  Eritrea  illegally,  the
    suggestion that he would be at risk for the reasons advanced is  wholly
    speculative.  The appellant had failed to discharge  the  burden  which
    was on him.

57. Finally, reference  was  made  to  MO  (Eritrea)  and  specifically  to
    paragraph 115, where the Tribunal in that case had found as follows:

         "We appreciate that in the context of a case in which the decision-
         maker has found a claimant/appellant wholly lacking in  credibility
         (save in relation to sex and perhaps age and/or date  of  departure
         from Eritrea and health), it is difficult  to  see  any  basis  for
         finding conclusively that they would not  fall within  one  of  the
         above two categories (highly trusted government officials and their
         families or those who are themselves members  of  the  military  or
         political leadership; members of ministerial staff  recommended  by
         the department to attend studies abroad). But at least in  a  range
         of cases the evidence may be such as to  make  it  clear  that  the
         claimant  concerned,  albeit   wholly   or   largely   lacking   in
         credibility, could not have any links with government officials  or
         the regime's inner circle and could not have an education or skills
         profile making it likely they have been civil servants or  have  an
         educational bent (e.g. if they are found to come from a rural  part
         of Eritrea and have  had  no  secondary  schooling).  What  may  be
         involved here sometimes is clearer  recognition  by  the  decision-
         maker that when finding a claimant wholly incredible they  are  not
         in fact meaning that they lack  credibility  in  every  conceivable
         particular, since they may in fact accept, for example,  that  they
         are from a rural background and lack education."

58. In this case the appellant had been found to have links  to  the  civil
    service and educational attainments and degrees.  So even on the  basis
    of the decision in MO (made in  2011]  the  appellant  would  still  be
    struggling to succeed in this  appeal  and  it  is  important  here  to
    recognise that further restrictions were imposed since April 2008.

59. In reply, on behalf of the appellant, Mr Shibli submitted that what was
    important above all was how this appellant was perceived on his  return
    to Eritrea, whether he would be perceived  as  somebody  who  had  left
    legally or as having left illegally.  In MO at paragraph 131  what  was
    discussed there was the perception the authorities  nowadays  had  with
    regard to failed asylum seekers who returned home.   It  discusses  the
    categories of failed asylum seekers saying they are not per se at risk,
    but a great majority would be perceived as having  left  illegally  and
    therefore except for very limited exceptions, must still be at risk.

60. In answer to a question  from  the  Tribunal,  as  to  whether  if  the
    appellant had left legally, as found, he would  be  able  to  establish
    this on return, Mr Shibli said that the point he  wanted  to  make  was
    that it was the  respondent's  suggestion  that  Dr  Kibreab  had  been
    referring to a situation in 2003 when the appellant had  left  when  he
    said that the "overwhelming majority of people who  left  were  refused
    exit visas".  In fact, in that report, Dr Kibreab  discussed  both  the
    present situation and the past situation over the last  several  years,
    but accepted there were  no  statistics  for  the  year  in  which  the
    appellant had left.  If one looked at the sentences quoted at paragraph
    24, "overwhelming majority" was not in the past tense, and was not said
    with reference to the pre-2008 position.  The problem is that based  on
    that sentence, the panel had said that he was exaggerating whereas  all
    he did was give his opinion on the present situation which was in  line
    with MO.

61. I noted at this time that  this  would  not  help  the  appellant  now,
    because if that is right, Dr Kibreab's evidence did not relate  to  the
    time when he left.

62. Mr Shibli then repeated his submission that the previous  Tribunal  had
    largely accepted Dr Kibreab's opinions as to who would  be  allowed  to
    leave legally, and the panel's assessment was flawed because it had not
    accepted Dr Kibreab's opinion on whether or not he had left legally.

63. Mr Shibli then reiterated the submissions he had made earlier.

Discussion

64. My starting point has to be that this  appellant  has  previously  been
    found to lack credibility and indeed  admitted  that  evidence  he  had
    given before an earlier  Tribunal  had  been  dishonest.   On  previous
    occasions, his claim to have left Eritrea illegally was not accepted.

65. It has not been suggested before me that he would have any other  basis
    of appealing against the respondent's refusal to revoke the deportation
    order which was made apart from his claim that he would be at  risk  on
    return.  It is  said  that  this  risk  would  result  in  one  of  two
    alternative ways.  First, it is said that he would be at risk  because,
    contrary to what  had  been  found  before,  he  did  leave  illegally;
    secondly, even if he did not, it is said  that  he  would  be  at  risk
    because he had stayed in this country for ten years, and thus would  be
    in breach of his obligation to complete his military service.

66. The evidence that he now relies  upon  is  an  expert  report  from  Dr
    Kibreab, whose report has been discussed at length above.

67. I have set out the arguments advanced before me in some detail,  and  I
    am entirely  satisfied  that  this  panel  considered  the  appellant's
    arguments with care and reached findings which were open to it  on  the
    evidence.

68. I deal  first  with  the  appellant's  claim,  which  has  always  been
    rejected, that he left Eritrea illegally.  If he had  left  without  an
    exit visa, production of his passport, which contained a  student  visa
    for this country, would have shown that he had  not  also  obtained  an
    exit visa, which would have been supportive of his case.  In  light  of
    his admission that he told lies at an earlier hearing, and the previous
    findings that his evidence was  not  credible,  I  do  not  accept  his
    explanation that he lost his passport in Middlesbrough in 2004.  In  my
    judgment, the  obvious  inference  from  his  failure  to  produce  his
    passport is that if he had it would have undermined his case.

69. It was not only the passport which the appellant claimed not to be able
    to produce.  The panel noted at paragraph 18 of its determination  that
    the appellant had also claimed to have lost  some  of  the  photographs
    relating to his attendances at demonstrations  when  he  was  arrested.
    The panel referred again to this claim at paragraph 19.

70. The panel rightly considered  that  the  starting  point  must  be  the
    findings made by  the  previous  panel  chaired  by  Immigration  Judge
    Hemingway, in which adverse credibility findings  had  been  made,  but
    properly  took  into  account  facts  that  had   arisen   since   that
    determination in relation to this matter, as is  stated  explicitly  at
    paragraph 22.  The panel took into account  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's claimed sur place activity against the Eritrean regime  and
    also to the evidence of Dr  Kibreab.   However,  having  considered  Dr
    Kibreab's report extensively and thoroughly, it gave its reasons why it
    could not accept his conclusions.

71. When considering these findings, I  have  in  mind  in  particular  the
    observations of the Supreme Court in MA (Somalia) extracts  from  which
    have been set out above.  I take particular note of  this  judgment  in
    the context that Dr Kibreab, as the panel noted at paragraph 27 of  its
    determination, did not address a  number  of  facts  specific  to  this
    appellant.  The panel considered that "it  may  be  the  case  that  Dr
    Kibreab was unaware of this background,  but,  whatever  might  be  the
    reason  the  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  there  is   no   specific
    consideration of these facts in the formulation of his  opinion  [that]
    the appellant's  evidence  that  he  did  not  have  an  exit  visa  is
    plausible".

72. I also note that Dr Kibreab, as also recorded by the panel at paragraph
    27 "conceded that the finding of  the  panel,  chaired  by  Immigration
    Judge Hemingway was sound on "the basis of formal logic", but concluded
    on the basis,  in  our  judgment,  of  general  information,  that  the
    appellant was credible in this regard".  The panel goes on to find that
    Dr Kibreab "appeared not to have taken account of the  fact  that  this
    appellant had been found not to be credible on two  separate  occasions
    in the previous determination and those findings were not  simply  made
    on the basis that his evidence  was  disbelieved,  but,  crucially,  in
    relation to the last hearing, on the basis that the  appellant  himself
    accepted that he  had  lied  in  the  first  hearing  in  the  evidence
    regarding the amount of time he spent in detention and also in relation
    to the manner in which he had entered the  United  Kingdom...  and  the
    explanations he gave for the telling of those lies were not accepted by
    the panel".

73. At paragraph 31 of MA (Somalia), when giving the judgment of the court,
    Sir John Dyson SCJ stated as follows:

         "31. What Laws LJ was saying at para 54 [of GM (Eritrea)] was that,
             where a claimant tells lies on a central  issue,  his  or  her
             case will  not  be  saved  by  general  evidence  unless  that
             evidence is extremely strong. It is only evidence of that kind
             which will be sufficient to counteract the  negative  pull  of
             the lie....".

74. As the panel noted at paragraph 27 of its determination, "it may be the
    case that Dr Kibreab was unaware  of  this  background,  but,  whatever
    might be the reason the fact of the matter is that there is no specific
    consideration of these facts in the formulation of his opinion that the
    appellant's evidence that he did not have an exit visa  is  plausible".
    With respect to Dr Kibreab, in the context of  this  appellant  and  in
    light of the Supreme Court decision in MA (Somalia) what needed  to  be
    considered was not whether or not the appellant's evidence, or account,
    was plausible, but whether his  evidence  was  sufficiently  strong  to
    exclude the real possibility that  he  came  within  that  category  of
    persons, which clearly did exist, who would have been allowed to  leave
    Eritrea legally.

75. When one considers that this appellant was a person  whose  credibility
    had been rejected previously and who  claimed  to  have  lost  evidence
    hugely relevant to this case, in light of MA (Somalia),  it  is  simply
    not sufficient to assert that his  explanation  is  plausible,  without
    going on to consider that  evidence  in  the  context  of  the  adverse
    credibility findings which had been made.

76. With regard to the appellant's exit from Eritrea, as the  panel  found,
    there was good reason to consider, for the reasons set out at paragraph
    26 of the panel's determination, that this appellant  came  within  the
    category of persons who would or could have been granted an exit  visa.
    Similarly, there was good reason to reject the  appellant's  submission
    that when he left Eritrea he was still  subject  to  military  service.
    The panel was entitled to conclude, as it did at paragraph 28, that "Dr
    Kibreab's report fails to consider whether or  not  the  appellant  may
    have qualified for demobilisation as a male former combatant, given his
    evidence that "ageing women and male former combatants were  the  group
    of 5,000 immobilised in July 2002".

77. The panel clearly gave thorough consideration to Dr  Kibreab's  report,
    but were entitled nonetheless to consider, for  the  reasons  it  gave,
    that the appellant had not established  either  that  he  left  Eritrea
    illegally or that he would be at risk now for failing to  complete  his
    military service (or its equivalent).  As noted by  Mr  Jarvis  in  his
    submissions, the Tribunal in MA had also  identified  the  category  of
    persons who would not be at risk, people who could advance the "wish on
    the part of the Eritrean authorities to embed  family  members  of  the
    regime abroad in case trouble  arises  in  Eritrea  to  infiltrate  the
    Diaspora community or as a means of encouraging foreign remittances  to
    Eritrea from those who are, in reality, well-disposed towards it."

78. In my judgment, having considered Dr Kibreab's evidence,  in  light  of
    the  specific  facts  already  found  concerning  this  appellant,  the
    Tribunal  was  entitled  to  reach  the  findings  it  did,   and   its
    determination contains no material error of law.

79. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed, and I so find.



Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.






Signed:                             Dated:  29 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

