
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01190/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 April 2014                              |On 9 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                GURI HYSTUNA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr A. Pretzell, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik,
Solicitors


 DECISION UNDER RULE 21(6) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES
                                    2008


    1. The appellant in  these  proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they were  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Kosovo, born on  25  June  1985.
       Two different dates are given for his arrival in the UK, 9 September
       1999 and 9 January 2000, although nothing turns on this. The further
       history can be taken quite shortly.

    3. He was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  17  January  2012.
       However, on 19 January 2012 and 21  January  2012  respectively,  he
       committed offences of assault occasioning  actual  bodily  harm  and
       intimidating a witness. He received a custodial  sentence  of  three
       months for the assault and a consecutive sentence of nine months for
       the offence of intimidating a witness, making 12 months in total. On
       5 June 2013 the Secretary  of  State  made  a  decision  to  make  a
       deportation order. The appeal against that decision was allowed by a
       Panel of the First-tier Tribunal.

    4. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal but that application was refused
       by a First-tier Tribunal judge. A renewed application  was  made  to
       the Upper Tribunal and a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  purported  to
       grant permission  to  appeal.  The  grounds  seeking  permission  to
       appeal, in summary, were that in  concluding  that  the  appellant's
       deportation would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  the
       First-tier Tribunal failed to give  adequate  reasons.  The  grounds
       also refer to and quote from MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192,
       although do not say in what respect the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
       to take that decision into account, the First-tier  Tribunal  having
       referred to and considered it in its reasons.

    5. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  refusing  permission  to
       appeal was sent by first class post to the Secretary of State on  17
       January 2014. This meant that any application to the Upper  Tribunal
       for permission to appeal had to be received by the Upper Tribunal no
       later than seven working days after the  notice  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's refusal of permission to appeal was sent. That meant that
       it had to be received no later than 28 January 2014. In fact, it was
       received on 30 January 2014 and was therefore out of time. This  was
       a matter that was in  fact  identified  by  Tribunal  administrative
       staff and indicated on the Tribunal file. The Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       who purported to grant permission to appeal did not  deal  with  the
       timeliness issue.

    6. Rule 21(6) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       ("the Procedure Rules") provides as follows:

           "(6)     If the appellant provides the application to the Upper
           Tribunal later than the time required by paragraph (3) or by an
           extension of time allowed under rule 5(3)(a) (power to extend
           time)--

           (a)     the application must include a request for an extension
           of time and the reason why the application was not provided in
           time; and

           (b)     unless the Upper Tribunal extends time for the
           application under rule 5(3)(a) (power to extend time) the Upper
           Tribunal must not admit the application."

    7. The timeliness issue in this case was not flagged up  prior  to  the
       hearing by either party. I mention  that  not  as  a  criticism  but
       simply to indicate that neither party was initially prepared to deal
       with the point. Mr Pretzell had  the  opportunity  to  consider  the
       point whilst this appeal was waiting to be  called  on.  I  rose  to
       allow Mr Avery time to  make  enquiries  in  relation  to  when  the
       refusal of permission by the First-tier Tribunal was served  on  the
       Secretary of State.

    8. In due course Mr Avery agreed with the chronology of events  as  set
       out above. He did not apply for a longer adjournment for this  issue
       to be considered further. He agreed that time  for  receipt  by  the
       Upper Tribunal of the application ran out on 28 January  2014,  that
       there was no application to extend time and no reason  given  as  to
       why the application was late.

    9. The Presidential Guidance Note of 2011 (amended in  September  2013)
       suggests at [24] that by parity of reasoning with Boktor  and  Wanis
       (late application for permission)  Egypt  [2011]  UKUT  00442  (IAC)
       where an UT Judge has not dealt with  the  issue  of  lateness,  the
       grant of permission can be considered as being conditional with  the
       issue of an extension of time to  be  considered  by  the  UT  Judge
       seized of the appeal.

   10. In line with the  decision  in  Boktor  and  Wanis  and  Samir  (FtT
       Permission to appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003(IAC), and taking  into
       account the Presidential Guidance Note at [24], I consider that  the
       grant of permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal  is  conditional
       because the timeliness issue has not been dealt with.

   11. Mr Avery submitted that it  was  important  to  bear  in  mind  when
       considering whether to extend time that there was  a  serious  legal
       issue involved in this appeal, concerning as it does deportation and
       the public interest inherent in the case.  He  said  that  the  only
       explanation he could offer was  that  at  the  time  of  making  the
       application there were  manpower  difficulties  and  a  shortage  of
       staff, so he had been informed.

   12. Mr Pretzell relied on the decision in Boktor and Wanis  and  BO  and
       Others (Extension of the time for appealing)  Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT
       00035. He submitted that the strength of the grounds was not a  good
       ground for extending time. In this case,  the  explanation  provided
       was not satisfactory and was unsupported by any evidence.  In  fact,
       in the matter before me there was no  explanation  provided  at  the
       time of making the application.

   13. Whilst in the main I accept Mr Pretzell's  submissions,  I  disagree
       with him on one point. Boktor and Wanis  did  not  decide  that  the
       strength of the grounds was not a good ground  for  extending  time,
       which is what I understood his submission to be. Commenting  on  the
       starred decision of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  in  AK
       (Tribunal appeal - out of time) Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201, it  was
       said in Boktor and Wanis at [13] that:

              "The Tribunal commented that it was of  course  impossible  to
             provide a list of what might be  "special  circumstances".   It
             was clearly of the view that the strength of grounds of  appeal
             could not by itself be a ground for extending time, for if that
             was the case, as was pointed  out,  a  person  who  had  strong
             grounds of appeal would never need  to  comply  with  any  time
             limits.   The  strength  of  the  grounds  might,  however,  be
             relevant in assessing the circumstances as a whole.

   14. It was the Tribunal's view that the strength of  the  grounds  could
       not "by itself" be a  ground  for  extending  time.  The  point  was
       endorsed in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new  rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT
       00060 (IAC) at [16] where the Upper Tribunal, with a Panel including
       the President,  said  that  the  merits  of  the  appeal  cannot  be
       decisive.

   15. In the matter before me the application was not only  out  of  time,
       there was no explanation for  its  being  late,  and  there  was  no
       application for an extension of time. The explanation  proffered  at
       the hearing before me was insufficient to cure those defects in  the
       application for permission made to the  Upper  Tribunal,  not  least
       because under rule 21(6)(a) the application must include  a  request
       for an extension of time and the reason why the application was  not
       provided in time.

   16. Ultimately, on the facts before me, the only basis on which it could
       be suggested that time for  submitting  the  application  should  be
       extended was the merits of the application. However, as has  already
       pointed out, by itself that is not a sufficient basis  on  which  to
       extend time.

   17.  In the circumstances, I refuse to extend time under rule 5(3)(a) of
       the Procedure Rules and the application to the  Upper  Tribunal  for
       permission to appeal is not admitted.

   18. The consequence of that conclusion is that there is no appeal before
       the Upper Tribunal and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
       allow the appeal therefore stands.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 14/04/14
