
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/01942/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates' Court        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 August 2014                             |On 26 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                  AHMED DAQ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION

 1. This appeal arises out of a challenge to the  determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge North and Mr  F.  Jamieson  JP  (the  panel).   For
    reasons given in their decision dated 2 July 2014 the  panel  dismissed
    the appeal under the Refugee Convention, on human rights grounds and on
    grounds that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    decision appealed against was that s.32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007
    applied to the appellant resulting in  a  deportation  order  dated  19
    September 2013. The grounds of appeal to the FtT argued that  the  s.32
    decision was that it was not in accordance with the law, unlawful under
    s.6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  not  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules and that removal would be in  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

 2. The appellant is a national of Somalia where he was born on  28  August
    1977.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 August 1997  and  embarked
    on a criminal career culminating in a conviction on 10 July 2012 at the
    Central Criminal Court of theft from a person of another for  which  he
    was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

 3. Having regard to the nature of the challenge to the panel's decision it
    is not necessary to dwell on the nature and extent of  the  appellant's
    criminal activity except to note that, in  summary,  between  1998  and
    2005, he was convicted of a wide range of offences ranging from assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm, possession of an offensive weapon in  a
    public place, using threatening abusive insulting  words  or  behaviour
    with  intent  to  cause  fear  or  provocation  of   violence,   theft,
    shoplifting, robbery, burglary with intent to steal and being drunk and
    disorderly.  On 15 December 2003 he was sentenced to  a  total  of  two
    years' imprisonment on two counts of burglary  and  one  of  having  an
    offensive weapon.  A conviction on 21 March 2005 of burglary led  to  a
    sentence of 30 months imprisonment on 4 May 2005.

 4. As to his immigration history, the appellant claimed asylum on  arrival
    which was refused but he was granted exceptional leave to remain  until
    13 April 1999.  His asylum claim was revived in 2007 when he was served
    with notice of a decision to make  a  deportation  order.   His  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed after a hearing on 24 January 2008.
     After error of law was found in the  decision  in  June  that  year  a
    further hearing took place before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  August
    2008 resulting in the appeal again being dismissed.  On appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal the case was remitted for  reconsideration  limited  to
    the issue whether  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  protection  under
    Article 3 further to an order dated 12 January  2010.   That  task  was
    undertaken by UTJ Jordan who for reasons  given  in  his  determination
    dated 11 May 2011 dismissed the appeal.  He found that Mogadishu  where
    the appellant had been born and educated was no longer safe as a  place
    to live.  UTJ Jordan found  however  that  as  a  Darod,  sub-clan  the
    Marehan, the appellant could relocate to Gedo, the place of  origin  of
    that clan.

THE APPEAL BEFORE THE FtT

 5. Turning to the decision that has given rise to this appeal,  the  panel
    heard evidence  from  the  appellant.  The  other  evidence  before  it
    included a report by a country expert, Mary Harper as well  as  country
    information including a range of reports from UNHCR, news agencies  and
    NGOs.  It heard submissions  on  a  range  of  material  including  the
    country guidance decision in AMM  &  Others  (conflict  -  humanitarian
    crisis; returnees; FGM) [2011]  UKUT  00445.   The  panel  reached  the
    following conclusions:

      i) The general situation in Mogadishu had improved significantly since
         AMM was decided and the  level  of  violence  did  not  now  engage
         Article 15(c) for all but the narrow group of returnees  identified
         in AMM.  As a consequence the appellant did not require  protection
         under this provision on his return to that city.

     ii) Although the appellant's clan affiliation  did  not  mean  that  he
         would necessarily receive help or protection from friends or fellow
         clan members, he is less likely to face difficulty than those  with
         no  such  clan  associations.   The  appellant   would   not   face
         persecution in Somalia for having tattoos/marks/injuries or because
         he had adopted a western lifestyle whilst in the UK.   Whilst  such
         matters might cause him low-level societal harassment it would  not
         be so serious as to amount to persecutory ill-treatment.

    iii) Whilst it  was  accepted  the  appellant  may  face  some  societal
         approbation (because of his criminal offending) it did  not  accept
         that this would amount to persecutory ill-treatment.

     iv) The appellant would be returning to Somalia as a single  relatively
         young man with bilingual skills and  someone  of  resilient  nature
         being prepared to breach  his  curfew  order  and  engage  in  some
         disruptive behaviour.  There were therefore no concerns  about  him
         being vulnerable and he could be expected to cope better than  most
         in re-establishing himself in Somalia on return.

      v) The appellant would be  returning  at  a  time  when  many  of  the
         diaspora had chosen  to  return  and  the  appellant  will  not  be
         necessarily  identified  as  someone  imputed   with   unacceptable
         religious  opinions  or  westernised  values  by  reason   of   his
         appearance or time spent in this country.

     vi) In the alternative the appellant  could  safely  relocate  to  Gedo
         assisted by his clan affiliations.

 6. The panel also reached a finding on Article 8 grounds but these are not
    subject to challenge.

 7. Ms Kiai helpfully summarised her challenge as this:  whilst it was open
    to the panel to depart from country guidance, it  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for doing so.  It had not given adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the conclusions of Mary Harper or those in the UNHCR Reports.

DISCUSSION

 8. A reasons challenge as opposed to a perversity one frequently arises in
    this jurisdiction.  It is not necessary for the Tribunal to set out its
    conclusions on all the evidence before it or on every point raised.  It
    is necessary to examine the determination to see  whether  the  reasons
    were "... sufficiently detailed to show the principles upon which  [the
    tribunal]  acted  and  the  reasons  for  its  decision"  -   see   the
    observations of Beatson LJ in  Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  558
    at paragraph 32(ff).

 9. Notwithstanding the acceptance by Ms Kiai that the challenge was one of
    adequacy of reasoning, the grounds do raise rationality with particular
    reference to the panel's consideration of  the  appellant's  resilience
    that would prevent him being vulnerable.  The test for such a challenge
    is a demanding one.  The grounds as  formulated  also  argue  that  the
    panel had misdirected itself as to the law in being satisfied that  the
    general situation in Mogadishu had improved  significantly  since  AMM.
    Taking each point in the grounds in turn:

The Respondent supplied no evidence on Somalia.

10. I accept Mr  McVeety's  submission  that  this  is  not  correct.   The
    respondent's reasons letter refers to country information including the
    Economist Intelligence Unit Report  dated  1  November  2011,  the  COI
    Report on Somalia dated January 2012 and a Country Bulletin Brief dated
    February 2013.  Somalia Bulletins dated August 2012 and  a  COI  Report
    dated the same month are also referred to.  Whether or  not  to  depart
    from country guidance is  not  simply  dependent  upon  the  respondent
    adducing new material.  It is open to a Tribunal to re-evaluate country
    guidance in the light of all the material irrespective of its provider.

The panel failed to identify which  parts  of  the  evidence  supported  the
finding of a material change in Mogadishu since AMM

11. After a comprehensive review which included the  conclusions  of  Judge
    Jordan between paragraphs [13] and [19],  the  panel  carried  out  its
    analysis of the evidence and gave reasons  why  it  concluded  why  the
    general situation in Mogadishu had  improved  significantly.   Specific
    reference is made  to  the  respondent's  assertions  and  the  reports
    provided by the appellant including the UNHCR Reports  and  the  expert
    report by Mary Harper.  Its conclusions are succinct  but  sufficiently
    clear and focused to demonstrate that an evaluation was carried out and
    that the panel, as  indicated  in  [15],  had  considered  all  of  the
    evidence.

12. In particular the panel noted the evidence by UNHCR in  its  report  of
    January 2013 that the authority of clan elders had been eroded  and  Ms
    Harper's evidence that Mogadishu remained  highly  insecure  since  Al-
    Shabab had conducted its tactical withdrawal in 2011.  The  panel  also
    noted the positive developments recorded in her evidence as well as the
    negatives including the risks to civilians.  In my view, the panel  was
    entitled to note that those risks occurred in  public  places  such  as
    restaurants, hotels, roadsides and roundabouts.  It was  also  entitled
    to note Ms Harper's evidence that Al-Shabab were no  longer  conducting
    large-scale co-ordinated recruitment drives in the city.

13. Ms Kiai argued that the panel had only summarised the beginning  of  Ms
    Harper's report and not the subsequent detail.  The report  is  divided
    between the general situation and a consideration under the heading  of
    "specific factors, tattoos, length of time spent in  the  UK,  criminal
    activity and lack of  Marehan  clan  membership".   These  aspects  are
    considered at [17] to [19] of the determination and  include  reference
    to the evidence of Mary Harper.  As with the general  situation,  I  am
    satisfied that the panel gave succinct but sustainable reasons for  its
    individual findings.  This ground is without merit.

The Panel failed to give  any/adequate  reasons  why  it  rejected  evidence
relevant to Article 15(c) risk in Mogadishu

14. The reasons given by the panel refer to Mary Harper's  report  and  the
    UNHCR Report of June  2014  and  in  addition  Amnesty  International's
    opinion.  This is really a repetition of the point considered above and
    it does not raise anything new of substance.

Mogadishu destitution

15. Under this heading,  the  grounds  assert  that  the  panel's  findings
    regarding specific risk factors contained material  errors  illustrated
    by unclear or irrational findings regarding the appellant's  resilience
    and previous use of aliases.  It is also argued  the  panel  failed  to
    give reasons for rejection of  material  evidence,  in  particular  her
    concern regarding the difficulty in keeping secrets in Somalia  due  to
    the strong oral culture.  The extent of the  rationality  challenge  is
    limited to this aspect and it is without merit.  I consider that it was
    rationally  open  to  the  panel  to  reflect  on  the  nature  of  the
    appellant's character when deciding whether he would be vulnerable  and
    I consider they were entitled to view him  as  someone  who  "could  be
    expected to cope better than most in re-establishing himself in Somalia
    on his return".  The panel  also  addressed  the  consequences  of  the
    appellant's criminal offending coming to light and  it  was  rationally
    entitled to observe that he may face some  "societal  [dis]approbation"
    but  that this would not amount to persecutory ill-treatment.

16. The grounds do not criticise the panel's  treatment  of  the  issue  of
    tattoos in relation to Mogadishu.  Ms Kiai submitted that the risk they
    raised applied also to the city.  Ms Harper explains that  Somalis  she
    had spoken to about the tattoos would place the appellant at  increased
    risk of serious harm if Al-Shabab became aware  of  them.   Furthermore
    she considered he might come  into  contact  with  Al-Shabab  or  their
    sympathisers in Mogadishu and would almost certainly do so with them in
    Gedo as it controls part of a region.  These would identify  him  as  a
    member of the diaspora and some Somalis she had  spoken  to  said  that
    tattoos were considered to be a sign of homosexuality.

17. The panel referred to the decision by UTJ Jordan that  the  tattoos  on
    the appellant's arm (which bear  the  name  of  a  former  partner  and
    Chinese characters) did not constitute a specific risk.  The panel went
    on to explain it had considered the evidence of Ms Harper but concluded
    that this did not give a reason to  interfere  with  the  UTJ  Jordan's
    findings.  Its reasoning is  succinct  but  cogent  and  sufficient  to
    demonstrate that the issue was addressed and dealt with.

18. Ms Kiai submitted that Ms Harper's evidence was based on the continuing
    presence of Al-Shabab in Mogadishu, however her focus appeared to be on
    the risks the appellant would specifically encounter because of them in
    the event of contact with Al-Shabab and  Gedo  which  I  will  turn  to
    shortly.  I am satisfied that  the  panel  had  proper  regard  to  the
    combined factors  of  residence  in  the  west,  the  tattoos  and  the
    appellant's criminal past and gave a proper place for these factors  in
    its reasoning on risk in Mogadishu.  The panel  gave  adequate  reasons
    for finding the appellant would be able to cope.

19.  The  panel  did  not  specifically  address  the  issue   of   imputed
    homosexuality.  This is not raised in the grounds  of  challenge.   The
    reasoning given by Ms Harper of this aspect  being  a  risk  factor  is
    somewhat loose.  I am satisfied that if the panel  had  addressed  this
    aspect specifically, it would inevitably have concluded that the robust
    nature of the appellant's character would provide him with the  ability
    to cope. Such a conclusion would have been rationally open to them. The
    panel  concluded  that  the   appellant   may   face   some   "societal
    [dis]approbation" indicating that it clearly  understood  the  evidence
    and it carried out a properly reasoned risk assessment.

20. The next ground under this heading challenges the conclusion  that  the
    appellant could stay in an IDP camp contrary to AMM.  Ms Kiai  accepted
    that it would only be vulnerable people who would be at risk in an  IDP
    camp.  I accept Mr McVeety's submission that the appellant did not fall
    in the vulnerable category for the reasons given  by  the  panel;  they
    were entitled to conclude that the appellant would be fit for work  and
    would be with  his  skills  able  to  avoid  having  to  live  in  such
    circumstances.

21. In the light of the above I am not persuaded that the  panel  erred  in
    law  as  alleged.  Its  consideration  of  internal  flight  was  on  a
    hypothetical basis  and  therefore  consideration  of  this  aspect  is
    academic. But as I heard submissions I have these observations to  make
    as to the assertions under the heading in the grounds, Gedo.

Gedo

22. The challenge raises the following points:

      i) Misdirection of law by reliance on withdrawn country  guidance:  AM
         (route of return) [2011] UKUT 54 (IAC).

     ii) A failure to give adequate reasons in  preferring  evidence  before
         UTJ Jordan in 2011 over recent evidence with reference to

          -   UNHCR Report June 2014

         -    Ms Harper's report that a tattoo would be an adverse indicator

         -    the appellant's non-belief in Islam.

         It would be unreasonable to expect a returnee to relocate to an IDP
             camp

         Further - relocation to an Al-Shabab controlled area is out of  the
         question: AMM

         Relocation to a non-Al-Shabab controlled area may be possible for a
         person who has a clan or strong family connection.

    iii) The panel failed to consider the risk of destitution in Gedo  based
         on him never having lived there and not having a nuclear family  to
         rely on for support.

23. It is fair  to  say  that  of  the  specific  risk  factors  Ms  Harper
    identified in her report, the presence of tattoos, the length  of  time
    in the UK and lack of knowledge regarding Islam raised the prospect  of
    heightened  risk  were  the  appellant  to  encounter  Al-Shabab.   She
    observed that the safest way for him to travel from Mogadishu  to  Gedo
    would be by air and as to Gedo itself she considered  that  the  region
    was in part still controlled by Al-Shabab.

24. The panel correctly noted  the  submission  that  the  appellant  would
    suffer ill-treatment at the hands of Al-Shabab in Gedo or en  route  as
    well as Ms Harper's disagreement with  UTJ  Jordan's  conclusions  that
    Gedo was potentially safe.

25. If there is a criticism to make of the panel's  reasoning  on  internal
    flight, it is that they did not make  a  clear  finding  regarding  the
    presence of Al-Shabab in Gedo or in the course of any over land journey
    there.  It referred to the evidence  of  reports  of  Al-Shabab  losing
    parts of Gedo to combined government forces and of  the  administration
    based in Kismayo wanting to expand into the Gedo region.

26. The guidance in AMM was clear that a person from an Al-Shabab area  who
    can show they do not genuinely adhere to Al-Shabab's ethos will have  a
    good claim  to  refugee  protection.   This  guidance  came  after  the
    decision of UTJ Jordan and it is evident that the panel  did  not  give
    adequate reasons for departing from it.

27. I do not consider however that this error is material  because  of  the
    reasons given above regarding the safety  of  the  panel's  conclusions
    regarding  Mogadishu  thus  rendering   internal   flight   alternative
    irrelevant.

28. By way of foot note I drew the attention of the parties to the case  of
    K.A.B. v Sweden (Application No. 886/11) in which the Strasbourg  Court
    reached a conclusion regarding Article 3 risk (as  opposed  to  Article
    15(c)) in Mogadishu in September 2013.  I drew the  parties'  attention
    to this case at the outset of the hearing in case it had  relevance  to
    the materiality of any error found.  As it turns out it did not.

29. In summary I am not persuaded that the determination of  the  panel  is
    infected by a material error.  This appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date 25 September 2014
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
