
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/01515/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Crown Court                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 July 2015                              |On 4 September 2015           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     MD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Both MD and the Secretary of State appeal to the Upper Tribunal against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Burnett)  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3 of the ECHR but dismissing his appeal on
    asylum grounds against  a  decision  to  deport  him  pursuant  to  the
    automatic deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. For convenience, we will continue to  refer  to  the  parties  as  they
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He is 40 years old.  He  first
    arrived in the UK on 26th January 2004 as a visitor.   Subsequently  he
    returned to Pakistan and then again came to the UK being granted  leave
    until 30 June 2005.  His leave was subsequently  extended  first  as  a
    work permit holder until 1 August 2006 and then as a visitor  until  15
    September 2006.  On 14 September 2006 he made an application for  leave
    to remain outside the Rules but this was refused  on  4  October  2006.
    The  decision  was  reviewed  and   upheld   on   22   December   2006.
    Consequently, the appellant has overstayed in the UK since 15 September
    2006.

 4. Between 2  December  2008  and  11  February  2010  the  appellant  was
    convicted of a number of offences.  On 18 April 2011, he was  convicted
    at Coventry Crown Court of a number of sexual  offences  involving  men
    and,  in  relation  to  the  most  serious,  he  was  sentenced  to  an
    indeterminate sentence of imprisonment for  public  protection  with  a
    determinate period of eight years' imprisonment.

 5. On 15 June 2011, the appellant was  informed  that  he  was  liable  to
    automatic deportation which was followed  by  a  questionnaire  and  an
    invitation to make representations why he should not be  deported.   He
    did not respond.

 6. On 9 April  2014,  the  appellant  was  informed  by  letter  that  the
    Secretary of State considered that s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIA Act 2002") applied  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had committed a particularly serious crime and constituted  a
    risk to the community.  Representations were then made on his behalf on
    a number of dates in April 2014 including that the appellant claimed to
    be at risk on return to Pakistan because he is a gay man and because he
    has converted from Islam to Christianity.

 7. On 14 July 2014, the Secretary of State made a decision that s.32(5) of
    the UK (Borders) Act 2007  applied  as  the  appellant  was  a  foreign
    criminal and his return to Pakistan would not breach his  human  rights
    or the Refugee Convention.   The  Secretary  of  State  also  issued  a
    certificate under s.72(9) of the NIA Act 2002 that the presumptions  in
    s.72(2) applied namely that the  appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime and constituted a danger to the community in
    the UK.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 25  November  2014,  Judge  Burnett  accepted  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to Pakistan because he was  a  gay
    man  and  a  Christian  convert.   As  a  consequence  he  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3 of the  ECHR.   However,  Judge  Burnett
    considered that the appellant had  not  rebutted  the  presumptions  in
    s.72(2) that he had been convicted of a particularly serious crime  and
    that he constituted a danger to the community.  As a result, he  upheld
    the certificate under s.72(9) and dismissed the asylum  appeal  without
    substantive consideration in accordance with s.72(10) of  the  NIA  Act
    2002.

The Appeals to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against
    the judge's decision to uphold the s.72 certificate on the  basis  that
    the judge finding that  the  appellant  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community in the UK was contrary to the evidence and irrational.

10. On 16 December 2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  V  A  Osborne)
    granted the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  on  that  ground.   The
    respondent filed a rule 24 reply dated 9 January 2015 seeking to uphold
    the Judge's decision on the s.72 certification. Finally, the  appellant
    served a rule 25 reply to that notice dated 1 February 2015.

11. In addition, the Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the judge's decision to allow the  appeal  under
    Art 3.  The Secretary of State argued that the judge had been wrong  to
    find that the appellant was at risk on return as a gay man or Christian
    convert  in  accordance  with  the  objective  evidence.   Further,  in
    relation to the risk to the appellant as  a  gay  man,  the  judge  had
    failed to make any finding as  to  whether  the  appellant  would  live
    "openly" in Pakistan.

12. The appeal was initially listed for hearing  before  UTJ  Grubb  on  28
    April 2015.  However, at that time  the  respondent's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal had not  been  decided.
    As a result, the appeal was adjourned in order  that  the  respondent's
    application for permission could be decided.

13. On 5 June 2015, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (UTJ  Roberts)  granted  the
    respondent permission to appeal against  Judge  Burnett's  decision  to
    allow the appeal under Art 3.  The appellant served  a  rule  24  reply
    dated21 July 2015 seeking to maintain the Judge's  favourable  decision
    under Art 3.

14. The appeal was subsequently listed before the  Upper  Tribunal  in  its
    current constitution on 27 July 2015.

The Respondent's Appeal

15. We will deal first with the respondent's appeal as that matter  can  be
    dealt  with  relatively  shortly  given  the  position  taken  by  both
    representatives before us.

16. Mr Mills, who represented the Secretary of State did not seek to pursue
    the respondent's challenge to Judge Burnett's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3.  He acknowledged that it  was  accepted
    that the appellant was a gay man.  At the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,
    the Presenting Officer indicated that he  had  no  submissions  to  add
    beyond the refusal letter and accepted that  that  letter  acknowledged
    that the appellant was at risk in his home area. Further,  he  accepted
    that the Presenting Officer had not sought to make any  representations
    in the light of the Operational Guidance Notes in respect  of  Pakistan
    for July 2014 relating to risk based upon sexual orientation and  as  a
    Christian convert.

17. In addition, Mr Mills accepted the position put forward by  Mr  Chelvan
    (who represented the appellant) that  it  was  no  longer  relevant  to
    enquire whether the appellant would behave  "discreetly"  in  Pakistan.
    If he would be at risk, if he behaved openly, then he was  entitled  to
    international protection, at least  in  this  case  under  Art  3  and,
    subject to any s.72 certificate point, asylum.  Mr Mills accepted  that
    the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in MSM (dated 3 July 2015 and
    contained in  the  appellant's  UT  bundle  at  pages  74  et  seq  and
    subsequently reported as MSM  (journalists;  political  opinion;  risk)
    Somalia [2015] UKUT 413 (IAC)), relying on the CJEC's decision in X,  Y
    and Z (C-199/12 to  C-201/12)  [2014]  Imm  AR  440,  had  removed  the
    requirement recognised in HJ (Iran) v SSHD  [2010]  UKSC  31  that,  in
    order to succeed in an international protection  claim,  the  appellant
    must establish that at least one of the reasons  why  he  would  behave
    "discreetly" would be out  of  fear  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment.

18. In the light of Mr Mills' position  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to
    explore further the impact of X, Y and Z upon HJ (Iran)  as  recognised
    by the UT in MSM.  Mr Mills did not actively pursue  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal against Judge Burnett's decision  to  allow  the  appeal
    under Art 3 and in the light of that  we  dismissed  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.  Judge Burnett's decision to allow the appeal under Art
    3 stands.

The Appellant's Appeal

19. The focus of the arguments before us concern the  judge's  decision  to
    uphold the s.72 certificate.

20. Mr Chelvan's submissions set out in the grounds, his rule 25 reply  and
    in further detail at the hearing can be summarised as follows.  At  the
    hearing before Judge Burnett, the Presenting Officer did not  challenge
    any of the evidence of  the  witnesses  who  gave  evidence  about  the
    rehabilitation and lowering of risk that the appellant posed since  his
    imprisonment.  In particular, Mr Chelvan relied upon a statement by  Mr
    David Shepherd the appellant's offender supervisor at his prison  dated
    27 August 2014 (at para 11.2 at page 31 of the appellant's FTT  bundle)
    that: "at this time he is stable and will not reoffend unless there  is
    a change in his circumstances." Mr  Chelvan  submitted  that  the  only
    change of circumstances  posited  by  the  judge  at  para  57  of  his
    determination was that the  appellant  might  lose  his  accommodation.
    However, that was contrary to the evidence of one witness AE, with whom
    the appellant had lived between 2009 and 2011, that she  would  provide
    accommodation on the appellant's release from prison.

21. Mr Chelvan submitted that this case was an  example  of  rehabilitation
    working and on the basis of that evidence it  was  irrational  for  the
    judge to conclude that the appellant continued to present a  real  risk
    of danger to the community by reoffending.  He invited us to set  aside
    the s.72 certificate and, in the light of the decision in  relation  to
    Art 3, to allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

22. We do not accept Mr Chelvan's submissions.

23. We first note that the appellant does not challenge the judge's finding
    that the appellant has not rebutted the presumption that he committed a
    particularly serious crime.

24. The presumption that, having committed that offence, he is a danger  to
    the community is also rebuttable.  The burden is upon the appellant  to
    establish on a balance of probabilities that he is not a "danger to the
    community".   That latter requirement must be  understood  as  follows.
    The danger must be  "real"  and  if,  as  is  the  case,  he  has  been
    "convicted of a particular serious crime and there is a  real  risk  of
    its repetition, he is likely to constitute a danger to  the  community"
    (see EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 630 at [45] per Stanley Burnton
    LJ).

25. There were a number of relevant documents before Judge Burnett which he
    took into account at paras 47-66 in concluding that the  appellant  had
    not rebutted the presumption  that  he  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community.  First, there were  the  sentencing  judge's  remarks  which
    Judge Burnett referred to at paras 47-48 setting out the  circumstances
    of the appellant's offending and that the judge had imposed an  IPP  on
    the basis that the appellant was a dangerous offender.  Secondly, there
    was a Structured Assessment of Risk in Need (SARN) Report  in  relation
    to the appellant's offending dated 21 March 2014 prepared by a clinical
    Psychologist.  The judge dealt with this at paras 49-51 as follows.

         "49. There is a report ...  dated  21st  March  2014.   This  is  a
             structured  assessment  of  risk  and  need   (SARN)   (sexual
             offending).  The report refers to  an  introductory  framework
             which sets out  the  appellant's  background  and  information
             about his life history.  I note that this report  states  that
             the appellant had his first relationship  with  a  male  while
             training to be a doctor.  It is stated that he was then forced
             by his family into a marriage with his wife.  The appellant is
             assessed in this report as a high rate of  reconviction  of  a
             sexual offence.  (see 2.3 of the report).

         50.  The report goes on to consider an assessment according to SARN
             (Structured assessment  and  need)  TNA  (treatment  and  need
             analysis).   The  author  records  that  there  are  carefully
             defined risk factors which must be considered in applying  the
             framework.  The author identities a number of risk factors.

         51.  At 5.1 it states that the appellant remains  within  the  high
             risk group.  This means that the appellant has a  high  number
             of psychological factors associated  with  increased  risk  of
             recidivism.  The author states that she feels though that  the
             current level of risk is likely to  be  overestimated  by  the
             RM2000 (the framework).  This was because she was of the  view
             that the appellant  had  engaged  well  with  the  recommended
             treatment for his risk profile and that he  had  good  insight
             and is managing the identified risks positively.  It is stated
             that the appellant is a high risk of harm to the public  which
             takes into account that if the appellant  were  to  re-offend,
             his  offence  would  likely  involve  intrusive  contact   and
             offending against vulnerable individuals."

26. Thirdly, there was a report from the  appellant's  offender  supervisor
    (upon which Mr Chelvan  placed  considerable  weight),  David  Shepherd
    dated 27 August 2014.  The judge dealt with this report at para  52  in
    the following terms

         "52. There is a report by the appellant's offender supervisor dated
         22nd August 2014.  It refers to a report of 12th  May  2014,  which
         assessed the appellant as a medium risk.  It is stated that  having
         seen the SARN report, the assessment now made is that the appellant
         is a medium risk of serious harm.  It is stated that he will not re-
         offend unless there is a change in his circumstances."

27. Fourthly, there was a NOMS report dated 20 September 2014 at pages 26 -
    29 of the bundle.  The judge dealt with this report at paras  53-55  as
    follows.

         "53. I note a further report dated 20th September 2014.  This is  a
             NOMS report.  I note that  it  states  that  at  the  time  of
             offence the appellant was a medium risk of re-offending and is
             still a medium risk of re-offending.  He  was  assessed  as  a
             high risk of harm to the public and  was  now  assessed  as  a
             medium risk of harm.  The ORGS scores were 46% and 64%.

         54.  The report states that the appellant is a medium  risk.   This
             is said to be  characteristic  as,  there  being  identifiable
             indicators of risk of serious harm present and  the  potential
             to cause harm but the appellant is unlikely to do so either in
             custody or in the community  unless  there  is  a  significant
             change in circumstances.

         55.  I note that it states that no further progress could  be  made
             to rehabilitate the appellant as the  appellant's  immigration
             status  and  the  deportation  decision,  remains  a  bar   to
             progress.  If the decision to deport  is  confirmed,  then  he
             could not move to open conditions.  I should  also  note  that
             the risk assessment is based upon a plan to move the appellant
             to open conditions to continue treatment  and  rehabilitation.
             It is stated though that progressive move to  open  conditions
             would be the most productive means of continuing to  reinforce
             and further develop the reduction in the  risks  posed.   This
             move, it is stated, is so the appellant  can  demonstrate  his
             learning and behavioural changes."

28. As regards those assessments, Judge Burnett said this at paras 56-57:

         "56. I do note that the professional assessments  take  account  of
             the appellant's attitude  and  behaviour  in  prison  and  the
             undertaking of courses and programmes.  I  consider  that  the
             character references  that  have  been  provided  and  support
             letters do not cause me  to  diverge  from  this  professional
             assessment.  These reinforce those assessments.

         57.  I note Mr Chelvan has quoted from  the  parts  of  the  report
             which I have also identified above.  He emphasises  the  "will
             not re-offend".  The report does not state that the  appellant
             will not re-offend.  It states he will not re-offend  "unless"
             there is a change in his circumstances.  This  "change"  could
             be a loss of accommodation.  It is very  difficult  to  assess
             these sorts of changes in circumstances, as the  appellant  is
             not as yet in open conditions in prison."

29. It is what the judge said in para 57 which attracted the  focus  of  Mr
    Chelvan's submission that the judge was simply not entitled  to  reject
    the offender supervisor's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  "will  not
    reoffend" on the basis that there would be a  change  of  circumstances
    since none were established on the evidence.

30. Fifthly there was a letter dated  22  May  2014  from  the  appellant's
    probation officer, Mr Whitehurst which the judge dealt with at para  58
    as follows:

         "58. Mr Chelvan also places emphasise on a recent letter  from  the
             appellant's  offender  manager,  Mr   Whitehurst,   that   the
             appellant's level of risk of harm is assessed as medium.  This
             indicates that there is no perceived immediate risk of serious
             harm at the present, either in custody or the community.   The
             probation officer goes on to state that  there  should  be  on
             going monitoring of sexual factors and the opportunity for the
             appellant to develop his learning.  It is also stated that the
             progress and reduced risk, would be jeopardised if the ongoing
             needs are not addressed."

31. Finally, the judge (at para 59) referred to the appellant's "static re-
    offending risk scores" in an OASys Report dated 12 May 2014 referred to
    in Mr Shepherd's report of 27 August 2014 at para 11.1 as follows:

             "59. I note the static re-offending risk scores (OGRS) OF  46%
             AND 64%.  This is the likelihood of  re-offending  within  the
             first and second years after release.  I understand that  this
             is used when there is no OASys assessment.  OASys is  said  to
             be a dynamic assessment which include social economic  factors
             such as employment and accommodation."

32. Having set out that evidence Judge Burnett gave his reasons for finding
    that the appellant has not rebutted  the  presumption  that  he  was  a
    danger to the community at paras 60-66 as follows:-

         "60. Based upon all of the above, it is clear  that  the  appellant
             committed a number of serious crimes.  The description of  the
             offences above and the fact  that  the  appellant  received  a
             sentence  of  indeterminate  length,  shows  he  committed   a
             particularly serious crime.  I do not find that the  appellant
             has rebutted this presumption contained within section 72.  It
             is therefore  necessary  to  turn  to  whether  the  appellant
             represents a danger to the public/community.

         61.  I have considered carefully the submissions of Mr Chelvan  and
             the reports I have referred to above.  It is  clear  that  the
             appellant is assessed as posing a medium risk  to  the  public
             (OASys assessment).  These assessments are a judgment  of  the
             dynamic factors by the individual probation  officer  combined
             with a statistical analysis of the likelihood of re-offending.

         62.  I do not consider  that  the  reports  are  stating  that  the
             appellant will not re-offend.  The reports  are  a  management
             risk by  applying  statistical  formula  and  social  economic
             factors.  The medium assessment does not mean there is no risk
             of  the  repetition  of  his  offending.   If  the   appellant
             reoffends, there is a real risk it will include serious harm.

         63.  The words of section 72 state that the appellant  "constitutes
             a danger to the community".

         64.  Mr Chelvan argues that the appellant is not a  danger  to  the
             public as there is no real risk.  I do not agree.  It is clear
             that the appellant originally did not accept  his  crimes  and
             there was described a level  of  deception  in  his  thinking.
             Given the serious risk to the public and for the protection of
             the  public,  an  indeterminate  sentence  was  passed.    The
             appellant is eligible for parole after 4 years, less any  time
             spent on remand.  He has not yet reached that 4  year  period,
             which as passed to protect the public from the appellant.   It
             should also be  acknowledged  that  he  appellant  is  working
             through his sentence plan and the courses set as required  and
             is rehabilitating himself.  However,  further  work  is  still
             needed.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the  appellant  can  be
             released now without any supervision or plans in place or  can
             be released without his learning being tested  first  in  open
             conditions in prison.  This all  shows  he  still  presents  a
             danger but that the risk and danger is being  managed  at  the
             moment by the probation service.  It does not mean he will not
             re-offend but the continued assessment and steps are to manage
             the risk he still poses to the public and the community.

         65.  I note that the appellant is not assessed as a low risk  where
             such an argument by Mr Chelvan would have much greater force.

         66.  I consider that the section  72  presumptions  have  not  been
             rebutted in this case.  As a result and by virtue  of  section
             72(6) I must dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds."

33. Whilst we accept that the Presenting  Officer  did  not  challenge  the
    evidence of any of  the  witnesses  that  is  not  tantamount,  in  our
    judgment, to an acceptance that the appellant on the basis of  all  the
    evidence had rebutted the presumption that  he  was  a  danger  to  the
    community.  That was an assessment which the judge properly had to make
    on the basis of all the  evidence,  professional  and  otherwise.   The
    genuineness of the personal witnesses as to the  appellant's  behaviour
    since imprisonment including his conversion  to  Christianity  was  not
    called into question.  However, that evidence had to  be  seen  in  the
    light of the professional evidence as to the risk, if any, he continued
    to pose to the community.

34. With the exception of what is said in para 11.2 of Mr Shepherd's report
    of 27 August 2014, nothing in the professional material  suggests  that
    the appellant no longer poses a danger to the community.   The  reports
    state, as Judge Burnett noted, that the appellant continues to  present
    a medium risk of serious harm to  the  community.   The  reports  speak
    about continued support and rehabilitative  interventions  to  continue
    the undoubted improvement in the appellant's awareness of his offending
    and responsibility for it and behavioural changes that he needs to make
    in order not to reoffend.  The appellant is, at present, of  course  in
    prison and not in the community.  The NOMS report, for example,  states
    that the appellant is a "medium risk" of causing serious  harm.   There
    is  no  suggestion  that,  despite  the  progress  being  made  by  the
    appellant, further is not required.  For  example  that  report  states
    that a move to a category D prison would be important as:

         "the most productive means of continuing to reinforce  and  further
         develop the reduction in risks posed." (our emphasis)

35. There is no suggestion here that the  appellant  presents  no  risk  of
    reoffending.  Likewise, the Clinical Psychologist notes that the  OASys
    Report states that the appellant is a "high risk of harm to the  public
    in the community" but that his risk to known adults, children and staff
    is assessed to be "low".  At para 6, the report sets out  a  number  of
    factors which might reduce the risk in the future or raise the risk  in
    the future.  Again, there is no suggestion, in our judgment,  that  the
    appellant can be said not to pose a risk to the public bearing in  mind
    that his offending was extremely serious  directed  against  vulnerable
    males.

36. In our judgment, the passage in Mr  Shepherd's  report  upon  which  Mr
    Chelvan places much reliance must be seen first in the context in which
    it is said and also as being only  part  of  the  evidence  before  the
    judge.  We have already set out the gist of  the  other  evidence.   As
    regards para 11.2, Mr Shepherd says this:

         "Although [the appellant] has not had the opportunity of practising
         his skills in the community, I am of the opinion that he could  now
         be assessed as medium risk of serious harm, namely that  there  are
         identifying factors which will contribute to his offending, but  at
         this time he is stable and will not  reoffend  unless  there  is  a
         change in his circumstances."

37. As that quotation makes plain, Mr Shepherd continues  to  believe  that
    the appellant presents a "medium risk of serious  harm".   Further,  at
    para 8.4 Mr Shepherd had earlier stated that :

         "[the appellant] has worked extremely well in developing skills and
         strategies  which will  lower  the  risk  that  he  had  previously
         represented and is now aware of his own personal risk  factors  and
         how he should address these when they become live issues."

38. The appellant had, of course, previously been assessed as presenting  a
    high risk.  Mr Shepherd recognises  that  the  appellant  has  improved
    through developing skills and strategies  and  that  the  risk  is  now
    lower.  That is, of course, consistent with  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant presents a "medium risk of serious harm".

39. In the NOMS report, which postdates Mr Shepherd's report, the  offender
    officer notes at para 12  that,  as  a  result  of  the  behaviour  and
    attitudes displayed by the appellant as  seen  by  the  writer  and  Mr
    Shepherd at the prison where the appellant is held:

         "The risk of serious harm assessment has been reduced to a  minimum
         level.   This  is  characterised  as   there   being   identifiable
         indicators of risk of serious harm present  and  the  potential  to
         cause harm but [the appellant] is  unlikely  to  do  so  either  in
         custody  or  in  the  community  unless  a  significant  change  in
         circumstances should arise."

40. As this makes clear, the writer  together  with  Mr  Shepherd  has  now
    placed the appellant's risk as reduced to  "medium  level".   The  fact
    that he is "unlikely" to reoffend either in custody  or  the  community
    unless there is a significant change in circumstances is not  the  same
    as saying either that there is no risk that he will  reoffend  or  that
    there is not a real risk that he will reoffend.  It is simply  unlikely
    unless there is a change of circumstances.

41. Further, the letter from Mr Whitehurst, a probation  officer  dated  22
    May 2014 also notes that  the appellant having undergone  a  number  of
    treatment programmes and that:

         "the overall assessments [is] that his a risk of harm is considered
         to be reduced to a Medium Level."

    Mr Whitehurst goes on to state:

         "[t]his indicates there is no perceived immediate risk  of  serious
         harm at the present time, either when in custody or the community."

42. He then concludes that:

         "[i]t is my opinion that his progress  and  reduced  risk  will  be
         jeopardised if the on going needs are not addressed."

43. Again, here the appellant is being assessed  as  presenting  a  "medium
    risk" to the community and also that he has made progress and the  risk
    he once presented has been  reduced.   It  is  not,  in  our  judgment,
    inconsistent for the judge to take the view that even if there  is  "no
    perceived immediate risk  of  serious  harm"  the  appellant  does  not
    represent a danger to the public.  Given his history and in  the  light
    of the professional evidence read as a whole and being at a  time  when
    the appellant has not lived in the  community  but  is  in  prison  and
    therefore his response to his  offending  behaviour  in  the  community
    remains largely speculative, the Judge's finding was one properly  open
    to him on the evidence.  When all these matters are taken into account,
    and  they  were  by  Judge  Burnett,  despite  Mr  Chelvan's   forceful
    submissions, we are simply unable to conclude that  it  was  irrational
    for Judge Burnett to take the view that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    rebut the presumption in s.72(2) that he continued to  present  a  real
    danger to the community through the risk of him reoffending even if  he
    would be accommodated and supported when he left prison.   His  finding
    was not one which no reasonable judge could reach on the evidence.

44. For these reasons, we are satisfied that the judge did not err  in  law
    in reaching his  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not  rebutted  the
    presumptions in  s.72(2)  of  the  NIA  Act  2002  and  to  uphold  the
    certificate under s.72.

Decision

45. The First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 3 did not involve an error of law.  That decision stands.

46. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

47. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    asylum grounds and uphold the s.72  certificate  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

48. Accordingly the appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  also
    dismissed.




                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal






