
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/01139/2014
                                                               IA/48804/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated on                       |
|2 March 2016                         |13 June 2016                         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   between

                            SULAIMON AYOOLA LAWAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie, instructed by Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant , who is a Nigerian citizen, born 28 July  1973,  appeals
    with permission the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A W Khan  and
    Mr G H Getlevog (the Tribunal).  For reasons given  in  their  decision
    dated 9 March 2015, the Tribunal  dismissed the  appellant  's  appeals
    against :

          a) revocation of a permanent EEA residence card dated 12 November
             2013 (the first decision) and

          b) a decision that section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
             applied dated 17 June 2014 (the second decision).

 2. These decisions followed the appellant's conviction on 11 March 2011 of
    conspiracy to breach immigration law for which he was sentenced  on  29
    July 2001 to a five year custodial sentence.  The  Secretary  of  State
    gave her reasons for revoking the permanent residence card in a  letter
    dated 14 November 2013.  The appellant appealed the first  decision  on
    22 November 2013 on Article 8 grounds and on the basis that it was "...
    not in accordance with the Immigration Rules ... the law ...  [or]  ...
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006".

 3. As to his immigration history, the appellant entered the United Kingdom
    after 21 May 2002 (the precise date is not known)  with  a  visit  visa
    issued in Abuja valid for six months.  On 16 February 2004  he  applied
    for a residence permit  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national,  Monica
    Antunes, a Portuguese citizen whom he had married in the United Kingdom
    on 11 December 2003.  A residence permit for five  years  was  granted.
    On 17 December 2009 the  appellant  was  issued  with  confirmation  of
    permanent residence as the family member of Ms Antunes.

 4. The appellant claimed asylum on  18  December  2013  which  led  to  an
    interview by the Secretary of State on 12 February 2014.  This  led  to
    the second decision that section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    applied.  The detailed reasons given by the Secretary of State for  the
    second decision included certification in respect of the  Asylum  claim
    under section 72(9)(b) of the Nationality,  Immigration  &  Asylum  Act
    2002 that  the  presumption  under  sub-section  (2)  applied  and,  in
    addition, the consideration of the appellant's claim  under  Article  8
    and the relevant provisions of Immigration Rules.   He appealed against
    that decision on 18 June  2014  leading  to  the  appeals  being  heard
    together before the Tribunal on  18  February  2015  resulting  in  its
    decision dated 16 March 2015.

 5. Although it is no longer of any relevance to this appeal, we note  that
    earlier, on 24 April 2013, the appellant had been served with a  Notice
    of Decision  to  make  a  deportation  order,  against  which  he  also
    appealed.  The decision to make a deportation order  was  withdrawn  by
    the Secretary of State on 27  November  2013  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant "no longer met the required criteria  for  deportation  under
    the EEA Regulations," see [3] of the Tribunal's decision.

 6. The appellant formed a relationship with Risikat  Lawal  with  whom  he
    lived from  2005.  She  had  arrived  from  Nigeria  in  2003  and  was
    naturalised as a British Citizen on 21 January 2013.  The  couple  have
    two British Citizen children born 2004 and  2007.  A  third  child  was
    expected in 2015.

 7. The Tribunal considered it was  required  to  determine  the  following
    issues recorded in paragraph [54] of its decision:

         "(a) whether revocation of the appellant's EEA residence card under
             Regulation 20(1) of the 2006 Regulations was lawful;

          b) whether the Section 72 certificate under the 2002 Act has been
             rebutted by the appellant ;

          c) whether deportation of the appellant  would  breach  the  UK's
             obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention based  upon  his
             various claims;

          d) whether the appellant 's deportation under  Section  32(5)  of
             the UK Borders Act 2007 is in breach of the  UK's  obligations
             under the European Convention on Human Rights;

          e) whether there are very compelling circumstances over and above
             those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 under  Section  117C  of
             the 2002 Act regarding Article 8: additional considerations in
             cases involving foreign criminals; and

          f) the best interests  of  the  appellant's  two  children  under
             Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009."

 8. We summarise the conclusions the Tribunal reached as follows:

          i) The appellant's marriage to Monica Antunes was a  marriage  of
             convenience.  Based on that marriage the  appellant  had  been
             issued with a permanent residence card  on  17  December  2009
             following a permit issued earlier in 2004.   There  was  ample
             evidence to justify the revocation of the residence card.

         ii) The appellant had not rebutted the presumption  under  section
             72(2) and the appeal was dismissed in so far as it  relied  on
             grounds specified in section 72(9)(a).

        iii) In respect of  the  appellant's  contention  that  deportation
             would breach his rights under Articles 2 and 3  of  the  Human
             Rights Convention, there was no substance to his claim that he
             could not be deported because of his political  opinion.   The
             appellant's account in this  respect  had  been  manufactured.
             Thus he had failed to establish that he would face  any  risk.
             As to the appellant's sexual orientation,  the  appellant  had
             completely failed to show that he would be at risk  by  virtue
             of this aspect as there was no credible evidence that  he  was
             either gay or bisexual.  The  appellant's  acclaimed  fear  of
             reprisals from his business partner was completely  incredible
             as was his claim to  be  at  threat  from  gang  reprisals  in
             Nigeria.

         iv) As to the appellant's Article 8 family life claim,  paragraphs
             399 and 399A did not apply because of  the  sentence  of  five
             years imprisonment.  It was accepted that he is in  a  genuine
             and subsisting relationship with Risikat Lawal  and  that  the
             couple have two children born in 2004 and 2007.  The  Tribunal
             noted that Mrs Lawal was expecting  a  third  child  in  2015.
             However, the Tribunal did not find that there were  compelling
             circumstances that existed over and above those  described  in
             paragraphs 399 and 399A (as required under paragraph 398).

          v) Furthermore, the Tribunal did  not  find  that  under  section
             117C(6) very compelling circumstances existed over  and  above
             those described in exceptions 1 and 2 as set  out  in  section
             117C(4) and (5).  The best interests of  the  British  Citizen
             children served in remaining with their mother and they  could
             not be forced to go to Nigeria. The Tribunal  also  considered
             that no one would argue that it would not  be  in  their  best
             interest to have their father living with  them  in  a  stable
             family unit.  However, these factors were  outweighed  by  the
             appellant's offending behaviour.  It was  accepted  that  some
             private  life  had  been  established  by  the  appellant  but
             interference would be proportionate to the  legitimate  public
             aim  sought  to  be  achieved  because  of  the  "very   great
             seriousness of the appellant's criminality".

         vi) There was no substance in the appellant's claim  that  he  was
             unable  to  return  to  Nigeria  because  of  his  ill  health
             attributed to hepatitis B and depression.

 9. The grounds  of  challenge  lack  precision.   However,  despite  their
    discursive nature, the First-tier Tribunal judge who granted permission
    identified two.  The first ground was that there had  not  been  proper
    consideration of the best interests of the British citizen children and
    their wishes to remain with the appellant.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ransley although granting permission considered that there  was  little
    merit in  this  ground,  correctly  noting  the  demanding  test  under
    paragraph 398 as a  consequence  of  the  term  of  imprisonment.   She
    observed that the Tribunal had taken into account the letters and diary
    entries of the children and the evidence  of  their  mother  about  the
    effect of deportation on their family life.

10. The second ground was taken to be a challenge  to  the  sufficiency  of
    reasons for the Tribunal's findings on the impact of the deportation on
    British children and a failure to assess adequately the  hardship  that
    would flow from such deportation. Judge Ransley  considered  there  had
    been a failure to give any  consideration  to  the  hardship  that  the
    children and mother might face and that this involved an arguable error
    of law, thus leading to her grant of permission.

11. We are grateful to Mr Otchie for his submissions.  It was apparent when
    he began to make his case that he had limited instructions.   This  was
    corrected during the course of an adjournment until 2.00pm by  when  he
    considered he was able to proceed and did not require any further time.



12. Despite Mr Otchie's detailed argument, we are not  persuaded  that  the
    Tribunal erred on either of the grounds  identified  in  the  challenge
    which was confined to the section  55  and  Article  8  considerations.
    Relevant to those issues the Tribunal set out the family life  evidence
    between paragraph [28] and [38] interspersed with evidence relating  to
    the other issues it was required to deal with.  The hearing of the case
    was  adjourned  part-heard  and  resumed  on  18  February  2015   when
    submissions were heard.  The conclusions and reasoning on each  of  the
    issues are set out between paragraphs [54] and [89] with the Article  8
    factors considered in some detail between [75]  and  [89].   These  are
    summarised above in para 8.

13. The Tribunal correctly directed itself at [79] that they were  required
    to have regard to  MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192,  as
    authority for the Immigration Rules being a complete code and that  the
    exceptional circumstances  were  to  be  considered  in  the  balancing
    exercise involving application of a proportionality test as required by
    Strasbourg jurisprudence.

14. In its recent decision in SSHD v LW (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 369,  the
    Court of Appeal reviewed the authorities in respect of the  deportation
    of foreign criminals and the interaction between the Immigration  Rules
    at 398 to 399A and Article 8.  In a helpful summary of the position  at
    [14] Gross LJ set out the current position:

         "14. Pulling the threads together:

               i) The new rules provide a comprehensive code;

              ii) The context is the great weight  to  be  attached  to  the
                  public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals;

             iii) That public  interest  and  related  questions  of  public
                  confidence reflect

                   1) protection of the public from re-offending;

                   2) deterrence;

                   3) public revulsion;

              iv) The considerations in a deportation  case  are  thus  very
                  different from those applicable to  cases  of  immigration
                  control;

               v) A proportionality test, taking all the relevant Article  8
                  criteria into account and weighed in  the  scales  against
                  the public interest in deportation, is to be  conducted  -
                  but through the lens of the new rules, rather than a free-
                  standing exercise;

              vi) In the case of a person sentenced to at least  four  years
                  imprisonment,  paragraph  398(a)   applies   and   neither
                  paragraph 399 nor 399A is applicable; accordingly it  will
                  only be in "exceptional  circumstances"  that  the  public
                  interest  in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
                  factors;

             vii)  "exceptional"  here  means  something  "very  compelling"
                  rather  than  something  "unusual";  that   something   is
                  "unusual" is, no doubt, a  necessary  but  not  sufficient
                  condition  for   the   determination   that   "exceptional
                  circumstances "apply".

            viii) The application of the new rules in an individual case  is
                  necessarily fact specific."

             As to the rules, paragraph 398(a) covers those who  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four  years.
             Paragraph 398(b) and (c) covers those who were sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment  of  less  than  four  years  or  where
             offending has caused serious harm or the person concerned is a
             persistent offender who has shown particular disregard for the
             law.  The appellant is in neither  category  and  accordingly,
             paragraph 399 and 399A do not apply.  These make provision for
             various  circumstances  where   taking   account   of   family
             relationships, deportation would be  contrary  to  Article  8.
             The  appellant  therefore  has  to  face  the  demanding  test
             provided in the rule "... the public interest and  deportation
             will only be outweighed by other factors where there are  very
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraphs 399 and 399A."

15. In BL (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 357, a different constitution of
    the Court of Appeal examined the relationship  between  Article  8  and
    section 55 and the Immigration Rules.  Arden LJ observed that  at  [30]
    and [31] that:

         "30. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship & Immigration Act  2009
         ("the 2009 Act")  requires  the  Secretary  of  State  when  making
         immigration decisions to have regard to the need to  safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of children in the UK.  Therefore the Secretary
         of State has to have regard to the best interest of the child  when
         making her proportionality assessment under Article 8(2).

         31.  However, while the best  interest  of  the  child  must  be  a
         primary consideration, it need  not  always  be  the  only  primary
         consideration: Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] 1WLR 3690."

16. BL was sentenced to four years  in  custody  for  drug  offences.   His
    family comprised his partner and four minor children;  in  addition  he
    was in a stronger position in that paragraphs  399  and  399A  applied.
    BL's appeal had been dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  but  allowed
    by the Upper Tribunal who concluded that  the  balance  had  come  down
    firmly against deportation on the basis that this would:

         "... impact disproportionately  on  the  best  interests  of  [his]
         children, giving rise  to  an  acute  imbalance  which  the  public
         interest favour  in  deportation  cannot  in  this  intensely  fact
         sensitive case outweighs."

17. Observing that the key issue the Upper Tribunal had to resolve was  how
    to balance BL's Article 8 rights where children are involved  with  the
    public interest in deportation, the Court  considered  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal was unquestionably right that the two crucial authorities were
    MF (Nigeria) and SS (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2014]  1WLR  908  and  that  the
    Tribunal had  correctly  recognised  that  while  the  children's  best
    interests were of primary consideration they need not be  the,  or  the
    sole, primary consideration.  As observed however by Arden LJ  at [50]:

         "50. But in their analysis of SS (Nigeria), the UT failed to  refer
         to an important  holding  of  this  court  on  balancing  the  best
         interests of the children with the public interest in  deportation.
         As this court put it in SS (Nigeria) the interests of the  children
         are a substantial consideration.  But this court went  on  to  give
         further valuable guidance as to how the competing interests of  the
         children, and  the  public  interest  in  deportation  were  to  be
         balanced.  This Court held that the children's interest  will  have
         to be stronger, the more pressing the nature of the public interest
         in the parent's removal.  The public interest will be  greater  the
         more serious the offence; see SS (Nigeria) at [47].  Moreover,  the
         courts have to respect the view of the legislature on the  pressing
         nature of the offence, particularly since it  reflected  policy  in
         the area of moral and political judgment: see SS (Nigeria) at [52].
          The children's best interests have to  be  weighed  against  other
         relevant considerations on that basis.  In  short,  as  applied  to
         this case it is not the functioning of the  balancing  exercise  to
         "promote" or "fortify"  their  interests  ...  but  to  weigh  them
         appropriately in the balance.

         51.  Failure to have regard to the holdings in SS (Nigeria) led the
         UT into error because having established what the  children's  best
         interests required, they failed to go  on  and  explain  why  their
         interests were strong enough to displace  the  public  interest  in
         deportation.  The public interest is particularly pressing in  this
         case because BL, with his four year sentence cannot  bring  himself
         within paras 399 and 399A.  Moreover since  such  a  person  cannot
         claim under those paras, it is clear that he must  be  able  to  do
         something over and above the requirements of those paras."

18. It was accepted by  the  Tribunal  in  the  case  before  us  that  the
    appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner
    and his children.  The Tribunal took account of the letters  and  diary
    entries that the children had written and asked themselves whether  the
    best interests of the children outweighed the appellant's  deportation.
    The Tribunal also explained that it had taken into account the evidence
    of Mrs Lawal upon the effect of deportation upon her and  the  children
    and the fact that they are all British citizens at [77] and [78].   The
    determination is a detailed one and it cannot  be  suggested  that  the
    Tribunal did not take all matters into account.

19. As we have  recorded  above,  the  Tribunal  accepted  where  the  best
    interests lay, which was to have their father living  with  them  in  a
    stable family unit.  Although the  grounds  of  challenge  assert  that
    there had not been proper consideration of the best  interests  of  the
    children, this is simply not made out.  The grounds  themselves  assert
    that the "FtT judge has  almost  ignored  the  express  wishes  of  the
    children of not wanting to be separated from the appellant and they are
    the  ones  that  are  seemingly  being  punished  by  the  emphasis  of
    'deporting foreign  criminals'".  The  first  limb  to  this  assertion
    appears to acknowledge that the children's wishes were  considered  and
    the second that they had been wrongly assessed.  We cannot  agree.  The
    Tribunal was carrying out the task required of it in the light  of  the
    appellant's criminality. As confirmed by Arden LJ (see [69] above), the
    Tribunal was required to weigh the best  interests  against  the  other
    relevant considerations which in this case  was  the  serious  criminal
    offending by the appellant.

20. That offending is described in the Tribunal's decision at paragraph [6]
    in these terms:

         "[6] In October 2010,  police  officers  attended  the  appellant's
         address and he was seen running from the back of the house  dumping
         a suitcase over a neighbour's garden fence.  In the suitcase were a
         large number of plastic envelopes, each  of  which  contained  sham
         wedding and false identity packs,  cheque  books,  passports,  cash
         cards  and  other  identification  documents.   The  police  search
         revealed numerous further identification packs  containing  similar
         documents in the name of Portuguese nationals.   There  were  proxy
         Nigerian wedding documents completed in respect of Nigerian  people
         marrying Portuguese nationals.  Highly  sophisticated  packages  of
         fraudulent material for the benefit of allowing non-EU citizens  to
         remain in the UK illegally were  found  together  with  �20,000  in
         cash."

21. As to the second ground, understood as a challenge based on  a  failure
    to assist adequately the hardship that would flow from deportation,  it
    is necessary to remember the residual test in paragraph 398.  The  task
    before the Tribunal was to  decide  whether  the  public  interest  was
    outweighed by "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraph 399 and 399A."  Paragraphs 399  and  399A  apply
    where  the  impact  of  deportation  on  family  relationships  between
    partners and their children  would  be  unduly  harsh  (and  implicitly
    contrary to article 8). These provisions only apply where the  sentence
    under consideration is less than 4 years or  where  the  offending  has
    caused serious harm or the person concerned is a  persistent  offender.
    The length of  sentence  imposed  on  the  appellant  resulted  in  the
    elevated test found in the concluding provision of para 398:

         "The Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

22. It is correct that the  Tribunal  did  not  explicitly  ask  themselves
    whether it would be unduly harsh on the children for the  appellant  to
    be deported. But it is clear that they were well aware of scheme of the
    rules from their direction at paragraphs [75] and [76]

         "75. ... Paragraphs 399 and 399A do not apply because the appellant
         was sentenced to five years' imprisonment. In other words,  if  the
         appellant had been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  less
         than four years or his deportation  was  conducive  to  the  public
         good, the appellant could have relied on paragraph 399 ...

         76. Since paragraph[s] 399  and  399A  do  not  apply,  the  public
         interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors
         where there are very compelling circumstances over and above  those
         described on paragraphs 399 and 399A ..."

23. Accordingly, the Tribunal was entitled to focus on the  seriousness  of
    the appellant's offending and to give this appropriate  weight  in  its
    assessment of the evidence and the best interests of the children.   It
    gave  sustainable  reasons  for  its  conclusion  at  [85]   that   the
    appellant's criminality outweighed the interests of his partner and the
    children. We are  not  persuaded  that  there  was  any  error  by  the
    Tribunal; the grounds of challenge are a disagreement with  a  decision
    that was legally correct and properly  open  to  the  Tribunal  on  the
    evidence.

24. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date: 10 June 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

